
CHARTER OF
THE CITY OF SANTA CLARA
CALIFORNIA
Article I. Name of City

Sec. 100    Name.

Article II. Boundaries

Sec. 200    Boundaries.

Article III. Succession

Sec. 300    Rights and liabilities.

Sec. 301    Ordinances.

Sec. 302    Continuance of present officers and employees.

Sec. 303    Continuance of contracts and public improvements.

Sec. 304    Pending actions and proceedings.

Article IV. Powers

Sec. 400    General grant of power.

Sec. 401    Disposal of public utility.

Article V. Form of Government

Sec. 500    Form of government.

Article VI. The Elective Officers

Sec. 600    City elected officers.

Sec. 600.01    Municipal elections.

Sec. 600.02    Consolidation of elections.

Article VII. The Council

Sec. 700    Term – Method of holding elections.

Sec. 700.1    Elections – Designation of seats.

Sec. 701    Term limits of mayor and council members.

Sec. 701.1    Qualifications for Chief of the Police Department.

Sec. 702    Compensation.

Sec. 703    Vacancies.

Sec. 704    Presiding officer – Mayor.

Sec. 704.1    Mayor – Limitation of terms.

Sec. 704.2    Mayor – Political position.

Sec. 704.3    Mayor – Powers and duties.

Sec. 704.4    Mayor – Vacancy.

Sec. 705    Vice Mayor.

Sec. 706    Powers.

Sec. 707    Regular meetings.

Sec. 708    Special meetings.

Sec. 709    Place of meeting.

Sec. 710    Quorum.

Sec. 711    Election and qualification of Council members.

Sec. 712    Proceedings.

Sec. 713    Action by ordinance or resolution.

Sec. 714    Power to lease, sell, or convey City property.

Sec. 714.1    Protection of parkland and public open space.

Sec. 715    Power to levy and collect taxes.

Article VIII. City Manager, Ordinances, Meetings

Sec. 800    Appointment.

Sec. 801    Compensation.

Sec. 802    Powers and duties.

Sec. 803    Rules and regulations.

Sec. 804    Manager pro tempore.

Sec. 805    Participation in Council action.

Sec. 806    Removal of the City Manager.

Sec. 807    Prohibition against Councilmanic interference.

Sec. 808    Ordinances.

Sec. 809    Repeal or amendment of ordinances.

Sec. 810    Effective date of ordinances.

Sec. 811    Emergency ordinances.

Sec. 812    Publication of ordinances.

Sec. 813    Codification of ordinances.

Sec. 814    Adoption of printed building codes, etc.

Sec. 815    Publishing of legal notices.

Article IX. Officers and Employees

Sec. 900    Officers to be appointed by the City Council and by the City Manager.

Sec. 901    Other appointive officers.

Sec. 902    Appointive officers; duties.

Sec. 903    City clerk; powers and duties.

Sec. 904    Director of Finance.

Sec. 905    City Engineer and Department of Public Works.

Sec. 906    Chief of the Police Department.

Sec. 907    Chief of the Fire Department.

Sec. 908    City Attorney.

Sec. 909    City Auditor.

Sec. 910    Administrative Code.

Sec. 911    Official bonds.

Sec. 912    Oath of office.

Article X. Appointive Boards and Commissions

Sec. 1000    In general.

Sec. 1001    Appropriations.

Sec. 1002    Appointments; terms.

Sec. 1003    Meetings; Chair.

Sec. 1004    Compensation, vacancies.

Sec. 1005    Oaths; affirmations.

Sec. 1006    Planning Commission – Generally.

Sec. 1007    Planning Commission – Duties and powers.

Sec. 1008    Parks and Recreation Commission.

Sec. 1009    Parks and Recreation Commission – Powers and duties.

Sec. 1010    Civil Service Commission.

Sec. 1011    Civil Service Commission – Powers and duties.

Sec. 1012    Board of Library Trustees.

Sec. 1013    Board of Library Trustees – Powers and duties.

Article XI. Civil Service

Sec. 1100    Civil service; merit principle.

Sec. 1101    Classified service.

Sec. 1102    Appointments from classified to the unclassified service.

Sec. 1103    Classification.

Sec. 1104    Pay plan.

Sec. 1105    Civil service rules and regulations.

Sec. 1106    Reserved.

Sec. 1107    Prohibitions.

Sec. 1108    Contract for administrative services.

Article XII. Retirement

Sec. 1200    State system.

Article XIII. Fiscal Administration

Sec. 1300    Fiscal year.

Sec. 1301    Annual budget; preparation by the City Manager.

Sec. 1302    Budget – Submission to City Council.

Sec. 1303    Budget – Public hearing.

Sec. 1304    Budget – Further consideration and adoption.

Sec. 1305    Budget – Appropriations.

Sec. 1309    Bonded debt limit.

Sec. 1310    Contracts on public works.

Sec. 1311    General fund.

Sec. 1312    Capital project funds.

Sec. 1313    Department funds.

Sec. 1314    Petty cash funds.

Sec. 1317    Actions against City.

Sec. 1318    Centralized purchasing.

Sec. 1319    Independent audit.

Sec. 1320    Utilities fund.

Sec. 1321    Revenue bonds.

Article XIV. Franchises

Sec. 1400    Procedure; terms.

Article XV. Reserved

Article XVI. Reserved

Article XVII. Reserved Powers, State Election Code and Amendments to State Elections Code

Article XVIII. Miscellaneous

Sec. 1800    Definitions.

Sec. 1801    Violations.

Sec. 1802    Validity.

Sec. 1803    Effective date.

Article I. Name of City
Sec. 100 Name.
The municipal corporation now existing and known as the “City of Santa Clara” shall remain and continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate, as at present, in name, in fact, and in law.

Article II. Boundaries
Sec. 200 Boundaries.
The territory of the City shall be that contained within its present boundaries as now established, with the power and authority to change the same in the manner provided by law.

Article III. Succession
Sec. 300 Rights and liabilities.
The City of Santa Clara shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold and enjoy all property, rights of property and rights of action of every nature and description now pertaining to this municipality, and is hereby declared to be the successor of same. It shall be subject to all the obligations, liabilities, debts and duties that now exist against this municipality.

Sec. 301 Ordinances.
All lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, or portions thereof, in force at the time this Charter takes effect, and not in conflict or inconsistent herewith, are hereby continued in force until the same shall have been duly repealed, amended, changed or superseded by proper authority.

Sec. 302 Continuance of present officers and employees.
The present officers, boards, commissions, and employees shall, without interruption, continue to perform the duties of their respective offices and employments for the compensation provided by ordinances, resolutions, rules, or laws, until the appointment and qualification of their successors under this Charter and subject to such removal and control as is herein provided.

Sec. 303 Continuance of contracts and public improvements.
All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which proceedings have been instituted under laws or charter provisions existing at the time this Charter takes effect, in the discretion of the City Council, may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws and charter provisions or may be continued or perfected hereunder.

Sec. 304 Pending actions and proceedings.
No action or proceedings, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this Charter takes effect, brought by or against the City or any office, department or agency thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained; but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any office, department or agency party thereto, by or under this Charter, may be assigned or transferred to another office, department or agency, but in that event, the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office, department or agency to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter.

Article IV. Powers
Sec. 400 General grant of power.
The City of Santa Clara, by and through its City Council and other officials, shall have and may exercise all powers necessary and appropriate to a municipal corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants which are not prohibited by the Constitution of the State of California or by this Charter, and which it would be competent for this Charter to set forth specifically, and the specification herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be exclusive of, or any limitation upon the general grant of powers heretofore or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the constitution or general laws.

Sec. 401 Disposal of public utility.
No public utility owned by the City shall be sold, leased or otherwise transferred unless authorized by the affirmative votes of two-thirds of the electors voting on such proposition at any election at which the question of such disposal is submitted to the electors.

Article V. Form of Government
Sec. 500 Form of government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council Manager” form of government.

Article VI. The Elective Officers
Sec. 600 City elected officers.
No person shall be eligible to hold any elective office in the City including Mayor, City Council, Chief of Police Department and City Clerk, unless he or she is a resident and a qualified registered elector of the City.

The elective officers of the City shall consist of a City Council composed of seven members, the Chief of the Police Department and the City Clerk. The members of the City Council, (which includes the office of the Mayor), the Chief of the Police Department and the City Clerk shall be elected from the City at large at the times and in the manner provided in this Charter. Except as otherwise herein provided, a person elected to an office for other than an unexpired term, shall serve a term of four years, and shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified. The term shall commence on the date the City Council certifies the canvass of the election returns submitted to it by the County Registrar of Voters.

The person receiving the most votes cast for a particular City office shall be declared duly elected. Ties shall be broken as provided from time to time by ordinance.

The office of Mayor shall be separately voted upon and is a separate office. The person elected at any election to the office designated “Mayor” shall be deemed elected, both as a Mayor and as a member of the Council. Although the Mayor is a Council member, his or her election does not change the number of Council members from seven.

No person shall be a candidate for both Mayor and a City Council seat at the same election. However, an incumbent member of the City Council may run for the elective office of Mayor, and the Mayor may run for the separate office of Mayor or other City Council office. However, at no time shall a member of the Council, including the Mayor, hold more than one City elective office. Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Charter, no incumbent member of the City Council while serving in such office with an unexpired term of more than six months shall be a candidate for any numbered Council seat other than the one which he or she holds. (Added by electors at election held November 7, 1972, approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10); Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 600.01 Municipal elections.
Commencing with the year 2000, a regular election shall be held in the City of Santa Clara on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of even numbered years. The regular election shall be held for the election of each municipal elective officer whose term of office regularly expires at that time, and for such other purposes as the Council may prescribe. Each such regular election shall be known as the general municipal election of the City, and shall be in lieu of all others previously so called. All other municipal elections that may be called under the authority of this Charter, or the California Elections Code, shall be known as special elections. (Amendment ratified 4-5-77; Amendment ratified 11-6-79; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 600.02 Consolidation of elections.
Any special election may be consolidated with a general municipal election and any municipal election may be consolidated with any State, County, or School District election held in the City or part thereof, in which case only one ballot need be printed for such consolidated election. (Amendment ratified 4-5-77)

Sec. 600.1 Time of taking office – Term.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 601 Eligibility.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Article VII. The Council
Sec. 700 Term – Method of holding elections.
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Charter with respect to City elections, the provisions of the State Elections Code, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted. The City expressly reserves its rights with respect to the conduct of City elections pursuant to Section 5 of Article XI of the California Constitution. Any changes made by the City Council in the City elections procedure shall be by ordinance and shall not be in conflict with any other sections of this Charter.

There are hereby reserved to the electors of the City, the powers of the initiative and referendum and of the recall of municipal elective officers. No primary election shall be held for municipal officers. No error, omission or defect in the notice of elections shall be cause to invalidate any election held under the provisions of this Charter. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 700.1 Elections – Designation of seats.
For purposes of City Council elections, each Council office shall be designated by an appropriate descriptive designation, as follows: The Council seat which on the effective date of this Section is occupied by the Mayor shall continue to be designated as “Mayor”; each of the other six seats, respectively, shall be designated as “Council Member Seat No. 2,” “Council Member Seat No. 3,” “Council Member Seat No. 4,” “Council Member Seat No. 5,” “Council Member Seat No. 6” and “Council Member Seat No. 7” respectively, and shall continue to be designated by the respective designation. The designation so given to each such office shall thereafter be used in all election, nomination papers, certificates of election, and other election papers pertaining or referring to such office, and to designate incumbency in such office. (Added by electors at election held November 7, 1972, approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10); Amended and renumbered from section 700.2 by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 700.1 Elections – Designation of seats.
For purposes of City Council elections, each Council office shall be designated by an appropriate descriptive designation, as follows: The Council seat which on the effective date of this Section is occupied by the Mayor shall continue to be designated as “Mayor”; each of the other six seats, respectively, shall be designated as “Council Member Seat No. 2,” “Council Member Seat No. 3,” “Council Member Seat No. 4,” “Council Member Seat No. 5,” “Council Member Seat No. 6” and “Council Member Seat No. 7” respectively, and shall continue to be designated by the respective designation. The designation so given to each such office shall thereafter be used in all election, nomination papers, certificates of election, and other election papers pertaining or referring to such office, and to designate incumbency in such office. (Added by electors at election held November 7, 1972, approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10); Amended and renumbered from section 700.2 by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 700.2 Elections: Designation of seats.
(Section Number Repealed – text amended and renumbered to section 700.1 by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 701 Term limits of mayor and council members.
No person elected as member of the Council shall be eligible to serve, or serve, for more than two (2) full terms; but such service prior to December 1, 2016, shall not disqualify any person from further service as a member of the Council. If a member of the Council serves a partial term in excess of two (2) years, it shall be considered a full term for the purpose of this provision. The office of elected Mayor, to be filled from the City at large, is a separate office from the Council and solely for the purpose of this term limit disqualification, is not a Council office or the Council. Consequently, time served in such office of elected Mayor is not time served on the Council and time served on the Council is not time served in such office of elected Mayor. (As amended by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of the Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000; Amended by electors at an election held November 8, 2016, Charter Chapter 18 of the State Statutes of 2017)

Sec. 701.1 Qualifications for Chief of the Police Department.
Candidates for the office of Chief of Police shall meet the minimum eligibility and qualification requirements imposed by state law upon candidates for the office of sheriff. (Added by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 702 Compensation.
Commencing on July 1, 2017, each member of the City Council, other than the Mayor, shall receive as compensation the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000) per month. The Mayor shall receive as compensation the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per month.

Commencing on July 1, 2019, and every two years on July 1 thereafter, the compensation of the City Council and Mayor shall be set by a Salary Setting Commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the Civil Service Commission from the qualified electors of the City for a term of four years. The first members shall be appointed for a term commencing January 1, 2019. Initially, the Commissioners shall be appointed in a manner so that two are appointed for two-year terms and three are appointed for four-year terms. On or before March 15 of every odd year, the Salary Setting Commission shall establish the salary of the Mayor and members of the City Council for the period commencing July 1 of that odd year and ending two years thereafter. Salaries so established by the Commission shall not exceed one hundred ten percent (110%) of the previous figure.

If a member of the City Council, including the Mayor, does not attend all meetings of the City Council or study sessions called on order of the City Council and held during the month, the compensation to him/her for such month shall be reduced by the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting or study session not attended unless he/she is absent with the consent of or on order of the City Council.

Absence from five consecutive regular meetings, unless excused by resolution of the City Council, shall operate to vacate the seat of any member of the City Council so absent. (As amended by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of the Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000; Amended by electors at an election held November 8, 2016, Charter Chapter 17 of the State Statutes of 2017)

Sec. 703 Vacancies.
A vacancy in any elective office of the City, including Mayor, City Council, Chief of Police Department, and City Clerk, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the remaining members.

In the event the City Council shall fail to fill a vacancy by appointment within thirty (30) days after such office shall have been declared vacant, it shall forthwith cause an election to be held to fill such vacancy. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy holds office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent, provided that if the vacancy occurs in the first half of a term of office and at least 130 days prior to the next general municipal election, the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the next general municipal election that is scheduled 130 or more days after the date the City Council is notified of the vacancy, and thereafter until the person who is elected at that election to fill the vacancy has been qualified. The person elected to fill the vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired balance of the term of office. (As approved at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held November 8, 2016, Charter Chapter 19 of the State Statutes of 2017)

Sec. 704 Presiding officer – Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the presiding officer. The Mayor shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. He/she shall be the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes. He/she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be imposed by the City Council consistent with his/her office. (As amended by the electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of the Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 704.1 Mayor – Limitation of terms.
No person elected as Mayor shall be eligible to serve, or serve, more than two (2) full terms; but such service prior to December 1, 2016, shall not disqualify any person from further service as Mayor. If a Mayor serves a partial term in excess of two (2) years, it shall be considered a full term for the purpose of this provision. (Added by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held November 8, 2016, Charter Chapter 18 of the State Statutes of 2017)

Sec. 704.2 Mayor – Political position.
The Mayor shall be the political leader within the community by providing guidance and leadership to the City Council, by expressing and explaining to the community the City’s policies and programs and by assisting the City Council in the informed, vigorous and effective exercise of its powers. Political leadership shall be concerned with the general development of the community and the general level of City services and activity programs. (Added by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with Secretary of State January 15, 1969)

Sec. 704.3 Mayor – Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) The Mayor shall have the power to make recommendations to the City Council on matters of policy and programs which require City Council decision; provided, that if he/she recommends any increases in the City budget, he/she shall recommend the method of financing such expenditure; and provided, further, that if he/she proposes curtailment of service, such recommendations and his/her reason therefor shall be specific. He/she may also, on his/her own account, inform the community on matters of policy or program which he/she believes the welfare of the community make necessary.

(b) The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council and shall have the vote as a member of the City Council. He/she shall have no veto power.

(c) The Mayor shall have authority to preserve order at all City Council meetings, to remove or cause the removal of any person from any meeting of the City Council for disorderly conduct, to enforce the rules of the City Council and to determine the order of business under the rules of the City Council.

(d) The Mayor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the City Council, provided that the same are not inconsistent with this Charter. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way as an infringement or limitation on the powers and duties of the City Manager as Chief Administrative Officer and head of the administrative branch of the City government as prescribed in other sections of this Charter. Except as otherwise herein provided, the Mayor shall possess only such authority over the City Manager and the administrative branch as he/she possesses as one member of the City Council. (Added by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 704.4 Mayor – Vacancy.
The office of Mayor shall become and be deemed vacant immediately upon the incumbent ceasing to be a member of the City Council. (Added by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with the Secretary of State January 15, 1969)

Sec. 705 Vice Mayor.
The City Council shall designate one of its members as Vice Mayor. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during his/her absence or disability. The Vice Mayor shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council. (As amended by electors at election held November 5, 1968, approved by Joint Resolution of Legislature filed with the Secretary of State, January 15, 1969; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 706 Powers.
All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, subject to the provisions of the Charter and to the Constitution of the State of California.

Sec. 707 Regular meetings.
The City Council shall hold regular meetings at least twice each month, at such times as it shall fix by ordinance or resolution and may adjourn or readjourn any regular meeting to a date certain, which shall be specified in the order of adjournment and when so adjourned, each adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes.

Sec. 708 Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor, or by four members of the City Council pursuant to the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, specifically Government Code Section 54956, as amended from time to time. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 709 Place of meeting.
All meetings of the City Council shall be held at the locations authorized by the Ralph M. Brown Act (commencing with Government Code Section 54950) as it now reads or is hereafter amended. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 710 Quorum.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time.

Sec. 711 Election and qualification of Council members.
The City Council shall judge the qualifications of its members as required by the Charter and shall judge all election returns.

Sec. 712 Proceedings.
The City Council shall establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings and punish any member or other person for disorderly conduct at any meetings. It shall have the power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath, and to compel the production of evidence before it. Subpoenas may be issued in the name of the City and be attested by the City Clerk. Disobedience of such subpoenas, or the refusal to testify (upon other than constitutional grounds), shall constitute a misdemeanor.

The City Council shall cause the City Clerk to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and, at the demand of any member, or upon the adoption of any ordinance or resolution for the payment of money, the City Clerk shall call the roll and shall cause the “ayes” and “noes” taken on any question, to be entered in the minutes of the meeting.

Sec. 713 Action by ordinance or resolution.
The City Council is hereby empowered to act by Ordinance or Resolution. An oral motion or order duly passed by the City Council and entered in the minutes of the Council shall have the same force and effect as a written Resolution duly introduced and passed by said City Council and shall be deemed to be a Resolution for all purposes.

Sec. 714 Power to lease, sell, or convey City property.
The City Council shall have power to lease, sell, convey, and dispose of any and all property of the City, subject to the provisions of Section 401 of this Charter, and provided further that no property exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in value shall be sold without first publishing notice of intention to sell in an official newspaper once a week for two weeks preceding the date of such sale. The notice of intention shall describe the property, the price theretofore offered for said property and the time and place when and where the sale will be consummated.

At the time fixed for said consummation of sale, the City Council shall call for further bids for said property and if any increased bid is received from a responsible bidder in at least five percent in excess of the original price offered for the same, then the City Council may accept the highest bid for said property or may order a new sale or may withdraw the property from sale.

Sec. 714.1 Protection of parkland and public open space.
Neither the Ulistac Natural Area, the Santa Clara Youth Soccer Park nor any other real property owned or controlled by the City that is presently listed or hereafter listed by ordinance in the inventory of parks and recreation facilities contained in Appendix Eight of the City of Santa Clara 2010-2035 General Plan shall be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more, nor shall its use be changed, abandoned or discontinued without such sale, lease, disposal or changed use having been first authorized or ratified by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the electorate, voting at a general municipal election for that purpose.

No substantial building, construction, reconstruction or development upon or with respect to any lands so dedicated shall be made except pursuant to ordinance subject to referendum.

The provisions of this Section 714.1 shall not apply to real property owned or controlled by the City that is subject to the CityPlace Master Community Plan originally adopted by the City Council by Resolution No. 8339. (Added by electors at an election held November 8, 2016, Charter Chapter 20 of the State Statutes of 2017)

Sec. 715 Power to levy and collect taxes.
The City Council shall have power to levy and collect taxes, and to collect license taxes for both regulation and revenue.

Article VIII. City Manager, Ordinances, Meetings
Sec. 800 Appointment.
A City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications. No City Council member shall receive such an appointment during the term for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within two years thereafter. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 801 Compensation.
The City Manager shall be paid a salary commensurate with his/her responsibilities as chief administrative officer of the City, which salary shall be established by ordinance or resolution. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 802 Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City government. He/she shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City and to that end, subject to the personnel provisions of this Charter, he/she shall have power and shall be required to:

(a) Appoint and remove, subject to the Civil Service provisions of this Charter, all officers and employees of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and except as he/she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. No person related to the City Manager by blood or by marriage shall be eligible for office or employment in the City.

(b) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the City Council and be responsible for its administration after adoption.

(c) Manage the City-owned water and power departments in a business-like manner, charging equitable rates for the services furnished and building up the properties so as to conserve their value and increase their capacity as needed by the City.

(d) Prepare and submit to the City Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year.

(e) Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem to him/her desirable.

(f) Make investigations into the affairs of this City, or any department or division thereof, or any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation to the City.

(g) Submit to the City Council at each meeting for its approval, the list of all claims and bills approved for payment by him/her.

(h) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by him/her by the City Council, not inconsistent with this Charter. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 803 Rules and regulations.
The City Manager may prescribe such general rules and regulations as he/she may deem necessary or expedient for the general conduct of the administrative offices and departments of the City under his/her jurisdiction. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 804 Manager pro tempore.
The City Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, one of the other officers of the City to serve as Manager Pro Tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager.

Sec. 805 Participation in Council action.
The City Manager and such other officers of the City as may be designated by the City Council, shall be accorded a seat at the City Council table and shall be entitled to participate in the deliberations of the City Council, but shall not have a vote.

Sec. 806 Removal of the City Manager.
The City Council shall appoint the City Manager for an indefinite term and may remove him/her by a majority vote of the entire Council. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the City Council shall by a majority vote of the entire Council, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his/her removal. The City Manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the City Council by majority vote of the entire Council may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolutions, the City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty but shall in any case cause to be paid him/her forthwith any unpaid balance of his/her salary and his/her salary for the next calendar month following adoption of the preliminary resolution. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 807 Prohibition against Councilmanic interference.
Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall order or request the appointment of any person to an office or employment or his/her removal therefrom, by the City Manager, or by any of the department heads in the administrative service of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service under the City Manager solely through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.

Any City Council member violating the provisions of this section, or voting for a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall cease to be a Council Member. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 808 Ordinances.
The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be “Be it ordained by the City of Santa Clara as follows:” No ordinance shall be finally adopted by the Council on the day of its introduction, nor within five days thereafter, nor at any time other than a regular meeting, nor until its publication as required in Section 812. However, ordinances calling elections and ordinances carrying out the provisions of elections need not be published prior to adoption. In case an ordinance is amended before its final adoption and after its publication, it shall in like manner be republished as required in Chapter Section 812, at least one day before its adoption as amended; provided, however, that where such amendment is made for the correction of clerical errors or omissions of form only, then such ordinances need not be given a first reading or a republication as corrected. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 809 Repeal or amendment of ordinances.
No ordinance or portion thereof shall be repealed except by ordinance. No ordinance shall be revised, re-enacted or amended by reference to its title only; but the ordinance to be revised or re-enacted, or the section or sections thereof to be amended, or the new section or sections to be added thereto, shall be set forth and adopted according to the method provided in this article for the enactment of ordinances, and such revision, re-enactment, amendment or addition, shall be done by ordinance only.

Sec. 810 Effective date of ordinances.
No ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days from and after the date of its adoption, except the following, which shall take effect upon adoption: (a) An ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election; (b) An improvement proceeding ordinance adopted under some law, or procedural ordinance; (c) An ordinance declaring the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation, or fixing the rate of taxation; or (d) An emergency ordinance adopted in the manner herein provided.

Sec. 811 Emergency ordinances.
Any ordinance declared by the City Council to be necessary as an emergency measure for preserving the public peace, health, safety or property, and containing a statement of the reasons for its urgency and adopted by a five-sevenths vote of the whole Council may go into effect at the will of the Council.

Sec. 812 Publication of ordinances.
The City Clerk shall cause each proposed ordinance to be posted at least three (3) days prior to its adoption in three (3) public places in the City and at least three (3) days prior to the ordinance adoption shall cause a single publication in an official newspaper to occur, setting forth the title of the ordinance, the date of its introduction, a brief summary of the ordinance and a list of the places where copies of the full text of the proposed ordinance are posted. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 813 Codification of ordinances.
Any or all properly enacted and unrepealed ordinances of the City may be compiled, consolidated, revised and indexed, including such restatements and substantive changes as are necessary for clarity in a comprehensive City Code.

A City Code may be adopted by reference by the passage of an ordinance in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. The City Code itself need not be published in the manner required for other ordinances. Prior to its adoption, not less than three copies of the Code shall be filed in the City Clerk’s Office, for examination by the public. After the Code has been adopted, ordinances may be amendatory or revisory of the Code. Sections of the Code shall not be revised or amended by reference but readopted and published at length as revised or amended. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 814 Adoption of printed building codes, etc.
Ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings, the installation of plumbing, the installation of electric wiring, or other similar work, where such rules and regulations have been printed as a code in book form, may be adopted by reference by the passage of an ordinance in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. The code so adopted need not be published at length, provided, however, that not less than three copies of such code shall have been filed, for use and examination by the public, in the office of the City Clerk prior to the adoption thereof.

Sec. 815 Publishing of legal notices.
The City Council shall by resolution designate one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City of Santa Clara as official newspaper for the publication of any legal notice or other matter required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in said City. If it appears to the City Council that the rates offered are unfair, it need not designate an official newspaper. Upon making a finding to such effect, or if publication of newspapers which have been so designated are suspended, then legal notices, ordinances or other matter required to be published in an official newspaper may be published by posting copies thereof in at least three public places in the City. The places for posting of legal notices shall be fixed by ordinance of the City Council.

No defect or irregularity in proceedings taken under this section, or failure to designate an official newspaper, shall invalidate any publication where the same is otherwise in conformity with this Charter, or law, or ordinance.

Article IX. Officers and Employees
Sec. 900 Officers to be appointed by the City Council and by the City Manager.
In addition to the City Manager, the City Council shall appoint and affix the compensation for the City Attorney and City Auditor who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by motion of the City Council adopted by at least four affirmative votes.

All other officers and department heads of the City shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager at compensation fixed by the City Council. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 901 Other appointive officers.
The City Council may provide by ordinance for the creation, consolidation or abolishment of the City departments or offices, not specifically enumerated in this Charter. Each department so created shall be headed by an officer as department head who shall be appointed by the City Manager.

Sec. 902 Appointive officers; duties.
Each appointive officer shall perform the duties imposed upon him/her by this Charter, by ordinance, or resolution and, if under jurisdiction of the City Manager, shall perform such other duties relating to his/her office as may be required of him/her by the City Manager. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 903 City clerk; powers and duties.
The City Clerk shall have the power and be required to:

(a) Attend all meetings of the City Council and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a full and true record of all the proceedings of the City Council in books that shall bear appropriate titles and be devoted to such purposes;

(b) Maintain separate books, in which shall be recorded respectively all ordinances and resolutions, with the certificate of the clerk annexed to each thereof stating the same to be the original or a correct copy, and as to an ordinance requiring publication, stating that the same has been published or posted in accordance with this Charter;

(c) Maintain separate books, in which a record shall be made of all written contracts and official bonds;

(d) Keep all aforementioned books properly indexed and open to public inspection when not in actual use;

(e) Be the custodian of the seal of the City;

(f) Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the City and certify copies of official records; and

(g) Have charge of all City elections.

The City Council may, in its discretion, appoint any other officer or employee of the City as City Clerk and grant such person additional compensation for the performance of such duties.

Sec. 904 Director of Finance.
There shall be a department of finance; the head of which shall be the Director of Finance, who as determined by the City Council, shall be, or be appointed by, the City Manager. The Director of Finance under the supervision of the City Manager shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City, including the financial affairs of the City-owned public utilities, and he/she shall have power and be required to:

(a) Compile the budget expense and capital estimates for the City Manager;

(b) Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures which have been budgeted;

(c) Maintain a general accounting system for the City government and of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for, prescribe the financial forms to be used by and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department or agency;

(d) Submit to the City Council, through the City Manager, a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City;

(e) Prepare for the City Manager, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report;

(f) Collect all taxes, special assessments, utility charges, license fees and other revenues of the City for whose collection the City is responsible except City taxes collected by the County and as provided in Section 1306, and receive all money receivable by the City from the State or Federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the City;

(g) Receive and have custody of all monies receivable by the City from any source;

(h) Deposit all monies received in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the City Council or, if no resolution be adopted, by the City Manager, and in compliance with all the provisions of the State Constitution and laws of the State governing the handling, depositing and securing of public funds; and

(i) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safe-keeping of all bonds and notes of the City and the receipt and delivery of City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 905 City Engineer and Department of Public Works.
(1) City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of California, and he/she shall have the power and be required to:

(a) Supervise and be responsible for all City engineering work, including the preparation of engineering maps, surveys, and designs;

(b) Perform such other duties as the City Council may from time to time prescribe, either by ordinance or resolution; and,

(c) On vacating the office, surrender to his/her successor all maps, plans, field notes and other records and memoranda belonging to the City and pertaining to his/her office and the work thereof.

(2) Director of Public Works and Utilities. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, who may be the City Engineer, shall, under the supervision of the City Manager, be in charge of the administration of such departments of the City, including engineering and utilities, as are or may be from time to time designated by the City Council. (As amended 1965 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 74, Chapter 101; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 906 Chief of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall have power and be required to:

(a) Preserve the public peace;

(b) Execute and return all process issued to him/her by legal authority; and

(c) Exercise all the powers that are now or may hereafter be conferred upon sheriffs and other police officers by the laws of the State. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 907 Chief of the Fire Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power and be required to:

(a) Supervise all matters relating to the prevention and extinguishing of fires and the protection of all property impaired thereby; and

(b) Make frequent inspection of all property within the City to enforce fire prevention regulations.

Sec. 908 City Attorney.
There shall be a City Attorney who shall have the power and be required to:

(a) Represent and advise the City Council and all City officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;

(b) Represent and appear for the City and any City officer or employee or former City officer or employee, in any or all actions and proceedings in which the City or any such officer or employee in or by reason of his/her official capacity, is concerned or is a party, but the City Council shall have control of all legal business and proceedings and may employ other attorneys to take charge of any litigation or matter or to assist the City Attorney therein;

(c) Attend all meetings of the City Council and give his/her advice or opinion in writing whenever requested to do so by the City Council, or by any of the boards or officers of the City;

(d) Approve the form of all bonds given to and all contracts made by the City, endorsing his/her approval thereon in writing;

(e) Prepare any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the City, and amendments thereto;

(f) Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal cases for violation of this Charter and of City ordinances; and

(g) On vacating the office, surrender to his/her successor, all books, papers, files, and documents pertaining to the City’s affairs.

To be eligible for appointment as City Attorney, the appointee shall have been admitted to practice as an attorney at law before the Supreme Court of the State of California, and shall have been engaged in the active practice of law for at least four years immediately prior to his/her appointment. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 909 City Auditor.
The City Auditor shall audit and approve all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the City government before payment and, with the advice of the City Attorney, advise the City Council as to the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges.

The City Council may, in its discretion, appoint any other officer or employee of the City as City Auditor and grant such person additional compensation for the performance of such duties.

Sec. 910 Administrative Code.
Within six months after the adoption of this Charter, the Council shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing for a plan of administrative organization of the City government, which will cover all matters concerning the powers, duties, term of office, procedure of all the officers, boards and commissions, and employees of the City; provided, however, that the provisions of said code shall not be in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter. This administrative code will cover all rules and regulations relating to fiscal operations, personnel management, election procedure, and other matters concerning the operation of the functions of the City government.

Sec. 911 Official bonds.
The City Council shall fix by ordinance the amounts and terms of the official bonds of all officials or employees who are required by this Charter or by ordinance to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk, except the City Clerk’s bond which shall be filed with the City Manager. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City.

In all cases wherein an officer or employee of the City is required to furnish a faithful performance bond, there shall be no personal liability upon, or right to recover against, his/her superior officer, or the bond of the latter, for any wrongful act or omission of the former, unless such superior officer was a party to, or conspired in, such wrongful act or omission. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 912 Oath of office.
Each member of the City Council, of every board and commission, and each officer and department head, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his/her office shall take, subscribe to and file with the City Clerk the following oath of affirmation: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.” (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Article X. Appointive Boards and Commissions
Sec. 1000 In general.
There shall be the following enumerated boards and commissions which shall have the powers and duties herein stated, and such other powers and duties as may be conferred by the City Council which are not inconsistent herewith. In addition, the City Council may create by ordinance such boards or commissions as in its judgment are required and may grant to them such powers and duties as are consistent with the provisions of this Charter.

Sec. 1001 Appropriations.
The City Council shall include in its annual budget sufficient appropriations of funds for the efficient and proper functioning of such boards and commissions.

Sec. 1002 Appointments; terms.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the members of each of such boards or commissions shall be appointed, and shall be subject to removal, by motion of the City Council adopted by at least four affirmative votes. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the members of such boards and commissions shall serve for a term of four years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified; provided, however, the members first appointed to those boards and commissions shall so classify themselves by lot that each succeeding July 1st the term of at least one of their number shall expire.

Sec. 1003 Meetings; Chair.
As soon as practicable, following the first day of July of every year, each of such boards and commissions shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as presiding officer at the pleasure of such board or commission. Each board or commission shall hold regular meetings as required by ordinance of the City Council, and such special meetings as it may require. All proceedings shall be open to the public unless the nature of any proceeding is such that in the opinion of such board or commission the public interest would be best served by closing a particular proceeding to the public, and the reasons therefor are declared in any action closing such proceeding. Upon conclusion of any such proceeding any final action which is to be taken by such board or commission, with respect to such proceedings, shall be taken in open meeting.

The affirmative or negative vote of a majority of the entire membership of such board or commission shall be necessary for it to take action. Each board or commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Each board or commission may prescribe its own rules and regulations which shall be consistent with this Charter and copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. It shall have the same power as the City Council to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath and to compel the production of evidence before it. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1004 Compensation, vacancies.
The members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation for their services as such, but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses when on official duty on order of the City Council.

Except as otherwise herein provided, any vacancies in any board or commission from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. Upon a vacancy occurring leaving an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. If a member of a board or commission absents himself/herself from three regular meetings of such board or commission, consecutively, unless with permission of such board or commission expressed in its official minutes, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or ceases to be a qualified elector of the City, his/her office shall be vacant and shall be so declared by the City Council. (As amended, 1967 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 35; Chapter 61; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1005 Oaths; affirmations.
Each member of any such board or commission shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceeding pending before such board or commission.

Sec. 1006 Planning Commission – Generally.
There shall be a City Planning Commission consisting of seven members to be appointed by the City Council from the qualified electors of the City, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government except that the City Manager, and the Director of Public Works and Utilities, or their designated representatives, shall serve as ex-officio members of the commission. (As amended, 1965 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 74, Chapter 101)

Sec. 1007 Planning Commission – Duties and powers.
The Planning Commission shall have power and be required to:

(a) After a public hearing thereon, recommend to the City Council the adoption, amendment, or repeal of the General Plan or any part thereof for the physical development of the City;

(b) Exercise such functions with respect to land subdivisions, planning, and zoning as may be prescribed by ordinance; and

(c) Exercise such planning, zoning, environmental or other function as now or may be hereafter authorized by the State of California in so far as they do not conflict with the provisions of this Charter. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1008 Parks and Recreation Commission.
There shall be a City Parks and Recreation Commission consisting of seven members to be appointed by the City Council from the qualified electors of the City, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government.

Sec. 1009 Parks and Recreation Commission – Powers and duties.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have power and be required to:

(a) Act in advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to parks, recreation, playgrounds and entertainment;

(b) Consider the annual budget of the Parks and Recreation Department during the process of its preparation and make recommendations with respect thereto to the City Manager and the City Council; and

(c) Assist in the planning and supervision of a recreation program for the inhabitants of the City, promote and stimulate public interest therein and to that end, solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of school authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1010 Civil Service Commission.
There shall be a Civil Service Commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the City Council from the qualified electors of the City, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government.

Sec. 1011 Civil Service Commission – Powers and duties.
(a) The Civil Service Commission is charged with the duty of providing qualified persons for appointment to the service of the City. All appointments in the public service shall be made for the good of that service, and solely upon merit and fitness, as established by appropriate test, without regard to partisan politics, race, color or religious belief.

(b) Act as Board of Review to hear petitions by civil service employees, and applicants for civil service positions, and to grant or deny such petitions.

(c) Perform such other duties as may be required by the civil service rules and regulations. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1012 Board of Library Trustees.
There shall be a Board of Library Trustees consisting of five members to be appointed by the City Council from the qualified electors of the City and no member of said Board shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government.

Sec. 1013 Board of Library Trustees – Powers and duties.
The Board of Library Trustees shall have charge of the administration of the Santa Clara Free Public Library and shall have power and be required to:

(a) Make and enforce such by-laws, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the administration and protection of the City library;

(b) Approve or disapprove the appointment of a librarian who shall be the department head;

(c) Accept into the library fund and administer money, personal property or real estate donated to the City or otherwise acquired for library purposes subject to the approval of the City Council;

(d) Contract with school, county or other governmental agencies to render or receive library services or facilities, subject to the approval of the City Council. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Article XI. Civil Service
Sec. 1100 Civil service; merit principle.
Appointments and promotions in the service of the City shall be made according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive examination.

Sec. 1101 Classified service.
The civil service of the City shall be divided into the unclassified and classified service.

(a) The unclassified service shall comprise the following offices and positions:

(1)    All elective officers;

(2)    City Manager;

(3)    City Attorney;

(4)    City Clerk;

(5)    City Auditor;

(6)    The head of each department, including but not limited to, the Director of Finance, Director of Public Works and Utilities, City Engineer, Chief of the Police Department, Chief of the Fire Department;

(7)    The Assistant City Manager, Assistant City Attorney, and Assistant Department Heads, whenever so designated by the City Council;

(8)    All members of boards and commissions;

(9)    Persons employed for a temporary or special purpose, for a period not to exceed six months in any one calendar year, if the City Manager certifies that such employment is temporary and that the work shall not be performed by employees in the classified service;

(10)    Persons employed to render professional, scientific, technical or expert service of an occasional and exceptional character;

(11)    Volunteer members of the Fire Department and Police Reserve; and,

(12)    The City Council by ordinance may divide or separate any department of the City into divisions and by ordinance may provide that the employee selected to be the head of any such division shall be in the unclassified service.

(b) The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically included in this section in the unclassified service. (As amended 1965 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 74, Chapter 101; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1102 Appointments from classified to the unclassified service.
In the event an officer or employee of the City holding a position in the classified service is appointed to a position in the unclassified service, and should subsequently be removed therefrom, he/she shall revert to his/her former position in the classified service without loss of any rights or privileges and upon the same terms and conditions as if he/she had remained in said position continuously. Should such person be eligible for retirement under the retirement system at the time of such subsequent removal, upon recommendation of the City Manager, he/she shall be retired in lieu of being restored to his/her former position. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1103 Classification.
The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council a plan of classification and grading of all positions in the City Service according to similarity of authority, duties and responsibilities. Such classification plan shall take effect when adopted by the City Council. Additions or changes in the classification plan may be adopted from time to time by the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager.

Sec. 1104 Pay plan.
The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council a standard schedule of pay for each position in the classified service. Such pay plan when adopted by the City Council shall include a minimum and maximum and such intermediate rates as may be deemed desirable for each class of positions. Amendments to the pay schedule may be adopted from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager.

Sec. 1105 Civil service rules and regulations.
The City Council shall adopt civil service rules and regulations governing the administration of the City civil service system to implement the provisions of this Article.

Sec. 1106 Reserved.
Code reviser’s note: At an election held on November 7, 1972, the electors repealed former section 1106 containing provisions prohibiting persons in the classified service from engaging in certain political activities. Said former section was adopted by the electors at an election held on April 2, 1951, and approved by the State legislature on April 25, 1951. The repeal of said section 1106 was approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10).

Sec. 1107 Prohibitions.
No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any application, test, certification, or appointment held or made under the personnel provision of this Charter or in any manner commit or attempt any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such personnel provisions or rules and regulations made hereunder.

Any person who by himself/herself or with others willfully or corruptly violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted hereunder shall be ineligible for a period of five years for employment in the City service and shall, if he/she is an officer or employee of the City, immediately forfeit his/her office or position. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1108 Contract for administrative services.
The City Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, may contract with the governing body of any other city, or county within this state, or with any state department, or with any private or governmental agency for the furnishing of administrative, fiscal, or personnel services.

Article XII. Retirement
Sec. 1200 State system.
The “Public Employees’ Retirement Law,” as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted for the City of Santa Clara, and plenary authority and power are hereby vested in said City, its City Council and its several officers, agents and employees at their discretion to do and perform any act, or exercise any authority granted, permitted, or required under the provisions of said Retirement Law, to enable said City to become or continue as a contracting City participating in the Public Employees’ Retirement System; provided, however, that the City Council may terminate any contract entered into with the Board of Administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System only under authority granted by ordinances adopted by a majority vote of the electors of the City of Santa Clara, voting on such proposition at an election at which such proposal is presented. (As amended by electors at election held November 7, 1972, approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10))

Article XIII. Fiscal Administration
Sec. 1300 Fiscal year.
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the 30th day of June of the following year. (As amended 1959 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 37; Chapter 121)

Sec. 1301 Annual budget; preparation by the City Manager.
At such date as he/she shall determine, the City Manager shall obtain from each office, department or agency of the City, estimates of revenue and expenditure for such office, department or agency, detailed in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager. In preparing the proposed budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates, shall hold conferences thereon with the head of such office, department or agency, respectively, and may revise the estimates as he/she may deem advisable. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1302 Budget – Submission to City Council.
At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, or at such prior date thereto determined by the City Council, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council the proposed budget as prepared by him/her. After reviewing the same and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the City Council shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and shall cause to be published a notice thereof not less than ten days prior to said hearing, by at least one insertion in an official newspaper.

Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the City Clerk at least ten days prior to said hearing. (As amended 1959 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 37; Chapter 121; Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1303 Budget – Public hearing.
At the time so advertised, or at any time to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, at which interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

Sec. 1304 Budget – Further consideration and adoption.
After the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall further consider the proposed budget and make any revisions thereof that it may deem advisable and on or before June 30 it shall adopt the budget with revisions, if any, by the affirmative votes of at least four members. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy thereof, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed with the City Manager and a further copy shall be placed and shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for inspection. The budget so certified shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of departments, offices and agencies of the City. (As amended, 1959 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 37; Chapter 121)

Sec. 1305 Budget – Appropriations.
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several departments, offices and agencies for the respective objects and purposes therein named. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.

At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement the budget by motion adopted by the affirmative votes of at least five members so as to authorize the transfer of unused balances appropriated for one purpose to another purpose, or to appropriate available revenue not included in the budget.

Sec. 1306 Tax system and collection of taxes.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1306.5 Budget and levy of taxes for interim period between fiscal years.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1307 Tax limits.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1308 Tax liens.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1309 Bonded debt limit.
The bonded indebtedness of the City may not in the aggregate exceed the sum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total assessed valuation of property within the City, exclusive of revenue bonds or any indebtedness that has been or may hereafter be incurred for the purposes of acquiring, constructing, extending, or maintaining municipally owned utilities, for which purposes a further indebtedness may be incurred by the issuance of bonds, subject only to the provisions of the State Constitution and of this Charter.

Sec. 1310 Contracts on public works.
Every contract involving an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the construction or improvement, (excluding maintenance and repair), of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks and playgrounds shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice by publication in an official newspaper by one or more insertions, the first of which shall be at least ten days before the time for opening bids.

The City Council may reject any and all bids presented and may re-advertise in its discretion.

The City Council, without advertising for bids, or after rejecting bids, or if no bids are received, may declare and determine that, in its opinion, the work in question may be performed better or more economically by the City with its own employees, and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect by at least four affirmative votes, it may proceed to have said work done in the manner stated, without further observance of the provisions of this section. Such contracts likewise may be let without advertising for bids, if such work shall be deemed by the City Council to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health or property, and shall be authorized by motion passed by at least four affirmative votes and containing a declaration of the facts constituting such urgency.

Sec. 1311 General fund.
The City Council shall maintain a General Fund for the purpose of accounting for the general government revenue and the expenditures of the various City departments resulting from the provision of general government services.

The City Council shall maintain a General Contingency Reserve Fund. A reserve shall be built up in this fund from any available sources including any excess of revenues over expenditures in the General Fund during any fiscal year.

The City Council may establish reserve accounts in the General Contingency Reserve Fund as needed to segregate monies for particular purposes. Transfers may be made by the City Council from the General Contingency Reserve Fund to any other fund or funds, of such sum or sums as may be required for the purposes Council deems appropriate. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1312 Capital project funds.
Capital Project funds shall be created and maintained as necessary to segregate and account for specific capital improvement project transactions and appropriations shall be included in the Capital Improvement Project Budget. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1313 Department funds.
The City Council shall maintain separate accounting records for the collection of revenues and disbursement of expenditures that are related to specific functions as determined by federal, state, other agency laws or City Charter provisions and regulations or as determined by Council action. These specific functions include, but are not limited to: the various City utilities whose operations are funded by user charges; grant programs; and trust funds established by bequest. Separate funds or accounts shall be maintained such that proper reporting can be made at any time. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1314 Petty cash funds.
The City Council may provide for revolving petty cash funds, to be paid to the City Manager or department heads and used for payment in cash of expenditures provided for in the budgets that cannot conveniently be paid otherwise. The City Manager, and such department heads, shall account to the City Council for all disbursements made therefrom when making demand for replenishment of the same and at such other times as the Council may require and the amounts shall thereupon be charged against the proper appropriations.

Sec. 1315 Presentation of demands.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1316 Registering warrants.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1317 Actions against City.
No suit or action for money or damages, whether sounding in tort, contract or some other theory, may be brought against the City, or any board, commission, agency or officer, agent or employee thereof, until a claim has been filed with the City, and either the City acts on the claim or it is deemed denied by operation of law. The procedures prescribed by State law governing the presentations, consideration and enforcement of claims against cities and its officers, agents and employees shall apply to the presentation, consideration and enforcement of claims against the City. Claims for money or damages which are excepted from or not covered by State law may be governed by the procedures established by City ordinance. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1318 Centralized purchasing.
A centralized purchasing system shall be established for all City Departments, offices, and agencies. The City Manager shall recommend and the City Council shall consider and adopt by ordinance, rules and regulations governing the contracting for purchasing, storing, distribution, or disposal of all supplies, materials and equipment, required by any department, office or agency of the City government.

Sec. 1319 Independent audit.
The Council shall employ, at the beginning of each fiscal year, an independent certified public accountant who shall audit the books, records and accounts of all officers and employees of the City who receive, administer or disburse public funds, and such other officers, employees, departments and agencies as the Council may direct. Such audit shall be made at such times as may be prescribed by the City Council but shall be at least annually.

As soon as practicable after the end of the fiscal year, a final audit and report shall be submitted by such independent accountant to the Council, the City Manager and the City Attorney. Three (3) copies of the audit shall be placed on file in the City Clerk’s office where they shall be available for public inspection. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1320 Utilities fund.
Receipts from the utilities operated by the City shall be paid into the City Treasury and maintained in a separate utilities fund for such utilities. Expenditures from such fund shall be made for the following purposes only for such utilities in the order named, viz.:

(a) For the payment of operating expenses, pension charges and proportionate payments to such compensation and other insurance and accident reserve funds as the City or the City Council may establish;

(b) For repairs and maintenance;

(c) For the payment of interest and sinking funds on bonds issued for acquisition, construction or extensions;

(d) For the payment of not to exceed five per cent of the gross receipts from such utilities to the general fund of the City in payment for services rendered; subject, however, to such limitations as may be contained in any resolution or indenture heretofore adopted providing for the issuance of revenue bonds for the acquisition, construction or improvement of such utilities, which bonds are now outstanding or may hereafter be issued under such existing resolution or indenture;

(e) For extensions and improvements;

(f) For the establishment of a sinking fund within the utilities fund for the replacement of utilities property in the minimum amount of two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00).

The City Council shall cause records to be kept of the receipts and expenditures of each utility and of credits and debits of each utility in the aforementioned utilities fund. The City Council may, however, order expenditures from the utilities fund for any utility even though that utility has no credit in the utilities fund, provided only that the balance in the utilities fund is greater than the proposed expenditure. (As Amended, 1967 Statutes, Senate Concurrent Resolution 35; Chapter 61; Amendment ratified 11-4-80)

Sec. 1321 Revenue bonds.
(a) The City Council, when authorized at an election as hereinafter provided, shall have power to issue revenue bonds for the purposes authorized by the general laws of the State of California including the issuance of refunding revenue bonds and also shall have power to borrow money and incur indebtedness for any and all revenue producing works, undertakings, enterprises and utilities (hereinafter in this section referred to as “works”) to the end that, as far as practicable, all such works shall be self sustaining and shall be paid for directly out of the revenues therefrom. Such works may be financed through the issuance of revenue bonds.

(b) Neither such revenue bonds, nor the interest accruing thereon, shall be, or evidence, indebtedness of the City. Such revenue bonds, and the interest accruing thereon, shall be a charge solely upon such of the revenues of the works on account of which they are issued as by the terms of their issuance are so charged therewith, but shall not be a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon, nor shall any recourse on account thereof be had against any income, receipts, revenues, funds, or property of the City, other than such charge upon such revenues of the work on account of which they are issued, and neither the credit nor the taxing power of the City shall be deemed to be pledged to, or charged with, such payment, nor shall the holder of any such bond have any right to compel the exercise of such taxing power.

(c) The City Council may avail itself of any of the procedures now or hereafter authorized by the general laws of the State of California for the issuance of revenue bonds or the City Council may, by ordinance or resolution effective upon adoption set up and establish a procedure for the issuance of such revenue bonds, the calling and holding of elections therefor, and all matters pertaining to the issuance and sale of such bonds; provided, however, that the issuance of said revenue bonds shall be submitted to the electors at an election and the votes of a majority of all those voting on the proposition shall be required to authorize the issuance of the bonds.

(d) Nothing in this section or elsewhere in this Charter, shall preclude the issuance, when authorized by two-thirds vote of the duly qualified electors of the City voting upon the proposition, of bonds of the City, for the purposes of any works, pursuant to proceedings therefor taken in accordance with the Constitution and general laws of the State. It is nevertheless the intention of this Charter that all principal and interest accruing on such bonds of the City if any, shall be provided currently out of the revenue fund pertaining to the works on account of which such bonds of the City shall have been issued, so far as it is practicable to make such provisions after the payment of all costs of operation and maintenance of said works and of all principal and interest on revenue bonds of the City issued on account of said works, and that so far as such current provision is not practicable, the general funds of the City shall be reimbursed out of said revenue fund, as soon as practicable, for all moneys paid from such general funds on account of such bonds of the City.

(e) The City Council shall have power to issue revenue bonds to finance the generation, production, transmission and distribution of electric energy, including the acquisition and/or construction of lands and facilities therefor, without authorization at an election. The City Council may avail itself of the procedures now or hereafter authorized by the general laws of the State of California for the issuance of such revenue bonds or the City Council may, by ordinance or resolution effective upon adoption, set up and establish a procedure for the issuance of such revenue bonds and all matters pertaining to the issuance and sale of such bonds. This section (e) does not authorize the financing of a nuclear plant, or an interest therein, unless approved by an election. (Amendment ratified 11-3-81)

Article XIV. Franchises
Sec. 1400 Procedure; terms.
The City Council may by ordinance provide a procedure for the granting of franchises or grant franchises pursuant to the procedure provided by the State law. Franchises may be granted for the use by any public utility of the streets, public places or property of the City upon such terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations as may be prescribed by ordinance, but no franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City adequate compensation for the privilege conferred. Such franchises may be granted either for a fixed or an indeterminate period.

Article XV. Reserved
Code reviser’s note: At an election held on November 7, 1972, the electors repealed former Art. XV, section 1500 - 1505, pertaining to the police court. Said former article was adopted by the electors at an election held on April 2, 1951, and approved by the State legislature on April 25, 1951. The repeal of said Art. XV was approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10).

Article XVI. Reserved
Code reviser’s note: At an election held on November 7, 1972, the electors repealed former Art. XVI, section 1600, pertaining to the school department. Said former article was adopted by the electors at an election held on April 2, 1951, and approved by the State legislature on April 25, 1951, and amended by the State legislature (1957 Stats., p. 4459). The repeal of said Art. XVI was approved by Senate Concurrent Resolution (1973 Stats., Res. Ch. 10).

Article XVII. Reserved Powers, State Election Code and Amendments to State Elections Code
Sec. 1700 Reserved powers.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1701 State Elections Code.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1702 Amendments to State Elections Code.
(Repealed by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Article XVIII. Miscellaneous
Sec. 1800 Definitions.
Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, as used in the Charter:

(a) “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.

(b) “City” is the City of Santa Clara and “department,” “board,” “commission,” “agency,” or “employee,” is a department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee as the case may be, of the City of Santa Clara.

(c) The masculine and feminine gender include the neuter. (Amended by electors at an election held March 7, 2000, Charter Chapter 11 of the State Statutes of 2000)

Sec. 1801 Violations.
The violation of any provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term of not exceeding one year or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Sec. 1802 Validity.
If any provisions of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.

Sec. 1803 Effective date.
For the purpose of nominating and electing members of the City Council, this Charter shall take effect from the time of its approval by the legislature. For all other purposes it shall take effect on the Tuesday next succeeding the date of election of the first City Council at 8:00 P.M.

Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01  Code Adoption

1.05  General Provisions

1.10  Administrative Penalties – Citations

1.15  Claims Against the City

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections:

1.01.010  Adoption by reference.

1.01.020  Ordinances included and repealed.

1.01.030  Effect of past actions on repealed ordinances.

1.01.040  Enforcement.

1.01.010 Adoption by reference.
That pursuant to City Charter Section 813, that certain Code entitled "The Code of the City of Santa Clara, California" ("Code"), not less than three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk for examination by the public, and which contains certain ordinances of a general and permanent nature (with clarifying changes) as compiled, consolidated, modified, constituted, codified and indexed in Titles 1 through 18, inclusive, is hereby referred to and adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out at length in this chapter. (Ord. 1785 § 1, 9-30-03).

1.01.020 Ordinances included and repealed.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature finally passed and adopted by the City Council up to and including Ordinance No. 1781 (finally passed and adopted on July 15, 2003) and not contained in the foregoing Code are hereby repealed, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1785 § 2, 9-30-03).

1.01.030 Effect of past actions on repealed ordinances.
The repeal provided for in SCCC 1.01.020 shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it affect the Capital Outlay Recreation Fund, established by Ordinance No. 631, as amended; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinances or resolution of the City or any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinances adopted for purposes which have been consummated; nor shall it affect any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to the salaries or the City officers or employees; nor shall it affect any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting, or vacating streets or alleys in the City; nor shall it affect any ordinance finally adopted and passed by the City Council after Ordinance No. 1781 (finally passed and adopted on July 15, 2003), which subsequent ordinances will ultimately be placed into this Code. (Ord. 1785 § 3, 9-30-03).

1.01.040 Enforcement.
Enforcement of this Code shall be pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, unless another section of this Code contains more specific provisions that are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070. (Ord. 1785 § 4, 9-30-03).

Chapter 1.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.05.010  How Code designated and cited.

1.05.020  Definitions and rules of construction.

1.05.030  Interpretation – No City liability.

1.05.040  Catchlines of sections.

1.05.050  Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.

1.05.060  Severability of parts of Code, ordinances, resolutions.

1.05.070  Prosecutorial discretion for enforcement – Continuing violations – Range of penalties – Enforcement cost recovery.

1.05.080  Adoption of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

1.05.010 How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections of this Code shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Santa Clara, California," or "Santa Clara City Code," and may be so cited. (Formerly § 1-1).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to power of City to codify ordinances, see Gov. C.A. §§ 50022.1 – 50022.8.

1.05.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a) Reserved for future use.

(b) "B" definitions:

(1) Building Standards Code. See (c)(2) "California Code of Regulations," below, for explanation.

(c) "C" definitions:

(1) California Building Standards Code. See (c)(2) "California Code of Regulations," below, for explanation.

(2) "California Code of Regulations" ["CCR"]. These are the regulations issued by State agencies. Titles 1 through 28 (with Title 24 omitted) of the California Code of Regulations are found in "Barclay's Official California Code of Regulations." The Barclay's version of the CCR states the Building Standards are no longer contained in the California Code of Regulations. This is not entirely accurate. Title 24 does exist, and it consists of 11 Parts. The California Building Standards Commission is responsible for publishing Title 24 as a separate title, and Title 24 is also known as the "California Building Standards Code." These respective 11 Parts of Title 24 are now the States' "building standards" and consist of subject matter such as the California Building Code (Part 2), California Electric Code (Part 3), California Plumbing Code (Part 5), California Fire Code (Part 9), etc. References are to the latest version of a CCR section, or its successor CCR section.

(3) "Charter" shall mean and refer to the Charter of the City of Santa Clara, as amended.

(4) "The City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Santa Clara."

(5) City Council. Whenever the words "Council" or "City Council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Santa Clara.

(6) "The Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Code of the City of Santa Clara, California." Throughout this Code, the Code is abbreviated "SCCC."

(7) Codes – Various California Codes. Reference to California codes will not always be preceded by their California identification, i.e., Civil Code, Government Code, Health and Safety Code, Labor Code, Streets and Highway Code, Water Code, etc. It is understood, unless the context indicates otherwise, that code references are to California codes. References are to the latest version of a code section, or its successor code section.

(8) "Code of Federal Regulations" ["CFR"]. These are the administrative regulations issued by various agencies of the United States government. The CFR consists of Titles 1 through 50. Amendments to the CFR first appear in the Federal Register. References are to the latest version of a CFR section, or its successor CFR section.

(9) Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 6800. See also C.C.P. § 12.

(10) "The County" or "this County" shall mean the County of Santa Clara, California.

(d) "D" definitions:

(1) "Day" is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. Unless expressly provided otherwise, "days" refers to calendar days.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 6806.

(2) Daytime, Nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 6807.

(3) "Department," "board," "commission," "agency," "officer" or "employee" shall mean a department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the City of Santa Clara.

(4) Designee. Whenever authority is granted to a City officer or employee (i.e., City Manager, Chief of Police, City Clerk, City Attorney, Director of Public Works, Director of Finance, etc.), whether explicitly provided or not, it is understood that the grant of authority includes the further delegation of that authority to a duly qualified and appointed designee.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) "G" definitions:

(1) Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 12.

(h) "H" definitions:

(1) "Health Department" shall mean the Health Department of the County of Santa Clara.

(2) "Health Officer" shall mean the Health Authority of the County of Santa Clara.

(3) Hold Harmless. Whenever a third party is charged with holding the City harmless, the phrase (or variation of the phrase) "protect, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless," shall be read to mean that party will protect, defend (including costs and reasonable attorney's fees), indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its City Council, officers, employees, agents, assigns and successors in any administrative or judicial action in which the City is exposed to liability.

(i) "I" definitions:

(1) "In the City" shall mean and include all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

(j) "J" definitions:

(1) Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

Stat. Ref.: See C.C. § 12.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) "M" definitions:

(1) "Month" shall mean a calendar month.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 6804.

(n) "N" definitions:

(1) Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 13.

(o) "O" definitions:

(1) Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 15.

(2) Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the city.

(3) Or, And. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.

(4) "Owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

(p) "P" definitions:

(1) "Person" includes any individual, partnership, association (or other group however organized), organization, social club, fraternal organization, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, government agency, public corporation, corporation (de jure or de facto), company, limited liability company, business, firm, joint venture, joint stock club, or any other legal, business, or commercial entity and any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 17.

(2) "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section.

Stat. Ref.: See C.C. § 14, subsec. 3.

(3) "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.

(4) "Process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 22.

(5) "Property" shall include real and personal property.

Stat. Ref.: See C.C. § 14, subsecs. 1, 2, 3.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) "R" definitions:

(1) "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.

Stat. Ref.: See C.C. § 14, subsec. 2.

(s) "S" definitions:

(1) Shall, May. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 14.

(2) Signature or Subscription by Mark. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his/her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name, but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 16.

(3) "The State" or "this State" shall be construed to mean the State of California.

(t) "T" definitions:

(1) "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

(2) Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 11.

(u) "U" definitions:

(1) "United States Code" ["U.S.C." or "U.S.C.A."]. This is the codification of enactments of the Congress of the United States. It consists of Titles 1 through 28.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) "W" definitions:

(1) Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 6805.

(2) "Writing" includes any form of a recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

Stat. Ref.: For similar State law, see Gov. C.A. § 8.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) "Y" definitions:

(1) "Year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

Stat. Ref.: For State law definition of "year," see Gov. C.A. § 6803.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Amended at request of city during 2003 recodification; formerly § 1-2).

1.05.030 Interpretation – No City liability.
None of the provisions in this Code or in any other ordinance or resolution of the City or in any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, whether preexisting, existing or in the future, are intended to create or to be construed to create an imposition of civil liability on the City, its Council, officers or employees while acting or failing to act in accordance with such provisions. (Ord. 1528 § 1, 7-16-85. Formerly § 1-2.1).

1.05.040 Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Formerly § 1-3).

1.05.050 Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Formerly § 1-4).

1.05.060 Severability of parts of Code, ordinances, resolutions.
(a) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.

(b) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of any uncodified ordinance or resolution heretofore or hereafter adopted is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of such ordinance or resolution. Each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of any ordinance or resolution is severable from all other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases unless such ordinance or resolution contains a provision which states that the City Council, or any body so delegated by the City Council, would not have passed the remainder of such ordinance or resolution if it had known that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinance or resolution would subsequently be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1970 § 1, 10-24-17. Formerly § 1-5).

1.05.070 Prosecutorial discretion for enforcement – Continuing violations – Range of penalties – Enforcement cost recovery.
(a) Preliminary Statement. Throughout this Code are provisions utilizing some form of enforcement language, i.e., "enforcement," "penalty," "unlawful," etc. Many of them refer to this SCCC 1.05.070. However, some sections have additional provisions that might include, but not be limited to, enforcement procedure, enforcement personnel, fine schedules, etc. Those provisions are intended to augment these basic provisions of SCCC 1.05.070.

(b) Acts or Omissions Constituting a Violation. Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance or resolution of the City, in any permit, use, rule or regulation promulgated or granted pursuant thereto, or in any authorization granted in writing by the City Council or the City Manager, or City Manager designee, (i) any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor (or infraction), or (ii) the performance of any act is required or the failure to perform any act is declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor (or infraction) [all the above categories are hereinafter collectively referred to as "violation(s)"], the enforcement of a violation shall be in the discretion of the City Attorney's office. Pursuant to the City Attorney office's prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations as a criminal (infraction or misdemeanor), civil, and/or administrative action.

(c) Continuing Violations. Each and every day, or any part thereof, during which any violation [as defined hereinabove in subsection (b)] is committed, continued, permitted or allowed, it shall be a separate offense.

(d) Prohibited Acts. Whenever a violation, as defined hereinabove in subsection (b), occurs, the violation shall include not only the act or omission constituting the violation, but it shall also include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, withholding or concealing the fact of such act or omission (or destroying or tampering the evidence associated with the act or omission).

(e) Criminal Enforcement.

(1) Prosecution. Every violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Provided, however, that in the sole discretion of the City Attorney's office, a violation may be prosecuted as an infraction where the City Attorney's office has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice. The City Attorney may specify in the citation, accusatory pleading or by amendment during the prosecutorial process that the matter will be prosecuted as an infraction.

(2) Penalty for a Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this Code that is deemed a misdemeanor is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both penalty and imprisonment.

(3) Penalty for an Infraction. Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Code, each and every violation of this Code that is deemed an infraction is punishable by:

(A) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

(B) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within a one-year period; or

(C) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision of this Code within a one-year period of the first violation.

(f) Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally, accidentally, or negligently commits a violation of this Code, any written authority issued by the City, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this Code, is civilly liable to the City in the sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day in which such violation occurs or continues. Pursuant to subsection (h), hereinbelow, the City may petition the appropriate court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. The civil penalties provided in this subsection (f) explicitly exclude the cost of enforcement provided in subsection (h), which costs will be imposed in addition to the civil penalties. The civil penalties are cumulative and not exclusive, and the civil penalties herein provided shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under the laws, regulations, or requirements of Federal law, State law, or City law. These civil remedies include, but are not limited to, actions or legal proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance.

(g) Administrative Penalties. Whenever, pursuant to Chapter 1.10 SCCC, Administrative Penalties – Citations, a hearing officer finds that any person has violated any provision of this Code, City regulation or City requirement, the hearing officer may assess an administrative penalty in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. The remedies provided in this section shall be pursuant to the applicable administrative procedures. The administrative penalties provided in this subsection (g) explicitly exclude the cost of enforcement provided in subsection (h), which costs will be imposed in addition to the administrative penalties. The administrative penalties are cumulative and not exclusive, and the administrative penalties herein provided shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under the laws, regulations, or requirements of Federal law, State law, or City law.

(h) Costs of Enforcement.

(1) In any criminal, civil, and/or administrative proceeding, appeal, hearing, or action commenced by the City under the laws (which include, but are not limited to, statutory enactments, resolutions, regulations, requirements, or conditions of approval) of the Federal government, State government, or City, the City shall be entitled to recover from the defendant(s) of such action the City's cost of enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspection costs, the cost of the services of personnel (which is not limited to City employees), forensic services, equipment utilized in the investigation, corrective actions (abatement, cleanup, etc.), and enforcement activities of the City.

(2) The prevailing party in any action shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys' fees only in those individual actions or proceedings in which the City elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 1531 § 1, 9-17-85; Ord. 1785 § 4, 9-30-03; Ord. 1833 § 1, 4-15-08. Formerly § 1-6).

Stat. Ref.: For State law authorizing cities to impose fines not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for terms not exceeding six months, or both, for violations of ordinances, see Gov. C.A. § 36901. For provision declaring violation of ordinance to be a misdemeanor, see Gov. C.A. § 36900.

1.05.080 Adoption of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 are hereby adopted. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 11-5-91. Formerly § 1-7).

Chapter 1.10
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES – CITATIONS
Sections:

1.10.010  Applicability.

1.10.020  Code enforcement officer – Defined.

1.10.030  Administrative citation.

1.10.040  Amount of administrative penalties.

1.10.050  Payment of administrative penalties.

1.10.060  Hearing request.

1.10.070  Advance deposit hardship waiver.

1.10.080  Hearing officer.

1.10.090  Hearing procedures.

1.10.100  Hearing officer's decision.

1.10.110  Administrative penalties.

1.10.120  Administrative costs.

1.10.130  Failure to pay administrative penalties and costs.

1.10.140  Judicial review.

1.10.150  Collection of administrative civil penalties.

1.10.160  Lien procedure.

1.10.170  Public hearing and protests of proposed liens.

1.10.180  Recording of lien.

1.10.190  Satisfaction of lien.

1.10.010 Applicability.
(a) This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in addition to all other civil legal remedies and which are an alternative to any criminal legal remedies which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of the City Code, or to any regulations adopted under the authority of the City Code. References to "City Code" include adopted regulations.

(b) Use of the remedies and procedures of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the Code enforcement officers authorized to proceed under this chapter, and the availability of the remedies and procedures of this chapter shall not limit or preclude the use of criminal or civil injunctive Code enforcement proceedings.

(c) The provisions of this chapter are pursuant to the authority granted by California Government Code Section 53069.4, as amended from time to time, or successor legislative enactment. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.020 Code enforcement officer – Defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, "Code enforcement officer" shall mean any City employee or agent of the City with the authority to enforce any provision of the City Code. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.030 Administrative citation.
(a) Whenever a Code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Code to which this chapter is applicable determines that a violation of such Code provision has occurred, the Code enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation.

(b) Whenever the Director of Finance is mentioned, it is understood that the reference includes "or designee."

(c) Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

(1) The date of the violation;

(2) The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

(3) The section or sections of the City Code violated and an abbreviated description of the acts or omissions constituting the violation;

(4) The amount of the penalty for the Code violation;

(5) A description of the penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the penalty shall be paid;

(6) A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; and

(7) The name and signature of the citing Code enforcement officer.

(d) Prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for a violation which pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or similar structural or zoning matters that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the Code enforcement officer shall provide a reasonable period of time not less than five business days to correct or otherwise remedy the violation.

(e) An administrative citation may be served by personal delivery on any person determined to be responsible for the violation if the responsible person can be located. If the Code enforcement officer cannot readily locate a responsible party for personal delivery of an administrative citation, then the citation may be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to a location reasonably calculated to give notice to the responsible party of the administrative citation. All notices required by this chapter to be served subsequent to service of a citation may be served either by personal delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed effective on the date of personal delivery or when the certified mail is either delivered or delivery is attempted.

If the certified mail receipt is returned unsigned, then service may instead be effected by regular first class mail, postage prepaid; provided, that the notice sent by regular mail is not returned by the postal service as undeliverable, and shall be deemed effective on the date three days following deposit in the mail.

Where a violation of Code provisions concerning the condition of real property is involved, an administrative citation or subsequent written notices authorized by this chapter may be served by certified mail at the address as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll.

Where a violation of Code provisions concerning the condition of real property is involved and personal delivery or service by certified mail upon the property owner is unsuccessful, service may be effected alternately or additionally by posting a copy of the order at a conspicuous location on the property which is the subject of the order.

Where service of any notice required under this chapter is effected in compliance with the requirements of this section and with due process the asserted failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.

(f) If the Director of Finance determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver (see SCCC 1.10.070, Advance deposit hardship waiver), the person shall remit the deposit to the City within ten days of the date of that decision in order to secure the hearing.

(g) The Director of Finance shall issue a written determination within ten days, listing the reasons for determining to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law.

(h) The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.040 Amount of administrative penalties.
(a) The amounts of administrative penalties for Code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of administrative penalties established by resolution of the City Council.

(b) The schedule of administrative penalties shall specify any increased penalties for repeat violations of the same Code provision by the same person within thirty-six (36) months from the date of an administrative citation.

(c) The schedule of administrative penalties shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of an administrative penalty after its due date. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.050 Payment of administrative penalties.
(a) The administrative penalty for an administrative citation shall be paid to the City through its Finance Department within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served. If a hearing is requested pursuant to SCCC 1.10.060, the administrative penalty shall be deposited with the Finance Department or an advance deposit hardship waiver shall be submitted to the City Clerk as required in SCCC 1.10.070.

(b) Any administrative citation penalty shall be refunded in accordance with SCCC 1.10.100 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation by the person charged in the administrative citation.

(c) Payment of an administrative penalty under this chapter shall not bar enforcement proceedings for any continuation or repeated occurrence of any Code violation that is the subject of an administrative citation. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.060 Hearing request.
(a) Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Code or that the party contesting is responsible for the violation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of service of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the administrative penalty or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to SCCC 1.10.070.

(b) A request for hearing form may be obtained from the City Clerk.

(c) The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

(d) If the Code enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.070 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
(a) Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an administrative citation and who claims to be financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in SCCC 1.10.060 may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.

(b) The request shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days following the date of service of the administrative citation.

(c) The requirement of depositing the full amount of the administrative penalty shall be stayed unless or until the Director of Finance makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

(d) The Director of Finance may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party submits to the Director of Finance a sworn declaration, together with any supporting evidence demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance the person's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

(e) If the Director of Finance determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the City within ten days of the date of that decision in order to secure the hearing.

(f) The Director of Finance shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for determining to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law.

(g) The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.080 Hearing officer.
The City Manager shall designate a hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.090 Hearing procedures.
(a) No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be noticed unless the administrative penalty has been deposited in advance in accordance with SCCC 1.10.060 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with SCCC 1.10.070.

(b) A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The party contesting the administrative citation may request one continuance for any reason; provided, that the hearing officer is given the request for continuance at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the scheduled hearing and that the deferred hearing shall not be deferred more than ninety (90) days after the request for hearing was made. A request for continuance made less than twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled hearing may be granted by the hearing officer based upon exigency only.

(c) At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses concerning the administrative citation. That contestant may appear personally or through an attorney. Prehearing discovery is not authorized, but subpoena of witnesses and documents shall be permitted as authorized by law. The hearing officer may conduct the hearing informally, both as to rules of procedure and admission of evidence, in any manner which will provide a fair hearing.

(d) The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing or, in the alternative, to present written or demonstrative evidence, shall constitute an admission of the violation by the recipient and an admission that the amount of the administrative penalty is appropriate as well as a failure to exhaust administrative remedies that may bar judicial review.

(e) The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the Code enforcement officer shall constitute presumptive evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

(f) The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Code enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.100 Hearing officer's decision.
(a) After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within thirty (30) days following completion of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon service on the responsible party, subject only to judicial review as allowed by law.

(b) The hearing officer shall consider any written or oral evidence submitted at the hearing consistent with ascertainment of the facts regarding the violation and compliance with the order.

(c) Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make findings and issue a decision regarding:

(1) The existence of the violation;

(2) The extent of compliance with the order;

(3) Person cited for the violation(s) is the responsible party.

(d) The hearing officer shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.

(e) If the hearing officer determines from a preponderance of the evidence that the contestant committed the violation charged in the administrative citation, then the administrative penalty on deposit shall be used to satisfy the penalty assessed by the hearing officer and shall become a debt to the City collectable through the processes provided herein.

(f) If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the administrative penalty has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the administrative penalty as well as for payment of any administrative costs assessed by the hearing officer.

(g) If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should not be sustained, then the hearing officer shall issue a decision canceling the administrative citation, and if the administrative penalty was deposited with the City, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited administrative penalty.

(h) The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision within ten calendar days following its issuance.

(i) The employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation penalties upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.110 Administrative penalties.
(a) The hearing officer may impose administrative penalties in an amount not to exceed the maximum provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by Council resolution in effect on the date when the violation occurred.

(b) In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the hearing officer may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:

(1) The duration of the violation;

(2) The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator;

(3) The seriousness of the violation;

(4) The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;

(5) The economic impact of the violation on the community;

(6) Such other factors as justice may require.

(c) Late payment charges shall accrue and be payable in the amount and by the terms specified in the schedule of administrative penalties.

(d) Administrative penalties sustained by the hearing officer are a debt owed to the City and in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation concerns the condition of real property, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred in accordance with SCCC 1.10.160. Failure to pay administrative penalties within the time allowed under this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.120 Administrative costs.
(a) The hearing officer may assess administrative costs against the violator when the hearing officer determines that a violation has occurred and that compliance was not achieved.

(b) Administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the City (both direct and indirect costs) in investigating and commencing administrative proceedings for the violation as well as any and all costs incurred by the City in connection with the hearing before the hearing officer, including but not limited to costs of the Code enforcement officer incurred in preparation for the hearing and for participating in the hearing itself and costs of the City to conduct the hearing. Failure to pay administrative costs in the amount specified in the administrative hearing officer's decision on or before the date specified in that decision shall constitute a violation of this Code punishable as a misdemeanor and shall further be subject to collection and late charges as otherwise provided for administrative penalties herein. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.130 Failure to pay administrative penalties and costs.
Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and/or administrative costs specified in a hearing officer's decision may be enforced as:

(a) A personal obligation of the violator; and/or

(b) If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property in accordance with SCCC 1.10.160, which shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest, and administrative costs are paid in full; and/or

(c) A criminal misdemeanor. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.140 Judicial review.
Any person subject to a decision of the hearing officer may obtain review of the decision in the appropriate court pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The administrative order shall provide notice of this right of judicial review and the time allowed therefor by law. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.150 Collection of administrative civil penalties.
The City may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.160 Lien procedure.
(a) Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within ninety (90) days after the administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposition becomes final, unless tolled by a timely request for judicial review pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 or reversed by court order, this obligation may constitute a lien against any real property involved where any violation was determined to concern the condition of that real property.

(b) The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the California Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 through 683.220 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

(c) Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.

(d) Prior to recording any such lien, a report shall be prepared and filed with the City Clerk stating the amounts due and owing.

(e) The City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by the City Council.

(f) A written notice to be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed by the current County equalized assessment roll not less than 10 days prior to the time set for the hearing. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.170 Public hearing and protests of proposed liens.
(a) Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property proposed to be subject to a lien pursuant to SCCC 1.10.160 may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest orally at the City Council hearing.

(b) Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party has a legal or equitable interest and the grounds of such protest or objection. The grounds for protest or objection, and any evidence or testimony submitted in support or in opposition to the imposition of a lien, shall be confined to whether the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed was satisfied in full within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a timely writ of mandate.

(c) The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the amount of the lien based upon evidence produced at the hearing. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.180 Recording of lien.
Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council imposing a lien, the City Clerk may file the same as a judgment lien in the Office of the County Recorder of Santa Clara County. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

1.10.190 Satisfaction of lien.
Once payment in full is received by the City for outstanding penalties and costs, the City Clerk shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution having a legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so they may record this notice with the Office of the County Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the City's lien. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 10-24-00).

Chapter 1.15
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:

1.15.010    State provisions – Applicability of chapter.

1.15.020    Presentation of claims – Prerequisite for bringing suit.

1.15.030    Contents of claim – Review of sufficiency.

1.15.040    Time limitation for presentation of claims.

1.15.050    Time for action by City.

1.15.060    Application to file a late claim.

1.15.070    Time barred claim.

1.15.080    Effective date of chapter.

1.15.090    Claim settlement authority.

1.15.010 State provisions – Applicability of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claims procedures applicable to the City are governed by the provisions of the Government Code, Chapters 1 and 2 of Chapter 3.6, commencing with Section 900 and following. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to Government Code Section 935 and shall apply to all claims against the City for money or damages; provided, that such claims are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08; Ord. 1877 § 1, 3-15-11).

1.15.020 Presentation of claims – Prerequisite for bringing suit.
No suit subject to this chapter may be brought against the City until a claim has been presented to and acted upon by the City, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.4. Any action brought against the City on a claim after it has been presented to and acted upon by the City shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.030 Contents of claim – Review of sufficiency.
A claim shall be presented to the City Clerk by the claimant, the claimant’s guardian, conservator, or the executor or administrator of the claimant’s will or estate, and shall show all information as required by Government Code Section 910. Where the claim seeks a refund, it shall be presented by the person who paid the money sought to be refunded, by his or her guardian or conservator or by the executor or administrator of his or her will or estate. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may, within twenty (20) days of receipt of a claim, either personally deliver or mail to the claimant a notice stating the deficiencies in the claim presented. If such notice is delivered or sent to the claimant, the City shall not act upon the claim until at least fifteen (15) days after such notice is sent. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08; Ord. 1877 § 2, 3-15-11).

1.15.040 Time limitation for presentation of claims.
Any claim specified in this chapter shall be presented within the following time limitations pursuant to Government Code Section 911.2:

(a) Claims relating to a cause of action for death, injury to person or to personal property, or growing crops shall be presented within six months after the accrual of the cause of action.

(b) Claims relating to any other cause of action shall be presented within one year after the accrual of the cause of action. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.050 Time for action by City.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 912.4, the City shall act on a claim within forty-five (45) days after the claim has been presented. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the City, such forty-five (45) day period may be extended by written agreement. If the claim is not acted on within forty-five (45) days, it shall be deemed to have been rejected on the forty-fifth (45th) day unless such time period has been extended, in which case it shall be denied on the last day of the period specified in the extension agreement. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.060 Application to file a late claim.
Any applicant who fails to file a claim within the time period required by this chapter may submit a written application to the City for leave to present a late claim, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 911.4. The City shall grant or deny the application to present a late claim within forty-five (45) days after it is presented to the City, in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Sections 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.070 Time barred claim.
Nothing in this chapter revives or reinstates any cause of action that, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, is barred by failure to comply with any previously applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation requiring the presentation of a claim prior to a suit, or by failure to commence any action thereon within the period prescribed by an applicable statute of limitation. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.080 Effective date of chapter.
Subject to SCCC 1.15.070, the provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively to any causes of action occurring prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1830 § 1, 2-12-08).

1.15.090 Claim settlement authority.
(a) With regard to settlement of matters for which worker’s compensation provides the exclusive remedy, the following limitations apply:

(1) The City Attorney, with the written concurrence of the City Manager, or their respective designees, is hereby authorized to compromise and settle worker’s compensation compromise and release claims against the City if the total amount of the settlement (which may include interest or attorney’s fees, or consist exclusively of interest or attorney’s fees) does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).

(2) The City Attorney, with the written concurrence of the City Manager, or their respective designees, is hereby authorized to settle worker’s compensation stipulations at any amount.

(3) Worker’s compensation-related matters that come within the requirements of the Government Claims Act are subject to subsection (b) of this section.

(b) With regard to settlement of claims other than those described in subsection (a) of this section, the following limitations apply:

(1) The City Attorney, or his/her respective designee, is hereby authorized to compromise and settle claims by or against the City if the total amount of the settlement (which may include interest or attorney’s fees, or consist exclusively of interest or attorney’s fees) does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).

(2) The City Attorney, with the written concurrence of the City Manager, or their respective designees, is hereby authorized to compromise and settle claims by and against the City if the total amount of the settlement (which may include interest or attorney’s fees, or consist exclusively of interest or attorney’s fees) does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

(3) Where there is a proposed settlement involving alleged police misconduct, the claim shall not be settled in any amount without the prior consent of the City Council. Settlements not involving payment of monies (such as, for example, dismissal in exchange for a waiver of costs) are not intended to be included in this limitation on settlement. Simple negligence matters (such as, for example, vehicle accidents) are not intended to be included in this limitation on settlement. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 10-9-18).

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.05    General Provisions

2.10    City Council

2.15    City Manager

2.20    City Clerk

2.25    City Attorney

2.30    Independent Auditor

2.35    Department of Public Works Administration

2.40    Engineering Department

2.45    Street Department

2.50    Automotive Services Department

2.55    Building Maintenance Department

2.60    Utilities Administration

2.65    Electric Department

2.70    Water and Sewer Department

2.75    Planning and Inspection Department

2.80    Police Department

2.85    Fire Department

2.90    Library Department

2.95    Communications Department

2.100    Parks and Recreation Department

2.105    Finance Department

2.110    Human Resources Department

2.115    General Characteristics of License or Permit – Suspension Procedure

2.120    Boards and Commissions

2.125    Municipal Elections

2.130    Political Campaign Finance Reform Act

2.135    Cemeteries

2.140    Disaster Council

2.145    Restrictions on Activities of City Officials and Certain City Employees

2.150    Payment of Prevailing Wages

2.155    Regulation of Lobbying Activities

2.160    Calendars of Certain City Officials

Charter references –    Civil service system § 1100 et seq.
    Provisions as to authority of City Council to establish departments, etc., generally, see Charter
    § 901.

Stat. Ref.:    For provisions relating to governmental conflict of interests, see Government Code § 81000 et seq.

Chapter 2.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

2.05.010  Organization of government generally.

2.05.020  Establishment of City policies and procedures.

2.05.030  Administrative procedures.

2.05.040  Departmental rules and regulations.

2.05.050  Insurance – Policy required on City officers and employees.

2.05.060  Bond – Elective officers.

2.05.070  Powers and duties of the City Manager.

2.05.080  Powers and duties of Directors and heads of departments generally.

2.05.090  Membership in State Employees' Retirement System.

2.05.010 Organization of government generally.
The governmental forces of the City shall be organized into the following department categories and the heads of each department shall be known by their respective titles as follows:

Department

Title

LEGISLATIVE

City Council

Mayor and Council Members

ADMINISTRATIVE

Council Officers

City Manager's office

City Manager

City Clerk's office

City Clerk

City Attorney's office

City Attorney

City Auditor's office

City Auditor

Public Works Administration

Public Works Department

Director of Public Works

Engineering Department

City Engineer

Streets and Automotive Services

Director of Streets and Automotive Services

Building Maintenance Department

Building Manager

Utilities Administration

Electric Department

Director of Electric Utility

Water and Sewer Department

Director of Water and Sewer Utilities

Departments

Communications Department

Director of Communications

Finance Department

Director of Finance

Fire Department

Fire Chief

Human Resources Department

Director of Human Resources

Information Technology

Director of Information Technology

Library Department

City Librarian

Parks and Recreation Department 

Parks and Recreation Director

Planning and Inspection Department

Director of Planning and Inspection

Police Department

Chief of Police

(Ord. 947; Ord. 1187 § 1, 4-2-68; Ord. 1215 § 1, 7-22-69; Ord. 1775 § 2, 8-20-02. Formerly § 2-1).

Charter reference – Provisions relative to form of government, § 500.

2.05.020 Establishment of City policies and procedures.
The policies of the City shall be adopted by resolutions or formal action of the City Council. In the absence of such policy, as determined by the City Council, the City Manager may establish and report an interim policy pending the formal action of the City Council on the subject.

The provisions of the document entitled the "City of Santa Clara Policy and Procedure Manual," as amended (or re-titled) from time to time, is hereby made a part of this Code by this reference. Additions, amendments or deletions may be made thereto by appropriate action of the City Council. A copy of the Policy and Procedure Manual is maintained by the City Clerk's office. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-2).

Charter references – General grant of powers, § 400; authority of City Council to act by ordinance or resolution, § 713.

2.05.030 Administrative procedures.
Pursuant to the City Charter, Section 802, the City Manager is the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City government. Some of the administrative procedures of the City have been established by the City Manager through formal documents or written memorandums.

The compilation of documents entitled "City Manager's Directives" shall constitute a portion of the established administrative procedures, and they are hereby made a part of this Code by this reference. Additions, amendments and deletions may be made by action of the City Manager. A copy of the City Manager's Directives is maintained by the City Clerk's office. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-3).

2.05.040 Departmental rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations of the various City departments shall be promulgated by the respective department heads after consultation with appropriate division heads and shall be approved by the City Manager.

In the absence of such established rules and regulations, division heads may establish and report interim rules and regulations for the guidance of employees, pending formal adoption of the same. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1527 § 1, 7-16-85. Formerly § 2-4).

2.05.050 Insurance – Policy required on City officers and employees.
The City Council shall procure and obtain a comprehensive dishonesty, disappearance and destruction policy including faithful performance blanket bond coverage in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) covering each of the employees and officials of the City, and insuring City from unfaithful performance of the duties of each of such officers and employees of the City. (Ord. 635 § 1; Ord. 997; Ord. 1519 § 1, 1-29-85; Ord. 1679 § 2, 10-10-95. Formerly § 2-6).

2.05.060 Bond – Elective officers.
The City Council shall procure and obtain a blanket surety bond in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), covering each of the elected officials of the City, conditioned upon the honesty of such officers and the faithful performance of the duties of their offices. (Ord. 635 § 1; Ord. 997. Formerly § 2-7).

2.05.070 Powers and duties of the City Manager.
Whereas by ordinance the City Council has provided for the creation of departments or offices, not specifically enumerated in the Charter as authorized under Charter Section 901 and has divided or separated many of the departments into divisions pursuant to Charter Section 1101(12) upon recommendation of the City Manager; at the same time it is recognized that the City Manager is the chief executive officer of the City and the head of the administrative branch of the City government and it is consistently intended and the City Manager is hereby authorized to modify and provide for deviation from any of the provisions of Chapter 2.15 SCCC and Chapters 2.35 through 2.110 SCCC under the circumstances where he/she administratively finds that the change will aid him/her in improving the administration of the City under the particular circumstances, and the modification or change will not constitute or cause a violation of the City Charter. Any such modifications shall be evidenced in rules and regulations authorized under Charter Section 803 and to the extent that there is any conflict in the provisions between hereinabove referenced chapters and the City Manager prescribed rules and regulations as herein authorized, the latter shall prevail. (Ord. 1527 § 2, 7-16-85. Formerly § 2-7.1).

2.05.080 Powers and duties of Directors and heads of departments generally.
The heads of the various departments established in this chapter shall have the following general powers, duties and responsibilities:

(a) To reorganize the department into the divisions established in this chapter in such a manner as to efficiently perform the functional responsibilities allocated thereto. For this purpose, the department head may create such sections and subunits within such division as deemed necessary.

(b) To make recommendations regarding recruiting, disciplining and discharging of departmental personnel in accordance with the civil service rules and regulations of the City.

(c) To transfer or reallocate personnel from one division to another in accordance with their respective needs and the best usage of available manpower.

(d) To keep correct attendance records of each employee for payroll purposes and to submit such other information as required for the proper maintenance of individuals' personnel records, including leaves of absence, job efficiency and personal conduct.

(e) To administer the department budget and permit no purchase requisitions to be issued or other expense incurred unless an appropriation therefor has been duly authorized.

(f) Department heads as such shall attend Council meetings only upon the invitation of the Council or the specific request of the City Manager.

(g) Department heads shall attend meetings of their respective boards and commissions and represent the City Manager thereon in case of his/her absence. They shall serve as recording secretary and keep the records of such commissions when so requested.

(h) Department heads shall carry on an active public relations program for their respective services including the publication of educational reports and brochures, the promotion of authorized objectives and the making of public addresses when the occasion so requires.

(i) Department heads shall promulgate and administer internal rules and regulations for the proper conduct of personnel and the efficient handling of the department's duties and functions.

(j) Department heads shall discharge such other duties as may be assigned to them by the City Manager or required by the ordinances, resolutions or official orders of the City Council. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-8).

Charter reference – Provisions relative to duties of appointive officers, see Charter § 902.

2.05.090 Membership in State Employees' Retirement System.
A contract is hereby authorized between the City Council and the Board of Administration, Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS). (Ord. 1054; Ord. 1090. Formerly § 2-9).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to authority of City to contract with Board of Administration of State Employees' Retirement System, see Gov. C.A. § 45345.

Charter reference – Provisions authorizing City to participate in State Employees' Retirement System and adopting same for use by the City, see Charter § 1200.

As to private patrol services, etc., see Chapter 5.55 SCCC.

Chapter 2.10
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.10.010  Membership – Terms of office and election.

2.10.020  Powers and duties – Generally –Mayor to serve as chairman – Conduct of meetings.

2.10.030  Appointment of City officers, etc.

2.10.040  Policies – Rules and regulations.

2.10.050  Publishing of legal notices.

2.10.060  Fiscal program – Taxes, public works contracts, budget, etc.

Charter reference – For Charter provisions as to City Council, see Charter §§ 700 to 715.

2.10.010 Membership – Terms of office and election.
The City Council is the governing body of the City, whose members shall be elected from the City at large for a term of four years, at the times and in the manner as provided in Section 700 of the Charter. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-10).

2.10.020 Powers and duties – Generally –Mayor to serve as chairman – Conduct of meetings.
All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council subject to the provisions of the Charter and to the laws and Constitution of the State. The Mayor shall be titular head of the governing body and shall serve as chairman of its meetings, which shall be conducted under Roberts' Rules of Order, except that the votes of Councilmen who are present but do not vote (abstain) may not be counted as an affirmative or negative vote. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1043 § 1. Formerly § 2-11).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to Council meetings generally, see Gov. C.A. §§ 54950 to 54958. See also, Gov. C.A. §§ 36800 to 36814.

Charter reference – Provisions as to powers vested in City Council, see Charter § 706. Provision regarding Mayor relative to City Council, see Charter § 704. Provisions regarding Council meetings, see Charter §§ 707 to 709.

2.10.030 Appointment of City officers, etc.
The duties of the City Council shall be to appoint the City Manager, City Attorney, City Auditor or Controller and the members of the various boards and commissions, for terms of office prescribed by the Charter. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-12).

2.10.040 Policies – Rules and regulations.
The City Council shall formulate policy and establish rules and regulations for the governing of the City through the legal use of ordinances, resolutions and oral motions or orders duly passed and entered in the official minutes of its meetings. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-13).

2.10.050 Publishing of legal notices.
(a) The City Council shall by resolution designate one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city as official newspaper for the publication of any legal notice or other matter required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in said city. If it appears to the City Council that the rates are unfair, it need not designate an official newspaper. Upon making a finding to such effect, or if publication of newspapers which have been so designated are suspended, then legal notices, ordinances, or other matter required to be published in an official newspaper may be published by posting copies thereof in at least three public places in the city.

(b) The places for posting of legal notices, ordinances or other matter required to be posted shall be, and hereby are, fixed by this ordinance of the City Council to be any of the following:

(1) Outside the entrance to the City Hall Council Chambers.

(2) City’s Central Park Library.

(3) City’s Mission Branch Library.

(4) City’s Northside Branch Library.

(c) No defect or irregularity in proceedings taken under this section or Section 815 of the City's Charter, or failure to designate an official newspaper, shall invalidate any publication. (Ord. 1298 § 1, 10-15-74; Ord. 1976 Â§ 1, 2-6-18. Formerly § 2-13.1).

2.10.060 Fiscal program – Taxes, public works contracts, budget, etc.
The fiscal program of the City shall be established by the Council in the manner set forth in the Charter and shall include the levying of taxes, the awarding of public works contracts, the adoption of a budget, the approval of demands against the City and the engagement of an independent auditor. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-14).

Charter reference – City Council authorized to levy and collect taxes, § 715; fiscal administration of City, § 1300 et seq.

Cross reference – Assessment and collection of property taxes and Uniform Sales and Use Tax, Ch. 3.10 SCCC.

Chapter 2.15
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.15.010    Appointment.

2.15.020    Duties and responsibilities.

2.15.030    Divisions and functions of City Manager’s office – Generally.

2.15.040    Employee relations division.

2.15.050    Commercial, industrial and public relations division.

2.15.060    Land management division.

2.15.070    Office management division.

2.15.080    Special projects, research and contracts division.

2.15.090    Emergency services and training division.

2.15.100    Clerical pool division.

2.15.110    –

2.15.260    Repealed.

2.15.270    Recodified.

2.15.280    Recodified.

2.15.290    Repealed.

Charter reference – City Manager, § 800 et seq.

2.15.010 Appointment.
The City Manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council, subject to the requirements of Charter Section 806. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-16).

2.15.020 Duties and responsibilities.
(a) The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City government, and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of all boards and commissions and shall serve as chief liaison officer between such bodies and the City Council, but shall have no vote thereon. He shall represent the City in its dealings with the various municipalities and other levels of government unless otherwise provided by the City Council.

(b) The City Manager shall have executive direction of the heads of all departments except those holding elective offices and those appointed by the City Council. These officers shall cooperate with all executive policies and procedures established by the City Manager insofar as the same are not in conflict with their legal duties or direct responsibilities to the City Council.

(c) The City Manager shall have the power to appoint, suspend, discipline or remove from service all other department heads and to perform or otherwise delegate their duties and responsibilities.

(d) The City Manager may prescribe such procedures, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Charter or legal actions and policies formulated by the City Council, as he may deem necessary for the conduct of the various departments, and he may investigate and inquire into the affairs of any department at any time.

(e) The City Manager shall, subject to budget authorization and the civil service rules and regulations, appoint and dismiss all regular, probationary and temporary employees as needed. He shall also recommend salary classifications and grant step increases in pay where applicable, within the general pay plan approved by the City Council.

(f) The City Manager shall act as advisor to the City Council on fiscal administration and shall administer the pertinent fiscal affairs of the City. He shall prepare and submit the annual budget of the City and administer it upon adoption. He shall prepare and submit annual financial statements and approve and submit periodically a list of claims and bills for payment.

(g) The City Manager shall serve as the Director of Finance unless otherwise determined by the City Council. He shall also serve as Director of Civil Defense. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1039 § 21. Formerly § 2-16.1).

2.15.030 Divisions and functions of City Manager’s office – Generally.
The City Manager’s office shall be organized into the following divisions, which shall be under the City Manager’s direct supervision. The assistant City Manager, who shall be in the unclassified service and shall also serve as the Deputy Director of Civil Defense, shall directly assist the City Manager in the supervision of these divisions as well as in the overall general administration of the City, and shall act in the capacity of the City Manager in his/her absence and do the work of such officer as required. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1187 § 2, 4-2-68. Formerly § 2-17).

2.15.040 Employee relations division.
There shall be an employee relations division in the City Manager’s office, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service, and the functions of which shall be as follows:

(a) Serves as chief negotiator on meet-and-confer matters with representatives from various employee organizations;

(b) Represents the City Manager at meetings with employees and employee organization agents;

(c) Directs City employee relations programs;

(d) Prepares memorandums of understanding with various employee organizations in accordance with California State law provisions, interpreting memorandums of understanding and related legislation on a day-to-day basis with management, individual employees and representatives of various employee organizations;

(e) Acts as City representative at all disciplinary actions and appeals involving employee relations;

(f) Conducts special organization studies and surveys;

(g) Assigns new classifications to bargaining units and performs such other functions as directed. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 6-2-70; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-17.1)

2.15.050 Commercial, industrial and public relations division.
The commercial, industrial and public relations division shall be under the immediate supervision of a deputy City Manager who shall be in the unclassified service and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Handle assignments involving the promotion of commercial and industrial development on behalf of the City.

(b) Perform any work as is necessary to expeditiously process annexation to the City and assist in the creation of special assessment districts.

(c) Establish and maintain a public information program for keeping the citizenry appropriately advised regarding the affairs of the City.

(d) Prepare or cause to be prepared as directed authorized reports, brochures and official documents to keep the City Council, administrative personnel and the general public informed as to the achievements, current needs and future problems of the community.

(e) Investigate complaints relating to commercial and industrial uses, conduct surveys, make special studies, prepare reports, handle special assignments and do related work as such tasks are delegated by the City Manager.

(f) Establish and maintain a mail, telephone and radio communications system for the efficient handling of citizens, information and service requests by the proper department or officer of the City.

(g) Coordinate and confirm the factual content of all official public statements of subordinate officers before the statements are released for publication. (Ord. 1477 § 1, 9-6-83. Formerly § 2-18).

2.15.060 Land management division.
The land management division shall be under the immediate supervision of the assistant City Manager who shall be in the unclassified service and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Negotiate land transactions, as directed.

(b) Conduct title search and other work as necessary to successfully negotiate property transactions.

(c) Conduct an active program for the sale, lease or management of City-owned property.

(d) Handle the work necessary to investigate and determine the value of property, as directed.

(e) Prepare, or cause to be prepared, authorized reports for use in acquiring property for City use, and perform such other work as directed. (Ord. 1477 § 1, 9-6-83. Formerly § 2-19).

2.15.070 Office management division.
The office management division shall be under the immediate supervision of the City Manager’s secretary, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Performance of secretarial and office management duties as directed.

(b) Maintenance of confidential files pertaining to the City Manager’s office.

(c) Supervision of the clerical staff assigned to the City Manager’s office and other related work as directed. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 8-16-83. Formerly § 2-20).

2.15.080 Special projects, research and contracts division.
The special projects, research and contracts division shall be under the immediate supervision of an administrative assistant, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Handle special project assignments as directed which generally are not specifically assignable to an individual department or that involve the efforts of several different departments;

(b) Act as a resource for research of various materials, supplies and reports for equipment and programs available through other agencies;

(c) Follow through on contract administration through the City Manager’s office and other related work as directed. (Ord. 1499 § 1, 6-19-84. Formerly § 2-20.1).

2.15.090 Emergency services and training division.
The emergency services and training division shall be under the immediate supervision of the emergency services coordinator and training officer, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) To prepare and maintain in a current status necessary basic plans for the conduct of the City operations under natural or war-caused emergencies and to supervise the preparation and maintenance of operational annexes to the basic plans.

(b) To supervise the organization, equipment and training of key personnel for the City’s emergency organization in accordance with the emergency services disaster plans.

(c) To enlist and train a voluntary organization for the aid and protection of the community during a natural or war-caused emergency, in accordance with emergency services plan.

(d) To perform such other voluntary community assistance as may be found essential to the common welfare.

(e) To establish, maintain and supervise a continuous in-service training program for the personnel of all the various City departments.

(f) To periodically counsel with employees and make recommendations to the City Manager and do related work as directed. (Ord. 1187 § 3, 4-2-68; Ord. 1241 § 5, 4-13-71; Ord. 1941 § 2, 6-16-15. Renumbered from § 2.15.270. Formerly § 2-22).

2.15.100 Clerical pool division.
The clerical pool division shall be under the immediate supervision of an administrative secretary, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Performs secretarial and administrative duties as required by the City Mayor’s office;

(b) Supervises clerical personnel of the clerical pool division, and performs such other functions as directed by City Manager. (Ord. 1285 § 2, 2-19-74; Ord. 1941 § 2, 6-16-15. Renumbered from § 2.15.280. Formerly § 2-23).

2.15.110 Centralized purchasing.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.3).

2.15.120 Purchasing officer.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.4).

2.15.130 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.5).

2.15.140 Purchases through or on behalf of other public agencies.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.6).

2.15.150 Estimates of requirements.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.7).

2.15.160 Requisitions.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.8).

2.15.170 Bidding.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.9).

2.15.180 Purchase orders.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.10).

2.15.190 Encumbrance of funds.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.11).

2.15.200 Formal contract procedure.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.12).

2.15.210 Informal bidding procedure.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.13).

2.15.220 Inspection and testing.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.14).

2.15.230 Action by City Council.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.15).

2.15.240 Exclusion.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.16).

2.15.250 Central stores.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91. Formerly § 2-21.17).

2.15.260 Surplus personal property.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2-12-91; Ord. 1739 § 2, 8-10-99. Formerly § 2-21.18).

2.15.270 Emergency services and training division.
Recodified by Ord. 1941 to SCCC 2.15.090.

2.15.280 Clerical pool division.
Recodified by Ord. 1941 to SCCC 2.15.100.

2.15.290 Service contracts – Signature authority.
Repealed by Ord. 1941. (Ord. 1738 § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. 1784 § 2, 9-16-03).

Chapter 2.20
CITY CLERK
Sections:

2.20.010    Election – Term of office – Custody of official seal.

2.20.015    City Clerk – Compensation.

2.20.020    Duties and responsibilities.

2.20.030    Assistant City Clerk – Duties and responsibilities.

2.20.040    Charge and conduct of City elections.

2.20.050    Repealed.

Charter reference – Duties and powers of City Clerk, § 903.

Stat. Ref.:    City Clerks generally, Gov. C.A. §§ 40801 – 40814.

2.20.010 Election – Term of office – Custody of official seal.
The City Clerk shall be elected by the City at large for a term of four years and shall be custodian of the official seal of the City. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-26).

2.20.015 City Clerk – Compensation.
The elected City Clerk shall receive as compensation the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month. Commencing on July 1, 2019, and every two years on July 1st thereafter, the compensation of the City Clerk shall be set by a Salary Setting Commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the Civil Service Commission, as set forth in City Charter Section 702. (Ord. 1983 § 1, 7-17-18).

2.20.020 Duties and responsibilities.
Except for the following the duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk as set forth in City Charter Section 903 shall be performed by the Assistant City Clerk as appointed to do so in SCCC 2.20.030:

(a) Be the custodian of the seal of the City;

(b) Have charge of all City elections. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1983 § 2, 7-17-18. Formerly § 2-27).

2.20.030 Assistant City Clerk – Duties and responsibilities.
The position of Assistant City Clerk is hereby created, which position is placed in the unclassified service of the office of the City Clerk. The Assistant City Clerk shall assist the City Clerk in the performance of the Clerk’s duties and shall act for the City Clerk in his/her absence. The City Council hereby appoints the Assistant City Clerk pursuant to Section 903 of the City Charter to perform the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) The recording and maintaining of a full and true record of all the proceedings of the City Council.

(b) Publishing and attesting the publication of all official notices.

(c) Administering oaths or affirmations and taking affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs of the City.

(d) The issuance of certified copies of official records as required and requested.

(e) Officially recording the rights, titles and interests in all real properties acquired by the City.

(f) The handling of all Council correspondence unless otherwise specifically designated.

(g) Preparing of the agenda and supplemental material for Council meetings in cooperation with the City Manager.

(h) Routing Council assignments to the respective officers having primary responsibility for their execution.

(i) Duplicating and distributing the minutes, ordinances, resolutions, policies and orders of the City Council to the various boards, commissions and administrative officers. (Ord. 1285 § 3, 2-19-74; Ord. 1983 § 3, 7-17-18. Formerly § 2-27.1).

2.20.040 Charge and conduct of City elections.
The City Clerk shall be in charge of all City elections and shall conduct the same in accordance with the provisions of Section 700 of the Charter. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-28).

2.20.050 Performance of City Auditor’s functions.
Repealed by Ord. 1982. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-29).

Chapter 2.25
CITY ATTORNEY
Sections:

2.25.010  Eligibility – Appointment and term of office.

2.25.020  Duties and responsibilities.

2.25.030  Divisions and functions of City Attorney's office – Generally.

2.25.040  Court and trial division.

2.25.050  Contract and transaction division.

2.25.060  Research and opinion division.

2.25.070  Library and clerical division.

Charter reference – Duties and powers of City Attorney and qualifications, § 908.

Stat. Ref.: City Attorneys generally, Gov. C.A. §§ 41801 to 41804.

2.25.010 Eligibility – Appointment and term of office.
The City Attorney shall be an active member in good standing of the State Bar and eligible for such appointment under Section 908 of the Charter. He shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-30).

2.25.020 Duties and responsibilities.
The City Attorney shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Advising the City Council, the City Manager and all City department heads in matters of law pertaining to their offices.

(b) Representing and appearing for the City and any City employee in any or all actions brought against the City or its employees in the course of their duties.

(c) Keeping the City Council informed as to all legislation affecting the City government and processing all insurance matters and damage claims against the City.

(d) Rendering written legal opinions when so requested by the City Council or the City Manager.

(e) Attending designated meetings of boards, commissions and special committees of the City and representing City departments before State or local courts, boards or commissions.

(f) Reviewing and approving the form of all City contracts, agreements, deeds and legal documents.

(g) The preparation and promulgation of municipal bond issues and special assessment districts.

(h) The preparation and promotion of State and Federal legislation proposed by the City Council.

(i) Preparing and processing all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the City Council.

(j) The preparation and handling of all City litigation or court proceedings.

(k) Prosecuting on behalf of the people all cases of violation of the Charter, provisions of this Code or other City ordinances.

(l) Be responsible for the processing of annexation proceedings and assist in the acquisition of public land, easements and rights-of-way. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-31).

2.25.030 Divisions and functions of City Attorney's office – Generally.
The City Attorney's office shall be organized into the following divisions, which shall be under the City Attorney's direct supervision. These divisions shall be primarily responsible for the public services and functions allocated thereunder as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1150 § 1, 10-11-66. Formerly § 2-31.1).

2.25.040 Court and trial division.
The Assistant City Attorney, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall have responsibility for the immediate supervision of the court and trial division and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Assist the City Attorney in performance of the duties of that office and act in the capacity of City Attorney in his/her absence and to do the work of such officer, as required.

(b) Provide hearing and trial counsel services.

(c) Handle discovery and other necessary proceedings incident to hearings and trials.

(d) Attend meetings of the Planning Commission.

(e) Perform such other duties as are assigned. (Ord. 1150 § 1, 10-11-66; Ord. 1660 § 1, 9-13-94. Formerly § 2-31.2).

2.25.050 Contract and transaction division.
An Assistant City Attorney, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall have responsibility for the immediate supervision of the contract and transaction division and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Assist the City Attorney in performance of the duties of that office and act in the capacity of City Attorney in his/her absence and do the work of such officer, as required.

(b) As assigned, assist various City departments in negotiating and preparing complex agreements, legal documents, etc.

(c) Prepare correspondence and answer complex inquiries from City departments, other agencies, and third parties.

(d) With special assistance, participate in preparing and presenting civil cases and administrative cases in utility matters.

(e) Attend meetings of the Planning Commission.

(f) Perform such other tasks as are assigned. (Ord. 1150 § 1, 10-11-66; Ord. 1439 § 1, 12-22-81; Ord. 1660 § 2, 9-13-94. Formerly § 2-31.3).

2.25.060 Research and opinion division.
A Deputy City Attorney, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall have responsibility for the immediate supervision of the research and opinion division and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Interpret the law, prepare legal opinions, and prepare and review resolutions, ordinances, bonds, invitations for bids and proposals, contracts, deeds, and related instruments.

(b) Prosecute actions involving violation of City ordinances.

(c) Prepare correspondence and answer routine inquiries from City departments and other agencies.

(d) Attend meetings of the Planning Commission.

(e) Perform such other tasks as are assigned. (Ord. 1150 § 1, 10-11-66; Ord. 1439 § 1, 12-22-81; Ord. 1660 § 3, 9-13-94. Formerly § 2-31.4).

2.25.070 Library and clerical division.
The library and clerical division shall be under the immediate supervision of the City Attorney's secretary, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Maintain the law library located in the City Attorney's office.

(b) Perform all secretarial and clerical duties required in support of the City Attorney and the divisions of the City Attorney's office as are assigned or directed, and other related work as is assigned. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 8-16-83; Ord. 1660 § 4, 9-13-94. Formerly § 2-31.5).

Chapter 2.30
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR
Sections:

2.30.010  Qualifications – Appointment and term of office.

2.30.020  Independent audit – Generally.

2.30.030  Independent audit – Information to be included.

Charter reference – Provisions providing for independent audit, see Charter § 1319.

2.30.010 Qualifications – Appointment and term of office.
The independent auditor shall be a certified public accountant in good standing and shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-32).

2.30.020 Independent audit – Generally.
The independent auditor shall, in conformity with the requirements of Section 1319 of the Charter and more often if the City Council so desires, make an independent audit report of the City's financial affairs. Such report shall be made directly to the City Council which shall include a report of any fiscal discrepancies or irregularities found and recommendations for their correction. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-33).

2.30.030 Independent audit – Information to be included.
The independent audit provided by SCCC 2.30.020 shall include the following:

(a) A statement of the cash position of each of the City funds.

(b) A statement of the receipts and expenditures of each City department and division thereof during the accounting period.

(c) A statement of the budget position of each of the City departments and the divisions thereof.

(d) A statement of the assets and liabilities of the various funds of the City.

(e) A schedule of the bonded indebtedness, interest requirements and other deferred obligations of the City.

(f) A schedule of the various insurance coverages of the City showing pertinent information regarding terms, expiration dates, etc.

(g) A combined balance sheet. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-34).

Chapter 2.35
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
WORKS ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

2.35.010    Organization generally – Director of Public Works.

2.35.020    Approval of plans, specifications and designs.

Charter references – Departments, §§ 901, 905; City Engineer, § 905.

Stat. Ref.:    Authority of municipal government to expend City income for police works, Gov. C.A. § 40401.

2.35.010 Organization generally – Director of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works Administration shall be under the immediate supervision of the Director of Public Works who shall be in the unclassified service and shall be hereinafter referred to as Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall supervise and be responsible for all engineering work, including, but not limited to, the preparation of engineering maps, surveys and designs. He/she shall also have executive and administrative direction and direct supervision of the Building Maintenance Department and Engineering Department, all under the supervision of the City Manager. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1398 § 1, 3-25-80; Ord. 1411 § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. 1775 § 3, 8-20-02. Formerly § 2-35).

2.35.020 Approval of plans, specifications and designs.
The City Engineer, who shall be in possession of a valid certificate of registration as a civil engineer by the California Board of Professional Engineers, is granted the discretionary authority to approve plans, specifications and designs for “public works,” as that term is defined in Labor Code Section 1720 and Section 1310 of the Charter. The City Engineer may delegate authority to approve plans, specifications and designs for public works projects, in writing, to a City of Santa Clara employee, so long as such employee possesses a valid certificate of registration as an engineer by the California Board of Professional Engineers both at the time of delegation and at the time of approval of the plans, specifications and designs.

The Director of Electric Utility and Assistant Director of Electric Utility, and each of them, are granted the discretionary authority to approve plans, specifications and designs for public works projects related to the City’s electric system so long as such Director or Assistant Director possesses a valid certificate of registration as an engineer by the California Board of Professional Engineers at the time of approval of the plans, specifications and designs.

The Director of Water and Sewer Utilities is granted the discretionary authority to approve plans, specifications and designs for public works projects related to the City’s water and sewer systems so long as such Director possesses a valid certificate of registration as an engineer by the California Board of Professional Engineers at the time of approval of the plans, specifications and designs. (Ord. 1967 § 1, 6-6-17).

Chapter 2.40
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.40.010  Organization generally – City Engineer.

2.40.020  Design division.

2.40.030  Traffic engineering division.

2.40.040  Field services division.

2.40.050  Land and property development division.

2.40.010 Organization generally – City Engineer.
The Engineering Department shall be under the general supervision of the City Engineer who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be organized into divisions as provided in this chapter. The City Engineer shall also assist the Director of Public Works in the general administration of the Public Works Department. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 4, 2-19-74; Ord. 1411 § 2, 1-20-81; Ord. 1775 § 4, 8-20-02. Formerly § 2-36).

2.40.020 Design division.
There shall be a design division in the Engineering Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Prepare plans, specifications, notices, forms and contract documents relating to any and all public works and other projects let to bid.

(b) Prepare and maintain all necessary permanent official maps, records, reports and documents.

(c) Administer the City street opening permit and sidewalk deficiency programs.

(d) Prepare and recommend annual and long-range operating and capital improvement budgets. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 4, 2-19-74; Ord. 1411 § 2, 1-20-81. Formerly § 2-36.1).

2.40.030 Traffic engineering division.
There shall be a traffic engineering division in the Engineering Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Provide for approved street and highway markings and traffic control devices.

(b) Conduct and interpret a variety of traffic surveys, reports and analyses and make recommendations for traffic safety.

(c) Maintain the public rights-of-way free from the intrusion of trees and shrubs which may impede safe pedestrian and vehicle movement. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1411 § 2, 1-20-81. Formerly § 2-36.2).

2.40.040 Field services division.
There shall be a field services division in the Engineering Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Provide the necessary staking, inspection and testing of materials of work in progress in the field.

(b) Process for approval any essential changes on public works projects while the work is in progress.

(c) Prepare permanent official maps, records, reports, documentation and data in connection with completed work and recommend payment of public works contracts in progress and upon completion and acceptance.

(d) Provide supervision, coordination and inspection of work authorized under the City street opening permit and sidewalk deficiency programs. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1411 § 2, 1-20-81. Formerly § 2-36.3).

2.40.050 Land and property development division.
There shall be a land and property development division in the Engineering Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Prepare and maintain all legal descriptions, permanent official maps, reports, documents and data in connection with completed work of public works improvements.

(b) Assist in the acquisition of all lands, easements and rights-of-way required by City.

(c) Prepare and process a variety of property and development agreements and cost clearance certificates, including the implementation of the City's program relative to the encroachment of private improvements in easements and public rights-of-way.

(d) Prepare and perform necessary work relating to the creation and implementation of local improvement districts. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 4-19-77; Ord. 1411 § 2, 1-20-81. Formerly § 2-36.4).

Chapter 2.45
STREET DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.45.010  Organization generally – Superintendent of streets.

2.45.020  Street maintenance division.

2.45.030  Storm drain division.

2.45.040  Street sanitation division.

2.45.050  Parkways and boulevard division.

2.45.010 Organization generally – Superintendent of streets.
The Street Department shall be under the direct supervision of a Superintendent of Streets and shall be organized into divisions as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1398 § 2, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-37).

2.45.020 Street maintenance division.
There shall be a street maintenance division in the Street Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to maintain the City's street system, including public sidewalks, alleys and public parking facilities, and to perform all authorized construction projects not let to private contract. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 5, 2-19-74; Ord. 1398 § 2, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-37.1).

2.45.030 Storm drain division.
There shall be a storm drain division in the Street Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to maintain the City's storm drainage system and perform all authorized construction projects not let to private contract. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1348 § 2, 4-19-77; Ord. 1398 § 2, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-37.2).

2.45.040 Street sanitation division.
There shall be a street sanitation division in the Street Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to provide for and administer an efficient solid waste management program including the recovery and reuse of waste materials. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 6, 2-19-74; Ord. 1398 § 2, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-37.3).

2.45.050 Parkways and boulevard division.
There shall be a parkways and boulevard division in the Street Department, the head of which shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to maintain and cultivate the public parkways and planting areas along the City street system, including the trees and shrubbery thereon. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1348 § 3, 4-19-77; Ord. 1398 § 2, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-37.4).

Chapter 2.50
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.50.010  Organization generally – Automotive Services Superintendent.

2.50.010 Organization generally – Automotive Services Superintendent.
The Automotive Services Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Automotive Services Superintendent, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this Department shall be to establish an effective maintenance program for the City's automotive equipment, including the preparation of equipment specifications, rental and amortization rates, replacement schedules, the investigation of mechanical failures, and the promulgation of feasible methods of disposing of surplus City equipment. (Ord. 1215 § 2, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 8, 2-19-74; Ord. 1398 § 3, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-38).

Chapter 2.55
BUILDING MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.55.010  Organization generally – Building Maintenance Superintendent.

2.55.010 Organization generally – Building Maintenance Superintendent.
The Building Maintenance Department shall be under the direct supervision of the building maintenance superintendent, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this Department shall be to maintain all City-owned buildings, including provision for janitorial and cleaning services, and the remodeling, repair, modification, alteration and additions to public buildings as authorized. (Ord. 1398 § 5, 3-25-80. Formerly § 2-39).

Chapter 2.60
UTILITIES ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

2.60.010  Organization generally.

2.60.010 Organization generally.
Utilities shall consist of two separate Departments which shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. (Ord. 1285 § 9, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-40).

Chapter 2.65
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.65.010  Organization generally – Director of Electric Utility.

2.65.020  Power supply development and licensing division.

2.65.030  Joint action projects division.

2.65.040  Cogeneration projects division.

2.65.050  Control operations division.

2.65.060  Power supply contracts division.

2.65.070  Rates division.

2.65.080  Energy conservation and services division.

2.65.090  Training and services division.

2.65.100  Electrical planning division.

2.65.110  Engineering division.

2.65.120  Field administration division.

2.65.130  Overhead division.

2.65.140  Underground division.

2.65.150  Substation maintenance division.

2.65.160  Municipal services division.

2.65.010 Organization generally – Director of Electric Utility.
The Electric Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of Electric Utility and shall be organized into divisions as provided herein. The Assistant Director of Electric Utility, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall directly assist the Director of Electric Utility in supervision, as well as in the overall general administration of the Electric Department; shall direct the planning, engineering, and operations of the City electric system, electrical generating facilities and power acquisition activities; shall act in the capacity of the Director of Electric Utility in his/her absence, and do the work of the Director of Electric Utility as required; all in accordance with the direction, orders, rules and regulations of the Director of Electric Utility. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 9-24-74; Ord. 1339 § 1, 10-5-76; Ord. 1393 § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41).

2.65.020 Power supply development and licensing division.
The power supply development and licensing division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall be to develop and negotiate various agreements and obtain the necessary permits and licenses to design, construct and operate power generation projects. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.1).

2.65.030 Joint action projects division.
The joint action projects division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to coordinate joint power agency activities. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.2).

2.65.040 Cogeneration projects division.
The cogeneration projects division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager or field foreman, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to operate and maintain cogeneration plants. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.3).

2.65.050 Control operations division.
The head of the control operations division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the daily operations of the City electric system. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 9-24-74; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.4).

2.65.060 Power supply contracts division.
The power supply contracts division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to analyze existing bulk power supply options and coordinate power supply contracts. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.5).

2.65.070 Rates division.
The rates division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to develop and analyze electric rate proposals, and perform Electric Department financial analyses. (Ord. 1393 § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.6).

2.65.080 Energy conservation and services division.
The energy conservation and services division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to develop and administer energy conservation programs and to provide other customer service activities as may be assigned to the division. (Ord. 1393 § 2, 10-30-79; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.7).

2.65.090 Training and services division.
The training and services division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the preparation and implementation of safety and training programs, and to provide emergency-related customer services. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 9-24-74; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.8).

2.65.100 Electrical planning division.
The electrical planning division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the planning studies necessary to provide an orderly expansion of the electric transmission and distribution systems. (Ord. 1377 § 2, 8-1-78; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.9).

2.65.110 Engineering division.
The engineering division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to provide engineering design, estimating, and drafting services required for expansion and improvement of electric transmission, distribution, and street light facilities. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 9-24-74; Ord. 1377 § 1, 8-1-78; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.10).

2.65.120 Field administration division.
The field administration division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to assist in the coordination of field services. (Ord. 1339 § 3, 10-5-76; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.11).

2.65.130 Overhead division.
The overhead division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a field foreman, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the construction and maintenance of the overhead transmission and distribution system, and street lighting system of the City. (Ord. 1339 § 3, 10-5-76; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.12).

2.65.140 Underground division.
The underground division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a field foreman, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the construction and maintenance of the underground transmission and distribution system of the City. (Ord. 1339 § 3, 10-5-76; Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.13).

2.65.150 Substation maintenance division.
The substation maintenance division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a field foreman, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise routine day-to-day maintenance of the electric system transmission and distribution substations, and supervisory control systems. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.14).

2.65.160 Municipal services division.
The municipal services division of the Electric Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a field foreman, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be to supervise the day-to-day maintenance of the automatic controls for traffic signals and meters. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 2-41.15).

Chapter 2.70
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.70.010  Organization generally.

2.70.020  Water construction, operation and maintenance division.

2.70.030  Water engineering division.

2.70.040  Sewer division.

2.70.050  Solar energy construction and maintenance division.

2.70.060  Solar energy engineering division.

2.70.010 Organization generally.
The Water and Sewer Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities. The Water and Sewer Department shall be organized into the divisions as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1285 § 9, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-42).

2.70.020 Water construction, operation and maintenance division.
The construction, operation and maintenance division shall be under the immediate supervision of a water general foreman who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To operate and maintain the general water system for supplying the requirements of the various consumer customers of the City.

(b) To operate and maintain the pumping plants, supply lines, central valves and storage reservoirs of such system.

(c) To operate and maintain a general fire hydrant system for the City.

(d) To perform customer services, maintain a proper records system and operate a central yard for the clean and orderly storage of equipment.

(e) To construct and install all authorized projects not let to private contractors. (Ord. 1285 § 9, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-42.1).

2.70.030 Water engineering division.
The water engineering division shall be under the direct supervision of the senior water engineer, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To perform the engineering, including the estimating, surveying and drafting required for system expansion.

(b) To supervise, inspect and approve for acceptance all system improvements installed by private contractors. (Ord. 1285 § 9, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-42.2).

2.70.040 Sewer division.
The sewer division shall be under the immediate supervision of the sanitary sewer foreman who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To maintain and operate the City's sewage disposal system, including the cleaning, removal, and prevention of stoppages and making of any necessary repairs.

(b) The administration of all rules and regulations governing the contract and use of the system by the general public.

(c) Perform all authorized projects for extensions, improvements and betterments to the system not let to private contract. (Ord. 1285 § 9, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-42.3).

2.70.050 Solar energy construction and maintenance division.
The solar energy construction and maintenance division shall be under the immediate supervision of a solar utility foreman who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall be as follows:

(a) To maintain the general solar energy utility system provided to various consumer customers of the City.

(b) To perform customer services, maintain a proper records system and provide for the clean and orderly storage of equipment.

(c) To construct and install all authorized projects not let to private contractors. (Ord. 1338 § 1, 9-21-76. Formerly § 2-42.4).

2.70.060 Solar energy engineering division.
The solar energy engineering division shall be under the direct supervision of the senior solar utility engineer who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To perform the engineering, including estimating, for solar utility systems.

(b) To supervise, inspect and approve for acceptance all solar utility systems installed by private contractors. (Ord. 1338 § 1, 9-21-76. Formerly § 2-42.5).

Chapter 2.75
PLANNING AND
INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.75.010  Organization generally – Director of Planning and Inspection.

2.75.020  Planning division.

2.75.030  Inspection division.

2.75.040  Community services division.

2.75.050  Permit services division.

2.75.060  Development review division.

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to planning generally, see Gov. C.A. § 65000 et seq.

Charter reference – Provisions relative to Planning Commission, see Charter §§ 1006 and 1007.

2.75.010 Organization Generally – Director of Planning and Inspection.
The Planning and Inspection Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of Planning and Inspection, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be organized into the divisions as provided herein. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1187 § 7, 4-2-68. Formerly § 2-53).

2.75.020 Planning division.
The planning division shall be under the immediate supervision of the City Planner who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the planning division shall be as follows:

(a) To prepare and administer a master plan for the orderly development of the City, including such precise plans as may be deemed essential.

(b) To conduct studies, surveys and other investigations considered to be necessary to prepare for the City's future growth.

(c) To administer the Zoning Ordinance and to investigate and report on requests for variances, special use permits and applications for rezoning.

(d) To review and make reports and recommendations on the acceptability of proposed subdivisions and their compliance with minimum requirements for public improvements, land use regulations and necessary dedications.

(e) To assist the Director of Planning and Inspection in providing necessary assistance to the permit center, the project clearance committee, and to the Planning Commission. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1187 § 7, 4-2-68; Ord. 1577 § 2, 10-13-87; Ord. 1711 § 1, 2-10-98. Formerly § 2-54).

2.75.030 Inspection division.
The inspection division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Building Official, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the inspection division shall be as follows:

(a) To enforce the provisions of applicable State laws, City ordinances, and regulations and codes pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, moving, conversion, alteration, or addition to any building or structure, and including zoning enforcement.

(b) To provide general guidance and supervision to the permit services division.

(c) To make the required inspections during the various stages of work to ensure that all work meets the requirements of the applicable codes.

(d) To maintain proper and adequate files and records of all work performed and required documentation for legal proceedings.

(e) To cooperate with the County of Santa Clara in abating health problems in the city.

(f) To enforce the provisions of the Housing Code and eliminate structural and other conditions that make buildings or structures unsafe for human occupancy and to carry out the City's routine housing inspection program.

(g) To reduce the propagation of neighborhood blight and slum conditions by encouraging, requiring, and enforcing the improvement of these areas or properties through the elimination of fire, health, and structural hazards by repair, removal, or demolition of structures and/or other contributing hazards.

(h) To do related work as required. (Ord. 1187 § 7, 4-2-68; Ord. 1577 § 3, 10-13-87; Ord. 1595 § 1, 2-14-89. Formerly § 2-54.1).

2.75.040 Community services division.
The community services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the community service division manager, who shall be in the unclassified services. The functions of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To administer programs funded by Federal, State, or other sources in order to assure compliance with terms specified under Federal, State, and local regulations and program guidelines.

(b) To provide necessary technical assistance to the City, its departments, divisions, boards, and commissions, and to delegate agencies on grant funded programs on compliance issues.

(c) To develop and manage human service programs and integrate grant-assisted programs with the services of the City.

(d) To monitor delegated agency contracts to assure compliance with terms specified under Federal, State, and local regulations.

(e) To prepare reports and recommendations regarding agency performance and future funding levels.

(f) To promote and stimulate the local housing assistance program through the development of new units and rehabilitation of substandard units.

(g) To package and maintain loans for acquisition, relocation, and rehabilitation of existing buildings and manage the actual reconstruction.

(h) To interview property owners, determine project eligibility, develop contract and legal documents, issue payments, collect fees, and perform such other functions necessary to the management of rehabilitation projects.

(i) To do related work as required. (Ord. 1577 § 4, 10-13-87. Formerly § 2-54.2).

2.75.050 Permit services division.
The permit services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the permit services division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service and under the general supervision of the Building Official. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To review and inspect all preliminary and final blueprints, drawings, and tracings which are submitted for approval prior to the construction or alteration of any building or structure, to ensure that there is compliance with the applicable building codes.

(b) To issue the proper permit to the applicant if approval is granted for the construction or alteration as specified in the submitted plans and when all City requirements have been satisfied.

(c) To render structural and technical assistance to the Planning and Inspection Department.

(d) To do related work as required. (Ord. 1215 § 4, 7-22-69; Ord. 1285 § 10, 2-19-74; Ord. 1595 § 1, 2-14-89. Formerly § 2-54.3).

2.75.060 Development review division.
The development review division shall be under the immediate supervision of the principal planner who shall be in the unclassified service under the general direction of the City Planner and the Director of Planning and Inspection. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall be as follows:

(a) To review and coordinate project reports for the City's permit center, project clearance committee, the Planning Commission, City Council and other groups as assigned in consultation with the City Planner and the Director of Planning and Inspection.

(b) To supervise several staff planners, and others as assigned in their preparation of materials and reports as noted above.

(c) To coordinate with other divisions and departments relating to projects associated with the above.

(d) To coordinate training and scheduling of planners at the permit center at the direction of the City Planner.

(e) To represent the City Planner and/or the Director of Planning and Inspection on various City and intergovernmental committees.

(f) To do related work as required. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2-10-98. Formerly § 2-54.4).

Chapter 2.80
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.80.010    Organization generally – Chief of Police.

2.80.015    Chief of Police – Compensation.

2.80.020    Assistant Chief of Police placed in unclassified service.

2.80.030    Field operations division.

2.80.040    Investigations division.

2.80.045    Special operations division.

2.80.050    Administrative services division.

2.80.051    Community service officer.

2.80.060    State aid in training policemen, etc. – Standards to be followed, etc.

2.80.070    Unclaimed property – Disposition generally – Notice and sale – Disposition of funds, etc.

2.80.010 Organization generally – Chief of Police.
The Police Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police who shall be elected by the voters for a term of four years. The Police Department shall be organized into the divisions as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1150 § 2, 10-11-66. Formerly § 2-55).

Charter reference – Duties and powers of Chief of Police, Charter § 906.

2.80.015 Chief of Police – Compensation.
Commencing on July 1, 2019, and every two years on July 1st thereafter, the compensation of the Chief of Police shall be set by a Salary Setting Commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the Civil Service Commission, as set forth in City Charter Section 702. The City Council shall take all necessary legislative action to implement the salary set by the Salary Setting Commission. (Ord. 1988 § 1, 10-9-18).

2.80.020 Assistant Chief of Police placed in unclassified service.
The office of Assistant Chief of Police is hereby placed in the unclassified service of the Police Department of the City. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-56).

2.80.030 Field operations division.
The functions of the field operations division shall be under the immediate supervision of a police captain who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Suppression of criminal activity, responding to routine and emergency calls, investigation of criminal activities, recovery of stolen property, regulation of criminal and noncriminal conduct and the apprehension of offenders.

(b) Accident investigation, reports for the correction of traffic hazards.

(c) Enforce traffic laws, issuing citations.

(d) Identify and attempt to resolve continuing issues, requiring police resources, that can be reduced or eliminated through problem-solving techniques, community involvement, and coordination of government services. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1150 § 2, 10-11-66; Ord. 1712 § 1, 3-10-98. Formerly § 2-57).

2.80.040 Investigations division.
The functions of the investigations division shall be under the immediate supervision of a police captain who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Investigating criminal complaints, interrogating suspects, apprehension of misdemeanants and felons, securing warrants, examining and presenting valid evidence to the courts in cooperation with the district attorney’s office, and filing on the disposition of cases.

(b) Insuring the proper tracking and service of all arrest warrants forwarded to the Police Department for action, and the prompt service of all witness subpoenas that are necessary to secure the attendance of named individuals in court for criminal cases.

(c) Participate in County-wide task forces focusing on specialized problems such as auto theft, narcotics enforcement, high-tech investigations, sexual predators, and other community problems lending themselves to multi-jurisdictional involvement. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1150 § 3, 10-11-66; Ord. 1712 § 1, 3-10-98. Formerly § 2-58).

2.80.045 Special operations division.
The functions of the special operations division shall be under the immediate supervision of a police captain who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Manage and coordinate the police response to all significant special events in the city where a police presence is necessary to ensure safety, maintain order or prevent disruptions.

(b) Provide oversight, training, and management to the department’s Special Response Team, ensuring that the team remains ready and prepared to provide services as necessary.

(c) Provide oversight, training, recruitment, and management to the Per Diem Police Officer Special Event classification, including maintenance of Peace Officer Standards and Training compliance records.

(d) Liaison with federal, state and local law enforcement partners to gather intelligence and information on criminal activity. Ensure that intelligence information is used to enhance the safety and security of all persons and events. (Ord. 1977 § 1, 2-20-18).

2.80.050 Administrative services division.
The function of the administrative services division shall be under the immediate supervision of a police captain who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Maintain a training program for the Police Department, assist as directed in the background investigation of new applicants.

(b) Provide planning and research for the Police Department.

(c) Properly keep and maintain criminal records, receive and file complaints, teletypes and all other material received by the Police Department pertaining to law enforcement and vehicle maintenance for the Police Department.

(d) All radio and telephone communication for the Police Department.

(e) Receive and account for all property coming into the possession of the Police Department, the booking and safe detention or transportation of all prisoners.

(f) Assist all police personnel in the solution of crimes and supply information as requested by other members of the Police Department.

(g) Execution and control of all process papers.

(h) Provide a reception function for the public where they can receive assistance and make reports either by phone or in person.

(i) Establish and maintain a crime prevention program and school services program.

(j) Provide traffic control at major crosswalks or near school crossings, etc., by utilizing part-time adult crossing-guards, and organization of safety patrols and bicycle safety program. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1150 § 2, 10-11-66; Ord. 1712 § 1, 3-10-98. Formerly § 2-59).

2.80.051 Community service officer.
A “community service officer” is a non-sworn employee of the Police Department, authorized by the Chief of Police to:

(a) Issue infraction citations for violations of the City Municipal Code and the California Vehicle Code; and

(b) Issue misdemeanor citations for violations of the City Code when the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be cited has committed a misdemeanor in their presence. (Ord. 1733 § 3, 5-4-99).

2.80.060 State aid in training policemen, etc. – Standards to be followed, etc.
The City shall, in declaring that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of Part 4, Chapter 1 (entitled “Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training”), Section 13500 et seq. and Section 13522 of the Penal Code, adhere to the standards, recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training while receiving such aid. (Ord. 966. Formerly § 2-61).

2.80.070 Unclaimed property – Disposition generally – Notice and sale – Disposition of funds, etc.
Any and all unclaimed property in the possession of the Police Department of the City of Santa Clara, except unclaimed bicycles, shall be held by the Police Department for a period of at least six months, and unclaimed bicycles shall be held by the Police Department for a period of at least three months, and thereafter such property will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, and notice of such sale shall be given by the Chief of Police at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by publication once in an official newspaper of said City. All funds realized from the sale of any such property shall be promptly paid to the Director of Finance for the general fund of the City. (Ord. 654; Ord. 1071. Formerly § 2-62).

Chapter 2.85
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.85.010    Organization generally – Fire Chief.

2.85.020    Assistant Fire Chief.

2.85.030    Deputy Fire Chief.

2.85.040    Administrative division – Administrative services coordinator.

2.85.050    Fire protection divisions – Battalion Chiefs.

2.85.060    Fire prevention division – Fire Marshal.

2.85.070    Hazardous materials divisions.

Cross reference – International Fire Code adopted, SCCC 15.60.020.

2.85.010 Organization generally – Fire Chief.
The Fire Department shall be under the direct supervision of a Fire Chief, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be organized into the divisions as provided herein. (Ord. 1290 § 1, 6-11-74; Ord. 1571 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63).

Charter reference – Duties and powers of Fire Chief, § 907.

2.85.020 Assistant Fire Chief.
The Assistant Fire Chief shall be in the unclassified service under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief shall perform the duties of the Fire Chief in the absence of the Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief shall directly supervise one or more of the following divisions of the Fire Department: administrative services; fire protection; fire prevention; and/or hazardous materials. (Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63.1).

2.85.030 Deputy Fire Chief.
The Deputy Fire Chief shall be in the unclassified service under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief. The Deputy Fire Chief shall directly supervise one or more of the following divisions of the Fire Department: administrative services; fire protection; fire prevention; and/or hazardous materials. The Deputy Fire Chief may perform the duties of the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief in their absence. (Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63.2).

2.85.040 Administrative division – Administrative Services Coordinator.
The Administrative Services Coordinator shall be under the direct supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief. This division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Administrative Services Coordinator, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Supervise all matters relating to the administration of the Fire Department.

(b) Coordinate the repair and maintenance of firefighting equipment and facilities.

(c) Prepare, compile, and maintain records and reports pertaining to the Fire Department.

(d) Prepare the annual Fire Department budget and exercise budget controls.

(e) Maintain and control the Department inventory of equipment and supplies.

(f) Coordinate map room operations.

(g) Perform such other related administrative duties as may be assigned by the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 8-24-76; Ord. 1410 § 1, 12-9-80; Ord. 1571 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63.3).

2.85.050 Fire protection divisions – Battalion Chiefs.
There are hereby created four fire protection divisions. Each division shall be under the direct supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief. Each division shall be under the immediate supervision of a Battalion Chief, who shall be in the unclassified service. The divisions are further identified as (a) emergency operations, with three divisions (shifts A, B, and C) and (b) training, with one division. Each Battalion Chief shall be responsible for the operation of the division he/she supervises.

(a) Emergency Operations Divisions (Shifts A, B, and C). The duties and responsibilities of these three emergency operations divisions are as follows:

(1) Supervision of all matters relating to the extinguishment of fires and the protection of property threatened thereby.

(2) Firefighting and maintenance of firefighting equipment and facilities.

(3) Public rescue, resuscitation, and first aid of fire victims, vehicle accident victims, and other emergency casualty victims.

(4) Assist pre-fire planning for fire suppression procedures, evacuation, and rescue procedures in structures having high value, or having high fire or high life-hazard occupancies.

(5) Fire protection inspections shall be made of commercial, industrial and high life-hazard occupancies on a coordinated basis with the fire prevention division.

(b) Training Division. The duties and responsibilities of this division are as follows:

(1) Schooling of personnel in advanced methods of firefighting, apparatus operation, rescue procedures, first aid, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and all other related duties.

(2) Organization and training of industrial plant fire brigades.

(3) Review, evaluation, and updating of evolutions, methods, and procedures used in firefighting, rescue, and first aid.

(4) Maintenance of training manuals and station libraries. (Ord. 1290 § 1, 6-11-74; Ord. 1571 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63.4).

2.85.060 Fire prevention division – Fire Marshal.
The fire prevention division shall be under the direct supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief. The division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Fire Marshal, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Inspection of buildings for safety, conducting school fire drills, and the review of building permit applications.

(b) Making frequent inspections of all property within the city and enforcement of fire prevention regulations.

(c) Causing the abatement or removal of fire hazardous buildings, litter, junk, uncultivated weeds, shrubs, and other flammable conditions.

(d) Conducting a public program of continual education in fire prevention.

(e) Enforcement of provisions of Chapter 15.60 SCCC and amendments thereto.

(f) Instruction of fire protection division personnel in current methods of fire inspection, prevention, and investigation.

(g) Review and updating of the Uniform Fire Code.

(h) Investigation of fires to determine the cause when the fire loss exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00).

(i) Conducting a home fire safety program for the residents of the City. (Ord. 1290 § 1, 6-11-74; Ord. 1410 § 2, 12-9-80; Ord. 1571 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92. Formerly § 2-63.5).

2.85.070 Hazardous materials divisions.
The hazardous materials divisions of the Fire Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief. There are hereby created four hazardous materials divisions. Each division shall be under the immediate supervision of a hazardous materials administrator or hazardous materials specialist, each of whom shall be in the unclassified service. The hazardous materials divisions are defined as (a) the hazardous materials administration division, (b) the hazardous materials training division, (c) the hazardous materials legislative division, and (d) the hazardous materials inspection division.

(a) Hazardous Materials Administration Division. The duties and responsibilities of the hazardous materials administrative division are as follows:

(1) Hazardous materials program coordination and division assignments.

(2) Provide consultation with Fire Department personnel, City personnel, and industry on hazardous materials issues.

(3) Serve as an on-site resource to the fire protection division in the event of a hazardous materials emergency.

(4) Perform related duties as assigned by the Assistant Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief.

(b) Hazardous Materials Training Division. The duties and responsibilities of the hazardous materials training division are as follows:

(1) Develop hazardous materials emergency training programs for the fire protection division and local industry.

(2) Provide consultation with Fire Department personnel, City personnel, and industry on hazardous materials issues.

(3) Serve as an on-site resource to the fire protection division in the event of a hazardous materials emergency.

(4) Assist the fire prevention division in carrying out legislative mandates and enforcement actions.

(5) Perform related duties as assigned by the Assistant Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or hazardous materials administrator.

(c) Hazardous Materials Legislative Division. The duties and responsibilities of the hazardous materials legislative division are as follows:

(1) Participate in hazardous materials legislative coordination committees on a local, County and State level.

(2) Provide consultation with Fire Department personnel, City personnel, and industry on hazardous materials issues.

(3) Serve as on-site resource to the fire protection division in the event of a hazardous materials emergency.

(4) Assist the fire prevention division in carrying out legislative mandates and enforcement actions.

(5) Perform related duties as assigned by the Assistant Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or hazardous materials administrator.

(6) Advise the hazardous materials administration division on implementation of new regulations, program revisions, and enforcement requirements.

(d) Hazardous Materials Inspection Division.

(1) Organize and perform hazardous materials/hazardous waste inspections and follow-up actions.

(2) Provide consultation with Fire Department personnel, City personnel, and industry on hazardous materials issues.

(3) Serve as on-site resource to the fire protection division in the event of a hazardous materials emergency.

(4) Assist the fire prevention division in carrying out legislative mandates and enforcement actions.

(5) Perform related duties as assigned by the Assistant Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or hazardous materials administrator.

(6) Advise the hazardous materials administration division on implementation of new regulations, program revisions, and enforcement requirements. (Ord. 1410 § 3, 12-9-80; Ord. 1571 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1632 § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. 1700 § 1, 7-22-97. Formerly § 2-63.6).

Chapter 2.90
LIBRARY DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.90.010  Duties and responsibilities – City librarian.

2.90.020  Administrative division.

2.90.030  Adult services division.

2.90.040  Youth and extension services division.

2.90.050  Materials access services division.

2.90.010 Duties and responsibilities – City librarian.
The Library Department shall be under the direct supervision of the City Librarian, and shall be organized into the following divisions. The Department shall maintain library programs, services and collections of materials for the informational, cultural, educational, technical and entertainment interests of the Santa Clara community. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 6-10-69; Ord. 1689 § 1, 7-9-96. Formerly § 2-67).

2.90.020 Administrative division.
The administrative division shall be under the direct supervision of the City Librarian who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall include the following:

(a) To plan, direct, organize and manage the activities of the Library Department program through immediate supervision of library division managers who shall be responsible for daily operations;

(b) To manage library facilities which are safe, accessible and functional for the delivery of library services; and

(c) To supervise a clerical staff which shall maintain payroll records, issue purchase orders, prepare reports and perform other administrative and clerical duties as assigned by the City Librarian, or his/her designee. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 6-10-69; Ord. 1689 § 2, 7-9-96. Formerly § 2-67.1).

2.90.030 Adult services division.
The adult services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the adult services division manager who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall include the following:

(a) To select, evaluate and deselect library materials for adults including books, periodicals, audio visual materials, and materials in electronic format;

(b) To provide information services through effective reference and information delivery systems; and

(c) To provide special services and collections as assigned by the City Librarian, or his/her designee. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 6-10-69; Ord 1689 § 2, 7-9-96. Formerly § 2-67.2).

2.90.040 Youth and extension services division.
The youth and extension services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the youth and extension services division manager who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall include the following:

(a) To select, evaluate and deselect library materials for children and young adults, including books, periodicals, audio visual materials, and materials in electronic format;

(b) To provide outreach to schools and other community locations through programming, community contacts, volunteer activities, bookmobile service, and other outreach activities;

(c) To provide library services at the branch facility;

(d) To assess the need for additional or enhanced branch or extension facilities and services; and

(e) To plan for and establish such other facilities and services as assigned. (Ord. 1689 § 2, 7-9-96. Formerly § 2-67.3).

2.90.050 Materials access services division.
The materials access services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the materials access services division manager who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall include the following:

(a) To manage the acquisition, cataloging, processing and repair of library materials and the organization of these materials into collections for public access;

(b) To provide and manage procedures for the circulation of library materials, including without limitation the establishment and enforcement of fees, fines and penalties consistent with said procedures; and

(c) To plan for, establish and manage the library's electronic utilities, systems and services, including without limitation upgrades, improvements and innovations. (Ord. 1689 § 2, 7-9-96. Formerly § 2-67.4).

Chapter 2.95
COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.95.010  Duties and responsibilities – Communications Director.

2.95.020  Administrative division.

2.95.030  Dispatching division.

2.95.040  Technical maintenance division.

2.95.010 Duties and responsibilities – Communications Director.
The Communications Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Communications Director and shall be organized into the divisions as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1285 § 11, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-68).

2.95.020 Administrative division.
The administrative division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Communications Director who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall be those assigned by the City Manager and shall include the following:

(a) To conduct studies, prepare reports and plans and work with architects, engineers and departments in planning City's future needs of all types of electronic communications and systems.

(b) To plan, organize and coordinate the radio, telephone, teletype and related systems and electronic facilities of the City.

(c) To supervise all contractual telephone and communications maintenance services and direct the operations of other divisions of the Communications Department.

(d) To represent the City on all communications matters before the Federal Communications Commission and other regulatory agencies.

(e) To do other work as required or related to communications or electronic systems and prepare an emergency operations plan in the event of disaster.

(f) To monitor and advise on matters pertaining to cable television. (Ord. 1285 § 11, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-68.1).

2.95.030 Dispatching division.
The dispatching division of the Communications Department shall be under the immediate supervision of a chief communications dispatcher who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Receive information, evaluate and dispatch emergency police, fire, and service units in response to requests for assistance by the public.

(b) Maintain records of such requests and actions taken.

(c) Act as coordination point for emergency situations.

(d) Monitor the municipal fire alarm and private alarm systems.

(e) Operate all radio and communications systems and perform other related work as required. (Ord. 1285 § 11, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-68.2).

2.95.040 Technical maintenance division.
The technical maintenance division shall be under the immediate supervision of a chief communications technician who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Install, modify and maintain City's radio, alarm, video communications equipment and other electronic systems.

(b) Maintain municipal fire alarm system. (Ord. 1285 § 11, 2-19-74. Formerly § 2-68.3).

Chapter 2.100
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.100.010    Organization generally – Parks and Recreation Director.

2.100.020    Parks division.

2.100.030    Park construction and repair division.

2.100.040    Park maintenance and operations division.

2.100.050    Recreational activities division.

2.100.060    Cemetery division.

Charter reference – Provisions establishing a Parks and Recreation Commission, designating powers and duties of same, §§ 1008, 1009.

Cross reference – Trees and shrubbery, etc., on public property, Chapter 12.35 SCCC.

2.100.010 Organization generally – Parks and Recreation Director.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall be under the direct supervision of a Parks and Recreation Director and shall be organized into five divisions as provided in this chapter.

The Assistant Parks and Recreation Director, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall assist the Parks and Recreation Director and shall act in the capacity of Parks and Recreation Director in his/her absence. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1392 § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. 1397 § 1, 3-11-80. Formerly § 2-69).

2.100.020 Parks division.
The parks division shall be under the immediate administrative supervision of a park superintendent who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) The operation of the various parks and playgrounds of the City and maintenance of same in an orderly and safe condition.

(b) The maintenance and cultivation of the parks including the trees and shrubbery thereon.

(c) The maintenance and cultivation of the lawns, shrubs and aesthetic installations around the public areas and buildings as assigned.

(d) The completion of other work as required. (Ord. 1130; Ord. 1392 § 2, 10-30-79. Formerly § 2-69.1).

2.100.030 Park construction and repair division.
The park construction and repair division shall be under the immediate supervision of a park construction and repair supervisor who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Coordinate and supervise the construction and repair of buildings, walks, athletic fields and courts, playground equipment, swimming pools, picnic areas and other City park facilities.

(b) Install and repair walks, athletic fields and courts, playground equipment, irrigation and drainage systems, and facilities and structures.

(c) Train and supervise assigned personnel in equipment operation, facility construction and repair procedures, and safety procedures.

(d) Completion of other work as required. (Ord. 1392 § 3, 10-30-79. Formerly § 2-69.2).

2.100.040 Park maintenance and operations division.
The park maintenance and operations division shall be under the immediate supervision of a park maintenance and operations supervisor who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of the division shall be as follows:

(a) Coordinate and supervise the planting, cultivation, propagation, transplantation, and care of tree and plant growth in City parks.

(b) Maintain the walks, athletic fields and courts, playground equipment, irrigation and drainage systems, and facilities and structures.

(c) Train and supervise assigned personnel in appropriate tree and plant maintenance, facility maintenance procedures, equipment operation and safety procedures.

(d) Completion of other work as required. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1392 § 3, 10-30-79. Formerly § 2-69.3).

2.100.050 Recreational activities division.
The recreational activities division shall be under the immediate supervision of a recreation superintendent who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) To operate and maintain a program of recreational and athletic activities for the various age groups of the community, utilizing the available school facilities during the summer vacation.

(b) Operate and maintain the swimming pool facilities and municipal plunge.

(c) Administer and supervise the various recreational and cultural activities sponsored by the City under contract or agreement with other agencies.

(d) Completion of other work as required. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1392 § 4, 10-30-79; Ord. 1397 § 1, 3-11-80; Ord. 1447 § 1, 4-13-82. Formerly § 2-69.4).

2.100.060 Cemetery division.
The cemetery division shall be under the immediate supervision of a cemetery superintendent who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) The administration of the sale of mausoleum crypts and burial lots, vaults, etc., and assistance in burials and interments and maintenance of appropriate records.

(b) The maintenance of buildings, roadways and cemetery grounds in a state of good repair and pleasing appearance.

(c) The installation of markers, monuments and concrete foundations in accordance with care agreements and good cemetery practice.

(d) The completion of other work as required. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1119; Ord. 1392 § 5, 10-30-79. Formerly § 2-69.5).

Cross reference – Cemeteries generally, Chapter 2.135 SCCC.

Chapter 2.105
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.105.010    Organization generally – Director of Finance.

2.105.015    Performance of City Auditor functions.

2.105.020    Accounting services division.

2.105.030    Municipal services division.

2.105.040    Administrative services division.

2.105.050    Computer services division.

2.105.060    Financial management division.

2.105.070    Purchasing – Authority – Application.

2.105.080    Adoption of centralized purchasing system for supplies, materials, equipment and services.

2.105.090    Centralized purchasing – Exceptions.

2.105.100    Definitions.

2.105.110    Splitting of purchases or contracts for services.

2.105.120    Appropriation balance necessary.

2.105.130    Purchasing Division Manager.

2.105.140    Purchasing process.

2.105.150    Additional quantities.

2.105.160    Single source procurement.

2.105.170    Bidding procedures – When required – Reverse auction – Exceptions.

2.105.180    Formal bidding procedure – Notice inviting bids.

2.105.190    Bidders’ security.

2.105.200    Performance bonds for contracts.

2.105.210    Opening of bids.

2.105.220    Rejection of bids.

2.105.230    Tie bids.

2.105.240    Procedure when no bids received.

2.105.250    Low bidder determination – Criteria.

2.105.260    Local preference.

2.105.270    Award of contract.

2.105.280    Informal bidding.

2.105.290    Purchases from public agencies.

2.105.300    Emergency purchases by City Manager.

2.105.310    Open purchase orders – Blanket purchase agreements.

2.105.320    General services – Definition.

2.105.330    General services – Contracting procedures.

2.105.340    General service contracts – Signature authority.

2.105.350    Surplus personal property.

2.105.360    Green purchasing.

2.105.010 Organization generally – Director of Finance.
The Finance Department shall be under the direct supervision of a Director of Finance, who shall be in the unclassified service. The Finance Department shall be organized into the divisions as provided in this chapter.

The Assistant Director of Finance, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall assist the Director of Finance and shall act in the capacity of Director of Finance in his/her absence. Additionally, the Assistant Director of Finance may be assigned the responsibility to oversee the operation of one or more of the divisions or may be assigned to directly supervise one of the divisions. (Ord. 1119; Ord. 1515 § 1, 11-27-84. Formerly § 2-72.1).

2.105.015 Performance of City Auditor functions.
The Assistant Finance Director shall perform the functions of the City Auditor. These duties and responsibilities include conducting in-depth financial and performance audits, overseeing the City’s performance management system, auditing and approving all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the City government before payment and, with the advice of the City Attorney, making reports to the City Council as to the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. (Ord. 1982 § 1, 7-10-18).

2.105.020 Accounting services division.
The accounting services division shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, accounting services, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Manage the general accounting system and accounting control for all the various offices, departments, and agencies of the City.

(b) Prepare and submit for the City Council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the City’s current financial position.

(c) Maintain cemetery and miscellaneous accounts receivable and deposit ledgers.

(d) Maintain an accounts payable ledger and manage the proper disbursement of all moneys in accordance with the City budget.

(e) Develop and implement expenditure control procedures over each office, department, or agency of the City.

(f) Prepare and record the biweekly payroll, voucher all claims against the City, and prepare the necessary warrants and checks for payment therefor.

(g) Maintain records correctly showing all the capital assets and liabilities of the City.

(h) Prepare annual audited financial statements for the City and its agencies and other periodic financial statements and reports as required and requested.

(i) Prepare for publication all required governmental reports having to do with the financial condition of the City.

(j) Compile data and statistics and develop financial analysis as required and requested.

(k) Manage special projects as assigned. (Ord. 1119; Ord. 1554 § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. 1566 § 1, 5-5-87; Ord. 1605 § 1, 12-5-89. Formerly § 2-72.2).

2.105.030 Municipal services division.
The municipal services division shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, municipal services, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Manage field and office customer service staff who provide counter and telephone assistance regarding utilities, business tax, process and receipt all monetary transactions (e.g., request for turn-on and turn-off of utilities, meter testing, payment arrangements and referrals for financial assistance).

(b) Manage a complex on-line computerized utility billing system which tracks meter and payment history, consumption, charges, allocations and generates monthly billings.

(c) Research, prepare findings and resolve customer concerns, suggestions and/or complaints.

(d) Maintain a comprehensive computerized hand-held meter reading system which stores monthly meter reads and interfaces with the utility billing system to generate monthly utility billings.

(e) Receive and have custody of all cash and checks received over the counter or in the mail by the City from any source and issue receipts therefor.

(f) Administer a computerized cash receipting system which tracks all payments received by the City. This system provides for real time verification of payments, encoding and endorsing of all checks and automatic posting of all transactions to the utility billing and business tax systems.

(g) Deposit or keep safe all moneys received in such depositories as may be designated by the City Council, in compliance with the provisions of the State law governing the handling, depositing, and securing of public funds.

(h) Administer the business tax policies and related enforcement, as directed, including the billing therefor.

(i) Maintain and process all bankruptcy claims; and prepare and file various State and Federal reports.

(j) Coordinate and process numerous service contracts and equipment maintenance contracts.

(k) Act as City’s representative for the receipt and evaluation of solicitation requests from charitable organizations.

(l) Manage special projects as assigned.

(m) Perform such other related administrative duties as may be assigned by the Director of Finance.

(n) Receipt credit and debit card transactions.

(o) Adoption and Amendment of Municipal Services Division, Utility Services Rules and Regulations.

(1) Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Resolution. The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, as it deems necessary for the administration or implementation of the intent of this Code, review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended rules and regulations concerning the operation or administration of the following:

(A) Finance Department’s Municipal Services Division, Utility Services Rules and Regulations [SCCC 2.105.030];

(B) Electric Department’s Silicon Valley Power Rules and Regulations [SCCC 13.05.040];

(C) Water Department’s Rules and Regulations for Water Service and Use [SCCC 13.15.080]; and

(D) Street Department’s Rules and Regulations for Garbage, Refuse, Recycling, Household Hazardous Waste, and/or Clean Green Service [SCCC 8.25.290].

(2) Amendment of Municipal Services Division, Utility Services Rules and Regulations. The City Council may subsequently adopt or amend the Municipal Services Division, Utility Services Rules and Regulations from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such amendments may be adopted as the City Council deems necessary or expedient for the administration or implementation of this Code, or to review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended rules and regulations concerning the operation or administration of the electric, water, sewer and/or street departments to govern the municipal and utility services furnished by the City. Such amendments may be in response to changing facts and circumstances which affect the operation of the City’s electric, water, sewer and/or street departments, or as a result of any applicable law(s) and/or regulation(s) implemented by the Federal or State government, their respective regulatory agency(ies), or local ordinance. Any new or amended rules and regulations subsequently adopted by the City Council by resolution shall be incorporated by reference into this Code.

(3) Responsible Parties. Customers of the electric, water, and/or street departments shall be considered as having given express consent to be bound by this Code and any City departmental Rules and Regulations subsequently enacted pursuant to this Code.

(4) Responsibility for Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of the departmental rules and regulations shall be with the City Manager.

(p) Enforcement of the Rules and Regulations. Except when more specific provisions pertaining to departmental rules and regulations are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(1) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the city, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the departmental rules and regulation as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Ord. 1119; Ord. 1187 § 8, 4-2-68; Ord. 1229 § 1, 5-26-70; Ord. 1554 § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. 1605 § 1, 12-5-89; Ord. 1644; Ord. 1717 § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. 1787 § 1, 11-18-03. Formerly § 2-72.3).

2.105.040 Administrative services division.
The administrative services division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Assistant Director of Finance or a division manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Manage and direct the activities of the Finance Department.

(b) Compile and produce the City’s annual operating and capital improvement budgets.

(c) Produce annual updates to the City’s five-year financial study.

(d) Prepare periodic and annual revenue forecasts.

(e) Analyze and prepare estimated revenue and expenditure updates.

(f) Monitor and report the City’s Proposition 4 appropriations limit and general contingency reserves.

(g) Manage production of the City’s annual financial reports, general-purpose financial statements, and comprehensive annual financial report.

(h) Manage the following ongoing projects:

(1) Reimbursement claims against the state;

(2) Sales tax audits;

(3) Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) updates;

(4) Legislative review and updates;

(5) Internal audit of fixed assets for insurance reporting.

(i) Perform internal control of Finance Department functions.

(j) Provide administrative and clerical support for the Finance Department.

(k) Manage “risk management” programs for the City and its agencies, including, but not limited to, general liability, earthquake, property and casualty, and other miscellaneous insurance coverage (commercial or self-insurance). Also, administer the liability claims service agreement.

(l) Manage special projects as assigned. (Ord. 1119; Ord. 1554 § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. 1605 § 1, 12-5-89. Formerly § 2-72.4).

2.105.050 Computer services division.
The computer services division shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, computer services, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties and responsibilities of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Provide the several departments of the City such assistance and advice in connection with the formulation and implementation of data processing procedures, systems and programs as are approved and authorized by the City Manager.

(b) Perform for the several departments of the City such data processing functions as shall be designated by the City Manager to be necessary and desirable. (Ord. 1158 § 1, 2-28-67; Ord. 1187 § 9, 4-2-68; Ord. 1285 § 12, 2-19-74; Ord. 1554 § 1, 8-12-86. Formerly § 2-72.5).

2.105.060 Financial management division.
The financial management division shall be under the immediate supervision of a division manager, financial management, who shall be in the unclassified service. The duties of this division shall be as follows:

(a) Monitor the financing needs of the City and its agencies and manage negotiated and public-bid bond issues.

(b) Manage cash flow and invest idle cash in accordance with established policies and procedures and prepare monthly reports for the City and its agencies.

(c) Manage the outstanding debt of the City and its agencies in compliance with established policies and various bond covenants and prepare periodic reports.

(d) Compile data and statistics and develop financial analysis and forecasts as required and requested.

(e) Prepare and monitor long-range financial plans for the City and its agencies, including periodic updates as required.

(f) Administer contracts between the City and its agencies and outside contractors for compliance with financial and insurance terms and conditions of these agreements, consistent with City policy.

(g) Manage special projects as required. (Ord. 1566 § 2, 5-5-87; Ord. 1605 § 1, 12-5-89. Formerly § 2-72.7).

2.105.070 Purchasing – Authority – Application.
(a) This purchasing system shall apply to all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services, in whatever amount.

(b) The establishment of a centralized purchasing system is authorized and directed by “The Charter of the City of Santa Clara, California” Section 1318 and Government Code Sections 54201 through 54205.

(c) When a purchase involves the expenditure of Federal assistance and/or contract funds, the purchase shall be conducted in accordance with mandatory Federal law and regulations.

(d) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.080 Adoption of centralized purchasing system for supplies, materials, equipment and services.
(a) A purchasing system is hereby adopted in order to: establish uniform procedures for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as “personal property”) and services; secure for the City supplies, materials, equipment and services at the lowest possible cost, while ensuring quality, quantity and availability; exercise proactive financial control over purchases; and clearly define authority for the purchasing function.

(b) There is also hereby created a centralized purchasing division, under the direct supervision of the City Manager or her/his designee, in whom is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services.

(c) The purchasing system may include decentralization of certain purchasing functions as appropriate while ensuring appropriate internal controls.

(d) All purchases of supplies, materials and equipment exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) require a City purchase order, and all general services require an executed contract. Exceptions to this requirement include:

(1) Preapproved procurement card purchases made in accordance with the City procurement card policy; and

(2) Payments made for ongoing City operations which are included in the approved requisition listing. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.090 Centralized purchasing – Exceptions.
The following are exceptions to the centralized purchasing system:

(a) The City Manager may authorize in writing any City department to purchase, contract for, or specify supplies, materials and equipment independently of the centralized purchasing system, but it shall be required that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with these procedures and shall further require periodic reports from the City departments on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization.

(b) Any contract for the purchase or sale of water, electrical power, fuels for the generation of electrical power, wastewater and recycled water.

(c) Any contract for a public work as defined by applicable State and local law, including, but not limited to, City Charter Section 1310 and Public Contracts Code Section 5100 and following. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.100 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(a) “Appropriate bidder” means a vendor or contractor with the capability in all respects to perform the contract completely, that presents a bid amount that is competitive and reasonable, and has attributes of trustworthiness, quality, fitness, capacity and experience to satisfactorily perform under the contract.

(b) “Architect-engineer and land surveying services” means those professional services within the practice of architecture, professional engineering or land surveying as defined by the laws of the State of California.

(c) “Brand name or equal specification” means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers’ names or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet City requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products.

(d) “Business” means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity.

(e) “City” means the City of Santa Clara and any of its affiliated agencies.

(f) “City Manager” means the City Manager or his/her designee.

(g) “Emergency” means a situation where immediate action is required to preserve the public peace, health and safety and/or to avoid severe degradation of City property or a facility.

(h) “Idle act” shall mean that formal bids would not be useful or produce any advantage for the City. Idle acts include but are not limited to the following situations where:

(1) Specifications cannot be drawn in a way that would enable more than one bidder to meet them.

(2) It is impossible, as a practical matter, to obtain the supplies, material or equipment required and observe the formal bidding requirements.

(3) Due to circumstances beyond the control of the City, the time necessary to use the formal bidding procedure would result in substantial economic loss to the City or substantial interference with a critical City operation.

(i) “Informal bidding” means purchases based on at least three price quotations, which may be solicited by any reasonable means including, but not limited to, mail, telephone, fax, electronic mail or posting on the City’s or another public website for bids.

(j) “Invitation for bids” means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids.

(k) “Life-cycle costs” means the costs that the City reasonably should be expected to pay for the full life of a product, including the purchase amount, cost of supplies, recycling and disposal of the product.

(l) “Maintenance” means routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation, protection, and keeping of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes in a safe and continually usable condition for which it was designed, improved, constructed, altered, or repaired. This definition of “maintenance” expressly includes, but is not limited to: carpentry, electrical, plumbing, glazing, and other craftwork designed consistent with the definition set forth above to preserve the facility in a safe, efficient, and continually usable condition for which it was intended, including repairs, cleaning, and other operations on machinery and other equipment permanently attached to the building or realty as fixtures. This definition does not include, among other types of work, janitorial or custodial services and protection of the sort provided by guards or other security forces. Upgrades to facilities may be considered maintenance only if they are necessary to preserve, protect and keep the public facility operating for its intended purpose in a safe and continually usable condition for which it was designed, improved, constructed, altered or repaired.

(m) “Open purchase order” is a document issued to a vendor that establishes a line of credit allowing appropriate City employees to obtain supplies, materials, equipment or general services on an “as needed” basis.

(n) “Person” means any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals.

(o) “Procurement” means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, materials, equipment or services. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, material, equipment or service, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and awards of contracts and contractual administration.

(p) “Procurement card” means a charge card/credit card issued to an employee of the City of Santa Clara for the purpose of making authorized purchases on the City’s behalf.

(q) “Public works” means the erection, construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any public structure, building, road or other public improvement of any kind.

(r) “Specification” means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, preparing a supply or service for delivery, or product to be used.

(s) “Supplies” means all property (including, but not limited to, equipment and materials) except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(t) “Surplus supplies” means supplies that are worn out, obsolete or unsuitable for City use.

(u) “Total amount” means total price charged for a product, including tax, shipping and handling, and any other associated charges.

(v) “Total taxable amount” means total price for product on which sales taxes are charged. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.110 Splitting of purchases or contracts for services.
No officer or employee of the City shall split or separate a purchase of supplies, materials or equipment, or a contract for general services, for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter. The acquisition of supplies, materials and equipment should normally be made as a single purchase when the need has been identified for multiples of items, related items, or similar items, which are ordinarily available from the same vendor or manufacturer. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.120 Appropriation balance necessary.
(a) No purchase of supplies, materials or equipment, or contract for general services, shall be entered into or executed by the City Manager unless there is an unexpended and unencumbered appropriation balance sufficient to pay the amount required by such purchase or contract or purchase order, except for an emergency purchase pursuant to this chapter.

(b) No officer or employee shall requisition, purchase or order any supplies, materials or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered balance of an appropriation, available for such purpose, against which the requisition, purchase or order may be charged. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.130 Purchasing Division Manager.
The Purchasing Division Manager shall be in the unclassified service and shall be the head of and have general responsibility for the purchasing division. The duties of the Purchasing Division Manager may be combined with those of any other department or position at the discretion of the City Manager. The Purchasing Division Manager shall, subject to the delegation and approval of the City Manager, have authority to or provide support thereof to:

(a) Purchase or contract for supplies, materials and equipment required by any City department in accordance with prescribed purchasing and bidding procedures, such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Division Manager shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division and such other rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Manager;

(b) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts or blanket purchase agreements for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment;

(c) Act to procure for the City the needed quality and quantity of supplies, materials and equipment at the least expense to the City;

(d) Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

(e) Prepare and recommend to the City Manager rules governing the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment for the City;

(f) Prepare and recommend to the City Manager revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

(g) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

(h) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of the purchasing system and other rules and regulations;

(i) Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between City departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment that cannot be used by any department;

(j) Maintain a central warehouse; and

(k) Maintain a bidders list, vendor catalog file(s) and the records needed for the effective operation of the purchasing division. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.140 Purchasing process.
The Purchasing Division Manager shall, subject to the provisions of the City Charter, this chapter and any other applicable law, establish a process for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.150 Additional quantities.
Within the period of time extended by the bidder after the award of a contract or purchase order for supplies, materials or equipment, the City Manager may purchase additional quantities at the award price of the specified articles, if the Council approved an option for additional quantities. Within the period of time extended by the bidder after the execution of a contract or purchase order for supplies, materials or equipment by the City Manager, the City Manager may purchase additional quantities at the quoted price, if such an option for additional quantities is included in the proposal and the cumulative amount of the contract or purchase order, after adding the additional amount purchased, does not exceed the authority of the City Manager for such a purchase. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.160 Single source procurement.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no specifications for the procurement of supplies, materials or equipment shall be written in a manner that limits the purchase to a single manufacturer or brand name product. A specification may reference a brand name if the specification is followed by the words “or equal” under circumstances where it is reasonably possible for equivalency to be demonstrated.

(b) A procurement shall be exempted from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section if the Purchasing Division Manager has determined that a particular product may be specifically designated by reason of one or more of the following purposes:

(1) To acquire a specific product or performance for the purpose of conducting a field test or experiment to determine the product’s suitability for use by the City;

(2) When required to ensure operation or function to match other products with respect to the repair, expansion or completion of a system, existing structure or program currently in use by the City, including, but not limited to, utility and technology purchases required to achieve interoperability with existing systems or programs;

(3) In order to obtain a necessary item that is available only from one source;

(4) In order to make an emergency purchase pursuant to this chapter; and

(5) In order to achieve significant cost savings based upon consideration of the following cost factors:

(A) Timeliness and quality of installation, repair and maintenance;

(B) Availability and quality of user training;

(C) Supplies and replacement parts;

(D) Modification of existing equipment, materials or systems;

(E) Continued product service/support;

(F) Estimated amount and cost of reasonably foreseeable future purchases of equipment that would be required to be compatible or functional with the product that is the subject of the standardization determination; and

(G) Administrative costs.

(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the inclusion in specifications of an industry standard with regard to performance that can be met by more than one product or manufacturer.

(d) Purchases of equipment, materials or supplies shall not be segregated or conducted in any manner for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this section.

(e) The Purchasing Division Manager shall establish written administrative procedures to carry out the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.170 Bidding procedures – When required – Reverse auction – Exceptions.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment, the expenditures for which equal or exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), shall be awarded to the lowest appropriate bidder after notice, pursuant to the procedures for formal bidding set forth in this chapter.

(b) When the Purchasing Division Manager finds it to be in the best interest of the City based on the circumstances of the particular procurement, the Purchasing Division Manager may procure by reverse auction purchases of supplies, materials, and equipment requiring formal bidding, which are readily available in the marketplace, highly standardized, and can be supplied by a reasonable number of qualified competitors. “Reverse auction” means an Internet-based process that allows vendors to view each other’s pricing, but not their identity, allowing for more competitive pricing for the City.

(c) Formal bidding requirements shall not apply in any of the following instances:

(1) Purchase of supplies, materials or equipment, the expenditure for which does not equal or exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00);

(2) The purchase or acquisition of any supplies, materials or equipment from, or through an agreement with any public or governmental body pursuant to this chapter;

(3) The purchase of any supplies, materials or equipment that can be obtained from only one vendor or manufacturer pursuant to this chapter;

(4) The purchase of any supplies, materials or equipment deemed by the City Manager to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health or property; and

(5) The purchase of supplies, materials or equipment where solicitation of bids would for any reason be an idle act, including the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment by the City Manager in an emergency or purchases made for ongoing City operations (which are identified in the approved requisition listing) pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.180 Formal bidding procedure – Notice inviting bids.
(a) Notices for invitation to bid shall include: a general description of the items to be purchased; the place where the proposal form, specifications and other contract documents may be obtained; and the time and place where bids will be opened. Prequalification processes may substitute for notices for invitation to bid.

(b) The notice inviting bids shall be published in one or both of the following manners:

(1) In a newspaper of general circulation in the City, at least once, not less than ten days before the date set for opening bids; or

(2) As a posting on the City’s website or City designated website, on a webpage designated for such postings; or

(3) At City Hall for a period of not less than ten days before the date set for opening bids. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.190 Bidders’ security.
All bids shall include such bidders’ security as is required by the bid documents and shall be presented under sealed cover. If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract within the time specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein, the bidders’ security may be declared forfeited to the City by the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee and any bonds so forfeited may be prosecuted and collected and the amount of the security paid into the general fund. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of their bidders’ security. The form and amount of such security shall be described in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.200 Performance bonds for contracts.
To secure faithful performance of the contract, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee is authorized to require security in the form of cash, cashier’s check, certified checks, or corporate faithful performance bonds, in such amount as he/she deems reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee requires such security, the form and amount thereof shall be described in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.210 Opening of bids.
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City department or staff so designated in the notice inviting bids or specifications at the time specified in the notice inviting bids. At the time and place prescribed in the said notice, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee shall examine the bids and prepare and file a bid summary.

The use of electronic media is authorized for the formal bidding procedure, including without limitation submission, opening and reporting of bids electronically; provided, that such use shall be governed by an administrative procedure promulgated by the Purchasing Division Manager. The administrative procedure shall include measures as appropriate for security of the bidding, approval and award processes and accurate retrieval or conversion of electronic information into a medium which permits inspection and copying. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.220 Rejection of bids.
In his/her discretion, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee may reject any or all bids presented. If he/she rejects all bids, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee may in his/her discretion re-advertise for new bids. If the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee finds and declares that the amount of the bids was excessive, he/she may have such supplies, materials or equipment purchased at a lower price without re-advertising for bids or further complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.230 Tie bids.
If two or more bids received are for the same amount and are the lowest bids, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee may select the winning bid in his/her discretion. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.240 Procedure when no bids received.
If no bids are received, the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee, at his/her discretion, may re-advertise or may otherwise acquire in the open market such supplies, materials and equipment without further complying with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that bids are received, but none of the bids meet specifications, this section shall apply as if no bids were received. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.250 Low bidder determination – Criteria.
The lowest appropriate bidder shall be determined based on the lowest overall total cost to the City including, but not limited to:

(a) Trade discounts;

(b) Shipping costs, when included in the specifications;

(c) Life-cycle costs, when included in the specifications; and

(d) The amount of sales tax revenue to be received by the City as a result of the purchase, as applicable pursuant to City Council policy. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.260 Local preference.
(a) Subject to the limitations contained in this section, the Purchasing Division Manager shall extend a bidding advantage to a local business in the form of a one percent price preference in the evaluation of bids or proposals for the procurement of supplies, materials, equipment and general services.

(b) The following contracts are exempt from the provisions of this section:

(1) Contracts funded in whole or in part from grants, donations or gifts to the City if the provisions of this section conflict with any special conditions attached to the grants, donations or gifts, provided the special conditions have been approved and accepted pursuant to the donations policy of the City;

(2) Emergency procurements;

(3) Single source procurements.

(c) “Local business” means a business with one or more fixed offices and/or locally taxed distribution points within the boundaries of the City and a current, valid City business license.

(d) After a hearing before the City Manager or his/her designee, should the City Manager or designee determine that a price preference was received under this section through an intentional misstatement, the recipient of any such price preference shall be subject to a civil penalty of treble the dollar price preference received or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater. The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.270 Award of contract.
(a) Where formal bidding is utilized, contracts shall be awarded to the lowest appropriate bidder meeting specifications, unless the City Council rejects all bids.

(b) The City Council shall have the right to waive any informalities or minor irregularities in bids or bidding. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.280 Informal bidding.
(a) Purchases of supplies, materials and equipment, which are not subject to the bidding requirements of this Code, may be made in the open market, without formal bidding.

(b) Purchases of supplies, materials and equipment that do not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) may be made without price quotations, if such purchase is determined by the City Manager or his/her designee to be in the best interests of the City.

(c) Purchases of supplies, materials and equipment which exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall, whenever practicable, be based on at least three price quotations and shall be awarded on the basis of the price quotation most advantageous to the City. Price quotations may be solicited by any reasonable means including, but not limited to, mail, telephone, fax, electronic mail or posting on the City’s or another public website for bids. Records of informal bidding purchases and price quotations shall be maintained for the designated retention period.

(d) The most advantageous price quotations to the City for an informal bidding purchase shall be based on consideration of:

(1) Quality and performance of the supplies, materials and equipment;

(2) Ability of the vendor to perform the transaction as specified in a timely manner;

(3) Vendor’s performance on prior purchase by the City or others;

(4) Capability of vendor to provide ongoing service and support; and

(5) Capacity and experience of the vendor.

(e) If an award in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) is made to a vendor other than the vendor submitting the lowest price quotation, written reason for the award decision shall be prepared and will be kept as a part of the record of the transaction. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.290 Purchases from public agencies.
The City Manager and/or his/her designee may, without prior City Council approval and without observing the bidding requirements prescribed by this chapter:

(a) Purchase or acquire any supplies, materials, equipment or power purchases from any public or governmental body or agency; or

(b) Contract with any public agency for the purchase or acquisition by such public agency for or on behalf of the City of any supplies, materials or equipment under the following circumstances:

(1) Agreements for the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment directly from another public agency; or

(2) Joint purchasing agreements entered into by the City and one or more public agency(ies) wherein the City is included as a potential purchaser under a formal bidding process engaged in pursuant to the joint agreement; or

(3) Direct purchases from vendors on terms obtained pursuant to formal bidding processes that name the City either specifically or categorically as a third party beneficiary of the bidding process or in the case where the vendor agrees to extend such participation to the City. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.300 Emergency purchases by City Manager.
(a) In the case of an emergency involving the threatening of lives, property or welfare of the people of the City or the property of the City, the City Manager and/or his/her designee may purchase supplies, materials or equipment without formal bidding, as formal bids would be an “idle act” in such an emergency and may contract for general services which the City Manager and/or his/her designee deems necessary for the purpose of meeting such emergency.

(b) For the purpose of meeting such emergency, the City Manager and/or his/her designee may expend unencumbered moneys in any City reserve fund, notwithstanding the fact that such moneys may not have been appropriated for such purpose, to the extent that other moneys have not been appropriated or are otherwise unavailable therefor.

(c) The City Manager and/or his/her designee shall provide a post-emergency report to the City Council on the use of any reserve amounts expended for the above purposes. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.310 Open purchase orders – Blanket purchase agreements.
(a) Use. Open purchase orders or blanket purchase agreements may be used as a means of procuring supplies, materials or equipment when the amount or nature of the specific items cannot be determined before they are needed, or where it is necessary that the place from which the items are purchased is strategically located.

(b) Amount of Open Purchase Order. Open purchase orders or blanket purchase agreements shall be established for the full estimated annual amount to be expended with the vendor by the individual City department for which the open purchase order is established or by the Purchasing Division Manager for a City-wide blanket purchase agreement. An open purchase order may remain valid for a period up to but not to exceed twelve (12) calendar months from the date of issue.

(c) Maximum Purchase Limit. The maximum purchase limit of a single open purchase order or blanket purchase agreement shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) unless a formal bidding or reverse auction has taken place.

(d) Formal Bidding Not Required. Informal bidding should be utilized where practicable for open purchase orders or blanket purchase agreements of more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) but less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).

(e) Additional Factors in Awards. Because open purchase orders or blanket purchase agreements are established in order to obtain the most cost-effective purchasing arrangements for the City, the following factors may be considered in addition to the factors set forth in other provisions of this chapter in determining price quotation to the City:

(1) Completeness of inventory;

(2) Quality of past service;

(3) Most favorable price discounts; and

(4) History of most competitive pricing. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.320 General services – Definition.
“General services” means any work performed or services rendered by an independent contractor, with or without the furnishing of materials, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Maintenance of City buildings, structures or improvements, which does not require engineering plans, specifications or design, such as replacement of broken window panes, fire extinguisher maintenance, minor roof repairs, utility systems maintenance, elevator maintenance, custodial services and pest control. Work to be performed on City property shall require a service contract;

(b) Repair, modification and maintenance of City equipment and software;

(c) Cleaning, analysis, testing, moving, removal or disposal (otherwise than by sale) of City materials, supplies and equipment;

(d) Replanting, care, or maintenance of public grounds, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, flowers and lawns, which does not require engineering plans, specifications or designs;

(e) Provision of temporary personnel services;

(f) Provision of other miscellaneous services to facilitate department operations; and

(g) Repair, demolition or other work required to abate nuisances pursuant to this Code.

“General services” shall not include contracts to be performed exclusively on property not owned, operated or maintained by City and valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Work to be performed that falls into this category may be secured with another method of payment approval, such as a purchase order, a purchase card, or a petty cash reimbursement, based upon City policies as amended from time to time.

“General services” shall not include work performed by City employees, public agencies, or pursuant to collective bargaining agreements. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.330 General services – Contracting procedures.
(a) Formal competitive proposals: at least three written competitive proposals shall be required for the following, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section:

(1) Utility department (i.e., Electric, Water and Sewer) general service contracts with a payment amount exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00); and

(2) All other department general service contracts with a payment amount exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

(b) Informal competitive proposals: at least three proposals shall be required for all other general service contracts, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. Informal competitive proposals may be solicited by any means available. A record of solicitations and proposals shall be maintained as part of the record of the transaction.

(c) Contracts for general services shall be awarded on the basis of the most advantageous proposal to the City. In determining the most advantageous proposal, the following factors shall be considered:

(1) Cost to the City;

(2) Quality of the proposal;

(3) Capabilities and expertise of the contractor or service provider; and

(4) Adherence to applicable City policies and directives.

For service contracts exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) that are not awarded to the lowest bidder, documentation for the award decision shall be maintained as part of the record of the transaction.

(d) Contracts for general services valued at five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more require written agreements prior to the work being performed.

(e) Exceptions.

(1) Regardless of contract value, competitive proposals are encouraged but not required for contracts for specialized services from licensed professionals;

(2) Sole source contracts, where the service or personnel is unique or the available contractors providing the service are few in number;

(3) Where the services are provided by a contractor included on a prequalified list.

(f) The City Manager or designee may establish written administrative procedures and guidelines to carry out the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.340 General service contracts – Signature authority.
Pursuant to Section 400 of the City Charter, authority to execute contracts with third parties for services provided to the City shall be granted to certain City officials as follows:

(a) The City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to purchase general services required by the City and to execute contracts for such services on behalf of the City in amounts up to and including one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per electric, water and sewer service contracts, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per all other service contracts, subject to approved budgetary amounts. Contracts with a value above these dollar limits shall be referred to the City Council for approval.

(b) The City Manager is authorized to delegate all or a portion of the authority to execute such service contracts to specified City employees at his/her discretion. Such delegation of authority shall be made in writing.

(c) Such service contracts are subject to the final review and approval of the City Attorney for form and content.

(d) The maximum amount of the value of the service contracts which the City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute shall be adjusted as needed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

2.105.350 Surplus personal property.
The purpose of this section is to maximize for the City the benefits of the prompt and efficient sale, auction or disposal of the City’s surplus personal property pursuant to Charter Section 1318, as follows:

(a) All City departments shall submit to the Purchasing Division Manager or designee at such times and on such forms as the City Manager shall prescribe, reports showing all personal property that is no longer used, that has become obsolete or worn out, or that has been acquired by the City as unclaimed property.

(b) The Purchasing Division Manager or designee is hereby delegated and shall have the authority to dispose of all surplus personal property that cannot be used by any City department or that has become unsuitable for City use when such property is valued (per unit or item) at the following amounts:

(1) Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less: by any method as determined by the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee.

(2) Between two thousand five hundred dollars and one cent ($2,500.01) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00): by posting notice of the intended sale for at least five working days preceding the date of the sale.

(3) Ten thousand dollars and one cent ($10,000.01) and above: by posting notice of the sale for at least five working days and publishing notice of the sale in a newspaper of general circulation at least once and at least one week preceding the date of sale. The published notice will generally describe the personal property subject to disposal and designate the time and place of the sale or auction.

The notice (posted and published) will advise prospective purchasers that a complete list and description of personal property to be disposed of is posted or available at designated location(s). The Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee will generally follow the informal purchase bid procedures provided herein, with respect to receipt of written bids and the resolution of tie bids.

(c) The Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee may from time to time conduct public auction(s) in lieu of the written bid procedure or utilize an online government auction service, if the public auction procedure is determined to provide the greater or more efficient market exposure for sales.

(d) The Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to exchange surplus personal property for, or trade in the same on new supplies, materials and equipment, without publishing a notice of intent to do so.

(e) No City employee may bid upon or purchase any item for sale, except as follows:

(1) The Chief of Police may, without City Council approval, determine the disposition of a police service dog by means of sale of the police service dog to its assigned handler.

(2) The Chief of Police may, without City Council approval, determine the disposition of a police service firearm, as defined in Penal Code Section 16520, by sale of the firearm in an amount equal to its depreciated value, to a sworn officer who is eligible for a retirement identification card endorsed for carrying a concealed firearm, in accordance with all applicable State and Federal laws.

(f) If State or Federal law, or public safety concerns, renders inappropriate the disposition of an item of surplus property in the manner set forth in this section, such item may be disposed of as required by law, or by any other method deemed appropriate by the Purchasing Division Manager or his/her designee, regardless of the value of the item. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15; Ord. 1975 § 1, 1-23-18).

2.105.360 Green purchasing.
Whenever economically feasible, the City will strive to (a) purchase products that minimize environmental impacts, toxins, pollution, and hazards to workers and the community to the greatest extent practicable and (b) purchase products that include recycled content, are durable and long-lasting, conserve energy and water, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, use unbleached or chlorine-free manufacturing processes, are lead-free and mercury-free, and use wood from sustainably harvested forests. (Ord. 1941 § 3, 6-16-15).

Chapter 2.110
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.110.010  Organization generally – Director of Human Resources.

2.110.020  Personnel records and benefits division.

2.110.030  Personnel testing and classification division.

2.110.010 Organization generally – Director of Human Resources.
The Human Resources Department shall be under the direct supervision of a Director of Human Resources, who shall be in the unclassified service, and shall be organized into two divisions as provided in this chapter.

The Assistant Director of Human Resources, who shall be in the unclassified service, shall assist the Director of Human Resources and shall act in the capacity of Director of Human Resources in his/her absence and shall directly supervise one of the two divisions of the Department. (Ord. 1730 § 3, 4-6-99).

2.110.020 Personnel records and benefits division.
The personnel records and benefits division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Assistant Director of Human Resources or a Human Resources Division Manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The functions of the personnel records and benefits division shall be as follows:

(a) Collect and maintain all personnel records, including employee records and rosters and comprehensive personnel files on each employee.

(b) Administer the medical, accident, life, industrial accident, unemployment and other employee insurance programs.

(c) Supervise the administration of the employees' retirement system.

(d) Review personnel status changes, new appointments, promotions and transfers for budgetary control.

(e) Administer the new-employee induction and orientation program.

(f) Recruit and oversee the employment of personnel entering into the temporary service of the City.

(g) Recommend policy regarding personnel rules, regulations, and procedures.

(h) Perform special studies and investigations and perform such other work as directed by the City Manager. (Ord. 1730 § 3, 4-6-99).

2.110.030 Personnel testing and classification division.
The personnel testing and classification division shall be under the immediate supervision of the Assistant Director of Human Resources or a Human Resources Division Manager, who shall be in the unclassified service. The functions of the personnel testing and classification division shall be as follows:

(a) Recruit and test personnel entering into and working with the regular City service.

(b) Conduct surveys on comparative employee salaries and fringe benefits and research comparison benefit programs.

(c) Perform classification studies and prepare recommendations for the modification of employee job specifications.

(d) Perform special studies and surveys.

(e) Recommend policy regarding personnel rules, regulations and procedures.

(f) Perform such other work as directed by the City Manager. (Ord. 1730 § 3, 4-6-99).

Chapter 2.115
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF LICENSE OR PERMIT –
SUSPENSION PROCEDURE
Sections:

2.115.010  License or permit – Defined.

2.115.020  License or permit – Refusal to issue – Appeal.

2.115.030  License or permit – Nontransferable.

2.115.040  License or permit – Grounds for revocation.

2.115.050  License or permit – Declare revoked.

2.115.060  Hearing.

2.115.070  Revocation hearing.

2.115.080  New permit or license.

2.115.090  Notice.

2.115.100  Suspension.

2.115.110  Appeal procedure upon revocation or suspension of license or permit.

2.115.120  License deemed debt.

2.115.130  Nonapplicability.

Cross references – Business tax, Chapter 3.40 SCCC. Business licenses and regulations, SCCC Title 5.

2.115.010 License or permit – Defined.
For the purpose of this article, a license or permit means a license or permit issued by the City. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-73).

2.115.020 License or permit – Refusal to issue – Appeal.
Unless the law, this Code, or an ordinance or resolution of the City prescribes a different procedure for appeal from denial of issuance of a license or permit, or where it is prescribed that the action is final or that the issuance of the license or permit is in the original jurisdiction of the City Council, an appeal from such denial may be made as follows:

(a) Appeal from denial of a license or permit may be made by the applicant for the license or permit to the City Council within seven calendar days after such denial of an authorized person, board or commission of City.

(b) Said appeal shall be taken by filing within said seven-day period a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and by the payment of an appeal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) or as otherwise modified or set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(c) Said appeal shall be heard by the City Council within thirty (30) days from the filing of said notice or at its next regular meeting, whichever is later. Upon request of applicant, City Clerk shall mail a post card notice of time and place of City Council hearing to appellant at address indicated in said notice of appeal filed with City Clerk. If address is not so indicated, such notice need not be given.

(d) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing and the City Council in its decision may reverse, set aside, affirm, amend or modify the subject of appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to further city appeal procedure. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 2-73.1).

2.115.030 License or permit – Nontransferable.
All licenses and permits are to be construed and held as licensing or permitting only the licensee or permittee named in the license or permit and are not transferable, severable or divisible unless the law, chapter of this Code, or ordinance of the City, fixing and requiring such license or permit specifically so provides. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-74).

2.115.040 License or permit – Grounds for revocation.
The violation of any Federal statute, State statute, or City ordinance by any person, holding a permit or license from the City, or by any of the employees of the holder of such permit or license in connection with the operation of the business or activity for which such permit or license is issued, shall be grounds for the revocation of such permit or license. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-75).

2.115.050 License or permit – Declare revoked.
Unless the law, this Code, or an ordinance of the City prescribes a different procedure for the revocation of a particular type of permit or license; if the Council is satisfied that grounds for revocation of any permit or license exist under the terms of SCCC 2.115.040 and that such offense renders the continuance of the holder of the permit or license in the business or activity covered by such permit or license contrary to the health, safety, good morals or welfare of the people of the City, it shall declare such permit or license revoked. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-76).

2.115.060 Hearing.
No such permit or license shall be revoked until after the holder of such permit or license shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Council, unless the City ordinance or Code sections pertaining to such permit or license provide otherwise.

The provisions of this section shall not restrict or limit the power given to any officer under any provision of any law, this Code, or an ordinance of the City, to suspend or revoke a license or permit, but any such suspension or revocation shall be subject to the right of appeal to the City Council in the manner provided in this article unless a different procedure is prescribed, by law, this Code, or an ordinance of the City, for appeal of the particular suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-77).

2.115.070 Revocation hearing.
Except where otherwise provided by law, this Code, or an ordinance of the City, any license or permit issued under the provisions of the law, this Code, or by City ordinance may be revoked by the City Council after ten days' written notice to the holder of said license or permit and a hearing had pursuant to said notice at which time the holder shall have the right to offer evidence and have the services of counsel, when it satisfactorily appears to the Council that said holder has violated any of the conditions of said license or permit or has violated any law of the United States, or the State, or any ordinance of the City, on the premises where the business or activity covered by said license or permit is being conducted, or in connection with said business or activity, and thereafter the person whose license or permit has been so revoked shall not be entitled to receive any license, or permit, of the same or similar character from the City, except on an express permit from the City Council. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-78).

2.115.080 New permit or license.
After a revocation, neither the Director of Finance, City Clerk, nor any other officer of the City shall issue a new permit, or license, of the same or similar character to the holder of the permit or license revoked, nor covering the premises for which it was issued, until the Council makes an order for such issuance. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-79).

2.115.090 Notice.
Written notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the license, or permit, holder, or on any person employed in the place where the business in question, or activity, is maintained. If service cannot be had in the foregoing manner, then a copy of such notice may be mailed to the license, or permit, holder at his/her place of business or his/her last address known to the City Clerk, at least five days prior to the hearing. The time of such notice may be shortened by the City Council with the written consent of the license, or permit, holder. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-80).

2.115.100 Suspension.
Whenever the Council deems that public health or safety requires it, the Council may suspend any permit, or license, pending the hearing upon the revocation thereof.

Licenses, or permits, may also be suspended by the City Manager, or his/her authorized representative, where he finds that public health or safety requires it, after twenty-four (24) hours' written notice left at the place of business or residence of the licensee or permit holder. Such notice shall state the grounds of the suspension. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-81).

2.115.110 Appeal procedure upon revocation or suspension of license or permit.
Except where other procedures are prescribed by any law, this Code, or an ordinance of the City, any holder of a license, or permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of any law, part of this Code, or an ordinance of the City, which license, or permit, has been revoked or suspended by order of an officer having authority to do so under SCCC 2.115.100 or under the particular provisions of the law, this Code, or City ordinance, under which such license or permit is issued, or by the City Council, shall have the right to appeal the order of revocation of suspension to the City Council within five days after the making of such order.

Said appeal shall be made by filing within said five-day period a notice of appeal with the City Council and said appeal shall be heard by the City Council within seven days from the filing thereof or at its next following regular meeting, whichever is later. All rights granted the holder of such license or permit shall be suspended pending final determination of the appeal.

The City Council shall affirm or overrule the revocation or suspension of such license, or permit, within ten days after the conclusion of the presentation of the said appeal. The decision of the City Council upon such appeal shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to appeal. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-82).

2.115.120 License deemed debt.
The amount of any license imposed by this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a debt to the City and recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-83).

2.115.130 Nonapplicability.
None of the provisions of this article shall be applicable to licenses or permits issued pursuant to City ordinances enforced by officers and employees of the County of Santa Clara pursuant to agreement between the City and County of Santa Clara where such agreement provides for the issuance of licenses or permits by such County official and employees and the collection and retention of license fees or permit fees by such County officials and employees. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 9-19-72. Formerly § 2-84).

Chapter 2.120
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Sections:

Article I. Establishment, Powers and Duties Generally

2.120.010    Names, membership, qualifications, and terms of office.

2.120.020    Powers and duties generally.

2.120.030    Meetings.

2.120.040    Utilization of City personnel.

Article II. Duties and Responsibilities Enumerated

2.120.050    Planning Commission.

2.120.060    Parks and Recreation Commission.

2.120.070    Civil Service Commission.

2.120.080    Board of Library Trustees.

2.120.090    Repealed.

2.120.100    Historical and Landmarks Commission.

2.120.110    Senior Advisory Commission.

2.120.120    Repealed.

2.120.130    Youth Commission.

2.120.140    Cultural Commission.

Charter reference – Appointive boards and commissions generally, §§ 1000 – 1013.

Article I. Establishment, Powers and Duties Generally

2.120.010 Names, membership, qualifications and terms of office.
There shall be and there are established within the City the following boards and commissions:

(a) Planning Commission. (SCCC 2.120.050)

(b) Parks and Recreation Commission. (SCCC 2.120.060)

(c) Civil Service Commission. (SCCC 2.120.070)

(d) Board of Library Trustees. (SCCC 2.120.080)

(e) Historical and Landmarks Commission. (SCCC 2.120.100)

(f) Senior Advisory Commission. (SCCC 2.120.110)

(g) Youth Commission. (SCCC 2.120.130)

(h) Cultural Commission. (SCCC 2.120.140)

All members of boards and commissions, except for members of the Youth Commission, shall be qualified electors of the City and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1088; Ord. 1241 § 3, 4-13-71; Ord. 1276 § 1, 6-26-73; Ord. 1625 § 1, 7-16-91; Ord. 1673 § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. 1809 § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. 1908 § 1, 7-16-13. Formerly § 2-90).

2.120.020 Powers and duties generally.
The boards and commissions of the City shall have the following general powers, duties and responsibilities in addition to those set forth in Article X of the Charter:

(a) To establish rules and regulations governing the election of their officers, the holding of meetings and the conduct of business.

(b) To utilize all appropriate techniques in crystallizing and testing public sentiment on major public issues in their respective fields.

(c) To make budget recommendations.

(d) To hold official hearings as required by law or requested by the City Council.

(e) To advise and recommend on City policies and procedures pertinent to their respective activities and functions.

(f) To support and adhere to all City policies promulgated by the City Council and to establish needed interim policies in the absence of the same.

(g) To provide information and promote good public relations between the City and the general public.

(h) To receive at least two hours of training in general ethics principles and ethics laws relevant to their public service every two years, as required by state law and the City Council.

(i) To perform such other related functions as may be assigned to them by the City Council. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1837 § 1, 5-6-08. Formerly § 2-91).

2.120.030 Meetings.
Each board or commission of the City with members thereon appointed by the City Council shall hold regular meetings at the times and on the days indicated by resolution of the City Council except when such day falls on a City holiday, and shall hold such special meetings as it may require. The times and days for holding regular meetings are subject to amendment from time to time by resolution of the City Council. A copy of the applicable resolution(s) is and will be available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1298 § 2, 10-15-74; Ord. 1300 § 1, 11-12-74; Ord. 1569 § 1, 5-26-87. Formerly § 2-91.1).

2.120.040 Utilization of City personnel.
The various boards and commissions may utilize the services of the appropriate City departmental personnel in carrying out their respective functions, subject to the administrative control of the City Manager. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-92).

Article II. Duties and Responsibilities Enumerated

2.120.050 Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall be primarily responsible for and have the following duties:

(a) The establishment, acceptance and continued supervision of a long-range master plan for the future development of the City.

(b) The proper application and preservation of the zoning and land use regulations of the City and recommending such revisions and amendments as may be deemed necessary.

(c) The processing of subdivision tract maps and property development applications in accordance with prescribed standards.

(d) Serve as a correlating agency for the capital improvement program of the City. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-93).

Stat. Ref.:    For State law as to planning generally, see Gov. C.A. § 65000 et seq. For State law as to authority of City to establish Planning Commission, see Gov. C.A. § 65100.

Charter reference – Provisions as to powers and duties of Planning Commission, see Charter § 1007.

2.120.060 Parks and Recreation Commission.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be primarily responsible for the following:

(a) The establishment, acceptance and continued supervision of a long-range parks and recreational program for the City.

(b) Planning and implementing an annual program of recreational and cultural activities for all age groups.

(c) Recommending and supervising all the City’s contractual relationships with other agencies in the recreational field.

(d) Serve as a correlating agency between the City and other units of government on recreational undertakings.

(e) The planning and supervision of the City cemetery. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-94).

Charter reference – Provisions establishing Parks and Recreation Commission and enumerating powers and duties of same, see Charter §§ 1008 and 1009.

2.120.070 Civil Service Commission.
The Civil Service Commission shall be primarily responsible for the following:

(a) The establishment, acceptance and continued supervision of a well-rounded civil service program.

(b) The recruiting, examining and establishing of a list of eligibles for appointment to the City service in accordance with established merit principles.

(c) The hearing of appeals by members of the classified service and acting upon the same. (Ord. 947. Formerly § 2-95).

Charter reference – Provisions relative to civil service, see Charter §§ 1100 to 1108. Provisions establishing Civil Service Commission and enumerating powers and duties of same, see Charter §§ 1010 and 1011.

2.120.080 Board of Library Trustees.
The Board of Library Trustees shall be primarily responsible for the following:

(a) Establishing, accepting and supervising a significant public library program.

(b) Providing for balanced library collections and services which represent the diverse perspectives of the community.

(c) Making recommendations to the City Council on library policies which ensure maximum public access to library collections and services.

(d) Serving as a central focus for citizen comment on library operations and materials and the provision of appropriate recommendations or response.

(e) Supporting educational, recreational and cultural activities for citizens of all age groups consistent with the mission of the library program.

(f) Representing the library program to the City, the community, other government agencies and organizations.

(g) Performing such other duties and exercising such powers as the City Council may impose or require. (Ord. 947; Ord. 1703 § 1, 10-14-97. Formerly § 2-96).

Charter reference – Provisions establishing Board of Library Trustees and enumerating powers and duties of same, see Charter §§ 1012 and 1013.

2.120.090 Cultural Advisory Commission.
Repealed by Ord. 1908. (Ord. 1276 § 2, 6-26-73. Formerly § 2-97).

2.120.100 Historical and Landmarks Commission.
The Historical and Landmarks Commission shall consist of seven members, whose members shall not hold any paid office or employment in the City government, and shall have power and be required to do the following:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to historical landmarks, names and renaming of streets, museums and the establishment thereof in the City, and the marking and preservation of historical landmarks and places.

(b) Exercise such other functions as it may be required to perform by the City Council. (Ord. 912; Ord. 1241 § 4, 4-3-71; Ord. 1276 § 2, 6-26-73. Formerly § 2-98).

2.120.110 Senior Advisory Commission.
The Senior Advisory Commission shall consist of seven members who shall not hold any paid office or employment in the City government, and shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:

(a) Study, review, evaluate and make recommendations to the City Council relative to any and all matters affecting elderly people in the City of Santa Clara.

(b) Make such studies and submit to the Council such reports or recommendations respecting matters affecting elderly people, and such matters as the Council may from time to time request. (Ord. 1088; Ord. 1276 § 2, 6-26-73; Ord. 1809 § 2, 9-26-06. Formerly § 2-99).

2.120.120 International Exchange Commission.
Repealed by Ord. 1908. (Ord. 1625 § 2, 7-16-91; Ord. 1699 § 1, 6-24-97. Formerly § 2-100).

2.120.130 Youth Commission.
The Youth Commission shall consist of no more than fifteen (15) youth members who shall be residents of the City and be primarily responsible for the following:

(a) To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to the youth and teen population within Santa Clara, especially as related to municipal programs and projects of the City.

(b) To perform such other related functions as may be assigned to them by the City Council.

Additional powers and duties of the Youth Commission shall be as determined by the City Council, by resolution, and may be amended, from time to time, to properly reflect changes in qualifications, composition and responsibilities of the Youth Commission as the City Council deems necessary. (Ord. 1673 § 2, 6-20-95. Formerly § 2-101).

2.120.140 Cultural Commission.
The Cultural Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall not hold any paid office or employment in the City government and shall have the following powers, functions and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to cultural enrichment and beautification of the City, sister city relationships and international exchanges.

(b) Encourage the beautification of the City and programs for the cultural enrichment of the City.

(c) Foster cultural events, activities and displays that celebrate the City’s native and historic cultures and present diversity.

(d) Assist in the planning and supervision of international exchange activities with our sister communities, sharing friendship, skills and concerns.

(e) Develop individual contacts designed to enhance international communication and understanding.

(f) Encourage educational, cultural, sports, technical and governmental exchanges to help acquaint citizens of Santa Clara with cultural and political diversity abroad.

(g) Perform other such duties and exercise such powers as the City Council may impose or require. (Ord. 1908 § 4, 7-16-13).

Chapter 2.125
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Sections:

2.125.010    Purpose.

2.125.020    Definition – Voter.

2.125.030    Time of election.

2.125.040    Procedure for municipal elections.

2.125.050    Notice of the holding of election.

2.125.060    Filing of nomination petitions.

2.125.070    Canvass of election returns.

2.125.080    Resolution of tie votes between candidates for municipal office.

2.125.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for holding municipal elections in the city in accordance with the provisions of certain State election laws as authorized in Section 600.01 and Section 700 of the City’s Charter. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-111).

2.125.020 Definition – Voter.
A voter is as defined in the Elections Code of California. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-112).

2.125.030 Time of election.
A regular election shall be held in the city at a time prescribed by the Charter, which at present is on the first Tuesday in April of each odd numbered year, and the same shall be known as the general municipal election. All other municipal elections that may be called under the authority of the City’s Charter, or by general laws, shall be known as special elections. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-113).

2.125.040 Procedure for municipal elections.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all elections called and held in the city shall be held and conducted in manner and form as required by the general laws of the State governing elections within municipalities. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-114).

2.125.050 Notice of the holding of election.
Notice of elections shall be given pursuant to the California Elections Code. No error, omission or defect in said notice shall be cause to invalidate any election held under the provisions of the City’s Charter or this Code. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-115).

2.125.060 Filing of nomination petitions.
(a) Any person otherwise qualified may be a candidate for City elective office at any election, regular or special, by filing with the City Clerk within the time prescribed in the Elections Code of California a petition signed by not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30) voters in the city.

(b) No person shall hold at any one time nomination petitions or other nomination papers for more than one City elective office, including but not limited to holding such petitions or papers for more than one numbered seat on the City Council, or holding such petitions or papers for both a numbered Council seat and the office of Mayor, City Clerk or Chief of the Police Department. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the City Clerk shall not issue to any person nomination petitions or other nomination papers for more than one City elective office.

(c) Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from withdrawing his or her nomination for a specific City elective office by returning to the City Clerk, without filing, nomination petitions or nomination papers for that position. After withdrawing his or her nomination for the specific City elective office, the City Clerk may issue and the candidate may obtain nomination petitions or nomination papers for another position. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75; Ord. 1851 § 1, 12-15-09. Formerly § 2-116).

2.125.070 Canvass of election returns.
When the Council acts as a canvassing board to canvass election returns, it will not later than the seventh day after the election, and at the usual hour and place of meeting, meet and canvass the returns and declare the result. Any such canvass may be held earlier than seven days after such election provided that all absentee ballots furnished for such election have been returned to the Clerk. The City Council may adjourn from day to day for the purpose of completing any such canvass. (Ord. 1325 § 1, 12-9-75. Formerly § 2-117).

2.125.080 Resolution of tie votes between candidates for municipal office.
Pursuant to Section 15651 of the California Elections Code, in the event of a tie vote between candidates who received an equal number of votes and the highest number of votes for an elective position enumerated in Section 600 of the City Charter, the tie vote shall be resolved by the following procedure:

(a) The first tie-break procedure will be counting precinct success. The candidate who prevails in the largest number of precincts shall be deemed the winning candidate.

(b) If the precinct determination does not resolve the tie vote, the City Council, by majority vote of a quorum present, shall select an alternate “by lot” procedure and then proceed with that procedure to determine the winning candidate.

(c) The “by lot” procedure will be resorted to only after certified results of the election have been received from the registrar of voters. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 10-25-94. Formerly § 2-118).

Chapter 2.130
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM ACT
Sections:

Article I. Findings and Purposes

2.130.010    Title.

2.130.020    Findings and declarations.

2.130.030    Purpose of this chapter.

Article II. Definitions

2.130.040    Interpretation of this chapter.

Article III. Contribution Limits

2.130.050    Limits on contributions from persons.

2.130.060    Prohibition on transfers of campaign contribution funds.

2.130.070    Return and refund of contributions.

2.130.080    Aggregation of payments.

2.130.090    Loans from third party sources.

2.130.100    Family contributions.

2.130.110    Money received by officials treated as contributions, income or gifts.

2.130.120    One campaign committee and one checking account per candidate.

2.130.130    Limit on cash contributions; cash expenditures.

2.130.140    Limit on anonymous contributions.

2.130.150    Contributions on behalf of others prohibited.

Article IV. Voluntary Expenditure Limits

2.130.160    Candidate acceptance or rejection of expenditure limits.

2.130.170    Extinguishment of expenditure limit.

Article V. Surplus Campaign Funds

2.130.180    Use of surplus campaign funds.

Article VI. Enforcement

2.130.190    Penalties for violation of this chapter.

2.130.200    Civil actions.

2.130.210    Injunctive relief.

2.130.220    Cost of litigation.

2.130.230    Disqualification.

2.130.240    Effect of violation on outcome of election.

2.130.250    Right to cure violation.

Article VII. Additional Disclosure Requirements

2.130.260    Additional pre-election campaign statement.

2.130.270    Disclosure of occupation and employer of contributor.

2.130.280    Submission of campaign disclosure statements.

Article VIII. Agency Responsibility

2.130.290    Duties of the local filing officer.

Article IX. Miscellaneous Provisions

2.130.300    Applicability of other laws.

2.130.310    Severability.

Article X. Dark Money

2.130.320    Purpose.

2.130.330    Interpretation and regulation.

2.130.340    Mandatory disclosure.

2.130.350    Presumptions.

2.130.360    Enforcement.

Article I. Findings and Purposes

2.130.010 Title.
In 1974, the voters of California approved a far-reaching initiative measure commonly known as Proposition 9. The provisions of Proposition 9 were codified into the California Government Code as Title 9 (entitled “Political Reform” – § 81000 et seq.). This enactment is commonly referred to as the “Political Reform Act of 1974,” hereinafter the “Political Reform Act.” Among other things, the Political Reform Act subjected all public officials to rigorous conflicts of interest provisions and imposed explicit regulation and accountability for political campaign contributions and expenditures on elected officials.

This chapter shall be known as the “City of Santa Clara Political Campaign Finance Reform Act” (“Act”). It is intended to supplement the provisions of the Political Reform Act, as it is amended from time to time. In some instances, the Act is intended to be a convenient, single source reminder of the applicable State law. In other instances, the provisions of the Act are expressly intended to be more restrictive than the Political Reform Act. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.020 Findings and declarations.
In enacting this chapter, the following findings and declarations are adopted:

(a) Monetary contributions to political campaigns are a legitimate form of participation in the American political process, but large contributions may have an undue influence on candidates or create the appearance of an undue influence in the political process.

(b) The rapidly increasing costs of political campaigns have forced many candidates to raise larger and larger percentages of money from individuals and interest groups with a specific financial stake in matters before the City Council. This has caused a public perception that votes are being improperly influenced by monetary contributions to candidates. This perception is undermining the credibility and integrity of the governmental process.

(c) High campaign costs are forcing officeholders to spend more time on fundraising and less time on the public’s business. The periodic pressure to raise contributions distracts officeholders from urgent governmental matters.

(d) The integrity of the governmental process, the competitiveness of campaigns and public confidence in local officials are all diminishing.

(e) Campaign contributions and campaign expenditures in municipal election campaigns should be fully and truthfully disclosed in order that the voters may be fully informed about a candidate’s sources of campaign contributions.

(f) Specific Findings Regarding Two Tiered Contribution Limits. The contribution limits set forth in SCCC 2.130.050 herein are based on the following specific findings:

(1) Individual contributions in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may result in the reasonable perception by the public of the appearance of undue influence on successful candidates by larger contributors. Limiting contributions below this level for candidates accepting the voluntary expenditure limits of this chapter will bolster the public’s trust in the local electoral process.

(2) Limiting contributions to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for candidates who do not accept voluntary campaign limits represents a reasonable incentive for candidates to accept voluntary expenditure limits without reducing any candidate’s ability to effectively campaign or to reasonably raise adequate campaign funds.

(3) The difference between the alternative contribution limits is not calculated to deny any candidate the option of not accepting expenditure limits. Rather, it is intended to reflect a meaningful distinction to be appreciated by both candidates and the public encouraging fair elections free from the perceived negative effects of excessive campaign spending. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.030 Purpose of this chapter.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the following purposes:

(a) Ensure that individuals and interest groups in the city have a fair opportunity to participate in the municipal elective and governmental processes.

(b) Reduce the influence of large contributors with a specific financial stake in matters before the City Council, thus countering the perception that decisions are influenced more by the size of contributions than the best interests of the people of the City.

(c) Encourage candidates to limit their overall expenditures in campaigns, thereby reducing the pressure on candidates to raise large campaign war chests for defensive purposes, beyond the amount necessary to communicate reasonably with voters.

(d) Increase the value of smaller contributions to candidates.

(e) Reduce the fund raising advantage of incumbents and thus encourage competition for elective office.

(f) Allow candidates and officeholders to spend a lesser portion of their time on fund raising and a greater portion of their time dealing with issues of importance to their constituents.

(g) Improve the disclosure of contribution sources in reasonable and effective ways.

(h) Help restore public trust in governmental and electoral institutions. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

Article II. Definitions

2.130.040 Interpretation of this chapter.
Unless a term is specifically defined in this chapter, or the contrary is stated (or clearly appears from the context), the definitions set forth in Chapter 2 (“Definitions” – § 82000 et seq. of the Government Code) of the State Political Reform Act shall govern the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.

(a) “Election cycle” means that period commencing on May 1st of a general election year and concluding on December 31st of that same year. If a special election is conducted, the election cycle shall commence on the first day of the month at least six months before the election and shall conclude on the last day of the month following the election (i.e., assume a March date is used for a City special election for an elective office; September 1st (the first day of the month at least six months before the election date) would be the first day of the election cycle and April 30th (the last day of the month following the election) would be the last day of the election cycle).

(b) “Campaign literature” means any communication which meets the following criteria: (1) it is distributed during the campaign cycle, (2) it identifies the candidate (even if the fact of candidacy is not mentioned in the communication, it is deemed that there is a valuable benefit to the candidate gained by the name recognition generated through the distribution of a communication during a campaign cycle), and (3) the candidate (and/or the candidate’s campaign committee) has paid for at least fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of preparation and/or distribution inclusion of the communication. The candidate’s cost for the campaign literature shall be identified and accounted for as a campaign expense.

(c) The term “office” means the offices of Mayor, City Council, Chief of Police and City Clerk. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1788 §§ 2, 3, 2004; Ord. 1835 § 1, 4-15-08; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

Article III. Contribution Limits

2.130.050 Limits on contributions from persons.
(a) No person shall make to any candidate for office or the controlled committee of such a candidate and no such candidate and the candidate’s controlled committee shall accept from any such person a contribution or contributions totaling more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) during the election cycle for each election in which the candidate is on the ballot or is a write-in candidate. Acceptance of the voluntary expenditure limits contained in SCCC 2.130.160 shall raise the contribution limit to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Beginning in 2014, the contribution limits established in this section shall be adjusted on an annual basis by a percentage equal to the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for the San Francisco Bay Area (CPI). The adjustment to the contribution limits shall be by City Council resolution adopted at least six months prior to each election. The adjustment shall be rounded off to the nearest ten dollar ($10.00) figure [downward (if four dollars ninety-nine cents

($4.99) or less) or upward (if five dollars ($5.00) or more)].

(b) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a candidate from making unlimited contributions to his/her own campaign.

(c) No person shall make to any candidate for office or the controlled committee of such a candidate and no such candidate or candidate controlled committee may accept a contribution unless it is made or accepted during the election cycle.

(d) The last day a campaign contribution may be deposited shall be eleven (11) calendar days before the election date (i.e., a Tuesday, November 2nd election date would make Friday, October 22nd the last day to deposit a contribution) and the last day a payment for campaign expenses may be made shall be the last day of the month following the election month (i.e., a November election would require that all campaign expenses be paid by December 31st – the last day of the month following the election month).

(e) Nominal in-kind contributions not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per source shall be allowed between the closing of the fundraising window and election day; provided, that the contribution meets all other requirements of this chapter.

(f) Committees formed to support or oppose a ballot measure shall be excepted from the limitations contained in this section. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1835 § 2, 4-15-08; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.060 Prohibition on transfers of campaign contribution funds.
No candidate controlled committee shall make any contribution to any other candidate running for office, his or her controlled committee or any committee supporting or opposing a candidate for office. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.070 Return and refund of contributions.
(a) If a contribution has been negotiated, deposited, utilized, or was not returned to the donor within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt it is considered received. Received contributions that are refunded to donors prior to the election are considered campaign expenditures and will count toward the voluntary expenditure limit. Received contributions refunded to donors after the election are considered surplus funds and will not count toward the voluntary expenditure limit.

(b) A contribution shall not be considered to be received if it is not negotiated, deposited or utilized, and if it is returned to the donor within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt. In the case of a late contribution, as defined in the Political Reform Act, it shall not be deemed received if it is returned to the contributor within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. 1954 § 1, 5-17-16).

2.130.080 Aggregation of payments.
For purposes of the contributions limits in this article, the following shall apply:

(a) All payments made by a person, as broadly defined in the Political Reform Act, whose contributions or expenditures are financed, maintained or controlled by any other person shall be considered to be made by a single person, committee or small contributor political action committee.

(b) Two or more entities shall be treated as one person when any of the following circumstances apply:

(1) The entities share the majority of members of their boards of directors.

(2) The entities share two or more officers.

(3) The entities are owned or controlled by the same majority shareholder or shareholders.

(4) The entities are in a parent-subsidiary relationship.

(c) An individual and any general partnership in which the individual is a partner, or an individual and any corporation in which the individual owns a controlling interest, shall be treated as one person.

(d) No committee which supports or opposes a candidate for office shall have as officers individuals who serve as officers on any other committee which supports or opposes the same candidate. No such committee shall act in concert with, or solicit or make contributions on behalf of any other committee. This subsection shall not apply to treasurers of committees if these treasurers do not participate in or control in any way a decision on whether the candidate or candidates receive contributions. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.090 Loans from third party sources.
(a) A loan shall be considered a contribution from the maker and the guarantor of the loan and shall be subject to the contribution limits (two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00, as adjusted from time to time) or five hundred dollars ($500.00, as adjusted from time to time) if the voluntary expenditure limit is accepted) of this chapter.

(b) Every loan to a candidate or the candidate’s controlled committee shall be by written agreement and shall be filed with the candidate’s or committee’s campaign statement on which the loan is first reported.

(c) The proceeds of a loan made to a candidate by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public and which is secured or guaranteed shall not be subject to the contribution limits of this chapter.

(d) Extensions of credit (other than commercial loans pursuant to subsection (c) of this section) for a period of more than thirty (30) calendar days are subject to the contribution limits of this chapter. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.100 Family contributions.
(a) Contributions by a husband and wife shall be treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated.

(b) Contributions by children under eighteen (18) years of age shall be treated as contributions by their parents and attributed proportionately to each parent (one-half to each parent or the total amount to a single custodial parent). (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.110 Money received by officials treated as contributions, income or gifts.
Any funds received by an elected official or candidate running in the city or any committee controlled by such an official or candidate shall be considered either a campaign contribution, income or a gift. All campaign contributions received by such persons shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter unless such campaign contributions are used exclusively for elections held outside the city. All income and gifts shall be subject to the conflict of interest provisions of the Political Reform Act. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.120 One campaign committee and one checking account per candidate.
A candidate shall have no more than one campaign committee and one checking account out of which all expenditures shall be made. This section shall not prohibit the establishment of savings or investment accounts, but no qualified campaign expenditures shall be made out of these accounts. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.130 Limit on cash contributions; cash expenditures.
This section is a reminder of a portion of the provisions of Government Code § 84300 pertaining to cash:

(a) No contribution of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall be made or received in cash.

(b) No expenditure of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall be made or received in cash.

The remaining provisions of Government Code § 84300 shall remain in effect. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.140 Limit on anonymous contributions.
No person shall make an anonymous contribution(s) to a candidate or controlled committee totaling one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in any election cycle. An anonymous contribution of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall not be kept by the intended recipient, but shall instead be promptly paid to the City Clerk for deposit in the general fund of the City to be earmarked for the purpose of offsetting any costs incurred by the City in enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.150 Contributions on behalf of others prohibited.
No contribution shall be made, directly or indirectly, by any person in a name other than the name by which such person is legally identified. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

Article IV. Voluntary Expenditure Limits

2.130.160 Candidate acceptance or rejection of expenditure limits.
(a) Each candidate for City office shall file a “Declaration of Candidacy Statement” (“Declaration”) which shall be in a form to be determined by the City Clerk before that candidate accepts any campaign contributions. At the time of filing his/her declaration, the candidate shall indicate on the Declaration his/her acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure limit of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00 – the base was established in February, 2000), which, beginning in 2014, shall be adjusted on an annual basis solely by a percentage equal to the San Francisco Bay Area All Urban Consumer Price Index (CPI). The adjustment to the voluntary expenditure limit shall be by City Council resolution adopted at least six months prior to each election. The adjustment shall be rounded off to the nearest hundred dollar ($100.00) figure [downward (if forty-nine dollars ninety-nine cents ($49.99) or less) or upward (if fifty dollars ($50.00) or more)].

(b) For candidates accepting the voluntary expenditure limits, the following advantages apply:

(1) The candidate may accept a contribution of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00, as adjusted from time to time) from each contributor.

(2) The City shall pay for one-half the cost of the candidate’s statement of qualifications printed in the ballot pamphlet.

(3) The sample ballot shall contain a designation that the candidate was a participant in the voluntary expenditure limit program.

(4) The candidate’s name shall be listed in a newspaper of general circulation indicating they have been a participant in the voluntary expenditure limit program.

(5) The candidate’s participation in the voluntary expenditure limit program shall be disseminated for public information on the City’s website, government access cable television channel, public libraries, public offices, etc.

(c) A candidate who agrees to accept the voluntary expenditure limit in this article may not change that decision, except where an opposing candidate files a statement of rejection of the voluntary expenditure limit, the candidate may rescind his/her acceptance of the voluntary expenditure limit within seventy-two (72) hours of the final date that nomination papers can be filed; provided, that the candidate will be limited from the date of his/her rescission to a maximum contribution limit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00, as adjusted from time to time) per source.

(d) A candidate who agrees to accept the voluntary expenditure limit in this article shall not exceed the expenditure limit of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), as adjusted from time to time. The candidate shall immediately notify all opponents and the City Clerk by telephone and by confirmation in writing the day the expenditure limit is exceeded.

(e) The following shall not count toward the voluntary expenditure limit: (1) the cost of the candidate statement, whether paid by the candidate or the City; (2) contributions returned by the candidate in accordance with SCCC 2.130.070(b); and (3) filing fees required by State or local law. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1768 § 2, 5-7-02; Ord. 1788 § 4, 2004; Ord. 1835 §§ 3, 4, 4-15-08; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. 1954 § 1, 5-17-16).

2.130.170 Extinguishment of expenditure limit.
If a candidate violates the campaign expenditure limit of this article, the expenditure limit shall no longer be applicable to the other candidates running for the same office. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.180).

Article V. Surplus Campaign Funds

2.130.180 Use of surplus campaign funds.
(a) At the termination of the election cycle, all candidates (whether defeated or elected) shall be required to have a zero balance in their campaign fund account. Disbursement of all unused (“surplus”) campaign funds is mandatory by the termination of the election cycle.

(b) With respect to loans a candidate makes to his/her own campaign, before the end of the election cycle, either (1) the loan must be repaid in full to the candidate, or (2) the outstanding loan balance must be forgiven (“written off”) by the candidate.

(c) Surplus campaign funds may be expended (1) for a post-election event held no later than the end of the election cycle, and/or (with the explicit exclusion of payment for an elected officer’s expenses unrelated to the election campaign) (2) for the purposes delineated in Government Code Sections 89519(b)(1) through (3) (entitled “Surplus campaign funds; disclosure; use”).

(d) The City’s campaign expenditure limitations do not apply to surplus campaign funds disbursed in compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. 1954 § 1, 5-17-16).

Article VI. Enforcement

2.130.190 Penalties for violation of this chapter.
Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the enforcement of violations of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor.

(a) Infraction/Misdemeanor. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and/or misdemeanor.

(b) Prosecution. Every violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the prosecutor has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the prosecutor may specify in the accusatory pleading or citation, that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction.

(c) Penalty for Infraction. Each and every violation of this chapter which is deemed an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).

(d) Penalty for Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this chapter which is deemed a misdemeanor is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both penalty and imprisonment. (Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

2.130.200 Civil actions.
(a) Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by a person residing within the city for an amount not more than three times the amount of the unlawful contribution or expenditure.

(b) If two or more persons are responsible for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.

(c) In determining the amount of liability, the court may take into account the seriousness of the violation and the degree of culpability of the defendant. If a judgment is entered against the defendant or defendants in an action, the plaintiff shall receive fifty percent (50%) of the amount recovered. The remaining fifty percent (50%) shall be deposited into the general fund of the City. In an action brought by the District Attorney, the judgment shall be paid to the general fund of the County of Santa Clara.

(d) No civil action alleging a violation of any provision of this Act shall be filed more than two years after the date the violation occurred.

(e) The provisions of SCCC 2.130.240, Effect of violation on outcome of election, shall apply. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.190).

2.130.210 Injunctive relief.
Any person residing in the City may sue for injunctive relief to enjoin violations or to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.200).

2.130.220 Cost of litigation.
The court may award to a plaintiff or defendant who prevails in any action authorized by this chapter, costs of litigation, including reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.210).

2.130.230 Disqualification.
In addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, if an official receives a contribution in violation of this chapter, the official shall not be permitted to make, participate in making or in any way attempt to use his/her official position to influence a governmental decision in which the contributor has a financial interest. The provisions of Government Code § 87100 et seq., and the pertinent regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission (Title 2, Division 6, Chapter 7 (entitled “Conflicts of Interest” – Section 18700 et seq.)) shall apply to interpretations of this section. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.220).

2.130.240 Effect of violation on outcome of election.
If a candidate is found by a court (or jury) to have violated any provision of this chapter, the court shall make a determination as to whether the violation had a material effect on the outcome of the election. If the court finds the violation did have a material effect on the election, the following shall apply.

(a) If the court determination becomes final before the date of the election, the votes for such candidate shall not be counted and the election shall be determined on the basis of the votes cast for the other candidates in that race;

(b) If the court determination becomes final after the date of the election, and if such candidate was declared to have been elected, then such candidate shall not assume office, the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled as otherwise provided in the City Charter and City Code;

(c) If the court determination becomes final after the candidate has assumed office, then the candidate shall be removed from office, the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled as otherwise provided in the City Charter and City Code;

(d) The court may determine the candidate shall be ineligible to hold any elective City office for a period of four years after the date of such court determination that a violation occurred;

(e) In a criminal proceeding, a plea of nolo contendere shall form the basis for a court determination of the impact of the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.170).

2.130.250 Right to cure violation.
A candidate or candidate controlled committee that accepts a contribution in violation of this chapter shall not be penalized, if the candidate or candidate controlled committee returns the contribution or contributes it to the City general fund or to a charitable organization within seven days of its receipt. (Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

Article VII. Additional Disclosure Requirements

2.130.260 Additional pre-election campaign statement.
The Political Reform Act provides for various campaign statements to be filed on dates determined by the Fair Political Practices Commission. The second pre-election statement has a filing deadline approximately three weeks before the election. In addition to the requirements of the Political Reform Act, seven calendar days before the election, all candidates shall submit to the City a campaign disclosure statement. This statement shall cover the period from the last date of the second pre-election statement to the date eleven (11) days prior to the election. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1835 § 5, 4-15-08; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.240).

2.130.270 Disclosure of occupation and employer of contributor.
No contribution shall be deposited into a campaign checking account unless the name, address, occupation and employer of the contributor is on file in the records of the recipient of the contribution. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.250).

2.130.280 Submission of campaign disclosure statements.
All submissions of campaign disclosure statements shall be submitted neatly printed, typed or in an electronic media form. In all cases, the documents/media must be legible (or electronically useable) as determined by the City Clerk. It is the intent of the City to give the voting public access to the campaign disclosure statements through the City use of modern media resources. Documents that are not legible (or electronically useable) prevent widespread public access to this crucial information. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1768 § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.260).

Article VIII. Agency Responsibility

2.130.290 Duties of the local filing officer.
The local filing officer shall:

(a) Prescribe the necessary forms for filing the appropriate statements. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.270).

Article IX. Miscellaneous Provisions

2.130.300 Applicability of other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of this State or the City. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14. Formerly 2.130.280).

2.130.310 Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, including the application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 1924 § 1, 4-22-14).

Article X. Dark Money

2.130.320 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide the maximum transparency to the voters of the City of Santa Clara about who is spending money on local campaigns and to create specific disclosure requirements for contributions to organizations that have historically refused to disclose contributions (“dark money”). (Ord. 1979 § 1, 5-15-18).

2.130.330 Interpretation and regulation.
(a) This article is intended to be interpreted consistently and as an enhancement to the provisions of the California Government Code and the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Act.

(b) The City Manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to adopt such regulations and forms as to facilitate the interpretation of this article and to provide such forms necessary for the filing of the required disclosures. (Ord. 1979 § 1, 5-15-18).

2.130.340 Mandatory disclosure.
All contributions of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more to any organization, including but not limited to multipurpose organizations as such organizations are defined in Government Code Section 84222, that makes expenditures that affect or are intended to affect a local Santa Clara election to City office or for or against a local Santa Clara ballot measure shall be reported in the same manner as campaign contributions are required to be reported under SCCC 2.130.280. (Ord. 1979 § 1, 5-15-18).

2.130.350 Presumptions.
It shall be presumed that if any multipurpose organization makes a contribution of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more to an entity that qualifies as a recipient committee under Government Code Section 84211, the source of the contributions to the multipurpose organization shall be subject to the mandatory disclosure requirements of this article. (Ord. 1979 § 1, 5-15-18).

2.130.360 Enforcement.
(a) The provisions of this article shall be enforceable as set forth in Article VI of this chapter.

(b) The provisions of this article are hereby incorporated into all contracts of the City, the Santa Clara Stadium Authority, the Santa Clara Housing Authority, and the Sports and Open Space Authority as provisions of law to which all parties to such contract are subject. The violation of this article shall be considered a material breach of the contract by a contracting party and grounds for termination of the contract. A contracting party shall be considered in violation of this section if the contracting party fails to disclose contributions made by the contracting party or by an intermediary of the contracting party or by contribution of earmarked funds as defined and regulated by Government Code Section 18432. (Ord. 1979 § 1, 5-15-18).

Chapter 2.135
CEMETERIES
Sections:

Article I. Cemeteries Generally

2.135.010    “Cemetery” defined.

2.135.020    Charges and fees for City cemetery to be set by City Council.

2.135.030    Boundaries of private cemetery – Generally.

2.135.040    Boundaries – Land excepted.

2.135.050    Burials within part of City cemetery prohibited.

2.135.060    Standards of maintenance – Regulations by City Council.

2.135.070    Compliance with State law.

2.135.080    Maintenance of abutting sidewalks.

2.135.090    Fences or enclosures – Maintenance generally.

2.135.100    Reserved.

2.135.110    Foundations and excavations, etc., in City cemetery to be done by superintendent – Fees.

2.135.120    Work in City cemetery to be done by cemetery employees only – Exception.

2.135.130    Applicability of chapter to all cemeteries dedicated to public use.

Article II. Removal of All Remains

2.135.210    Definitions.

2.135.220    Human remains or remains.

2.135.230    Cremated remains.

2.135.240    Cemetery.

2.135.250    Burial park.

2.135.260    Mausoleum.

2.135.270    Crematory.

2.135.280    Columbarium.

2.135.290    Crematory and columbarium.

2.135.300    Interment.

2.135.310    Grave.

2.135.320    Lot, plot, and interment plot.

2.135.330    Plot owner, owner, or lot proprietor.

2.135.340    Cemetery authority.

2.135.350    Order of disinterment and removal of human remains.

Article III. City-Owned Cemeteries

2.135.410    Application of rules.

2.135.420    Declaration of abandonment – Adoption.

2.135.430    Declaration of abandonment – Requisites – Provisions for removal of remains.

2.135.440    Declaration of abandonment – Publication – Title – Contents.

2.135.450    Declaration of abandonment – Posting and mailing copies.

2.135.460    Removal and reinterment of remains – When authority accrues.

2.135.470    Notice to City by friend or relative – Contents – Delivery.

2.135.480    Notice of time and place of disinterment and reinterment.

2.135.490    Voluntary removal of remains – Affidavit – Delivery and contents.

2.135.500    Voluntary removal of remains – Consent of heirs.

2.135.510    Removal by owner of burial lot.

2.135.520    Ownership of lot passing by succession – Removal of remains by heirs – Affidavit as evidence.

2.135.530    Place of reinterment.

2.135.540    Manner of reinterment.

2.135.550    Vaults and other improvements – Removal by relative or friend.

2.135.560    Vaults and other improvements – Removal or disposition by City – Effect.

2.135.570    Sale of area abandoned – Court order unnecessary.

2.135.580    Use of proceeds of sale of abandoned cemeteries.

2.135.590    Conveyance of lots where remains are reinterred.

2.135.600    Conveyances to owners of plots in abandoned cemeteries – Effect.

2.135.610    Erection of markers on reinterment – Record of reinterment – Preparation, filing and inspection.

2.135.620    Declaration of removal of remains – Filing and acknowledgment – Effect.

Article I. Cemeteries Generally

2.135.010 “Cemetery” defined.
The term “cemetery” as used in this article shall mean and refer to the Santa Clara Cemetery and any other cemetery that the City may now or in the future acquire, own and operate and to any private cemetery within the city. (Ord. 1155 § 1, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-1).

2.135.020 Charges and fees for City cemetery to be set by City Council.
Prices and rates for cemetery lots, graves, crypts, niches and other services in the City cemetery shall be charged and collected for according to such schedules as the City Council may adopt by resolution. (Ord. 497; Ord. 604. Formerly § 6-2).

2.135.030 Boundaries of private cemetery – Generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, inter or entomb, or cause to be buried, interred or entombed, the body or remains of any deceased person within the city except within the following described boundaries:

A parcel of land, 20 feet in width and 40 feet in length, lying between a line parallel with and distant 110 feet northwesterly of the northwesterly line of Franklin Street and a line parallel with and distant 130 feet northwesterly of the northwesterly line of Franklin Street, and between a line parallel with and distant 327 feet southwesterly of the southwesterly line of Lincoln Street and a line parallel with and distant 367 feet southwesterly of the southwesterly line of Lincoln Street, as said streets are shown upon that certain Map of Town of Santa Clara, recorded in Book B of Maps at page 103, Santa Clara County Records;

Together with all that certain 52.611 acre parcel of land as shown and delineated upon that Record of Survey filed for record in Book 233 of Maps at page 33, Santa Clara County Records; together with all that certain 0.802 acre parcel of land as shown and delineated upon that Record of Survey filed for record in Book 75 of Maps at page 16, Santa Clara County Records; together with all of those certain Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20, as shown and delineated upon that map of the Geo. Roth Subdivision, recorded in Book L of Maps at page 95, Santa Clara County Records;

Excepting therefrom all of that 0.028 acre parcel beginning at a point in a southerly line of that certain parcel of land described in a deed to the Jesuit Community at Santa Clara University, Inc., a California Corporation, recorded March 29, 1971 in Book 9271 of Official Records at page 228, Santa Clara County Records, distant 37.50 feet, easterly, measured at right angles from the centerline of Winchester Boulevard, formerly Santa Clara-Los Gatos Road;

Thence, parallel with said centerline, North 0° 38' 14'' East, 452.19 feet;

Thence, along a tangent curve to the left with a radius of 382.50 feet through a central angle of 6° 33' 23'' for an arc length of 43.77 feet to the easterly line of Winchester Boulevard as shown on said Record of Survey recorded in Book 233 at page 33;

Thence, along said easterly line, South 0° 38' 14'' West, 495.89 feet to the southwesterly corner of said parcel;

Thence, along said southerly line, South 89° 54' 49'' East, 2.50 feet to the point of beginning;

And all of that 0.048 acre parcel commencing at the intersection of said southerly line of the Jesuit Community with said easterly line of Winchester Boulevard;

Thence, along said easterly line, North 0° 38' 14'' East, 534.97 feet;

Thence, North 23° 55' 57'' West, 39.10 feet to the true point of beginning;

Thence, continuing along last said line, North 23° 55' 57'' West, 820.60 feet to the southeasterly line of Bellomy Street as shown on last said Record of Survey;

Thence, along said southeasterly line, North 65° 45' 54'' East, 22.70 feet to a point of cusp;

Thence, leaving said southeasterly line southerly along a tangent curve to the left with a radius of 20.00 feet through a central angle of 89° 41' 51'' for an arc length of 31.31 feet to a point distant 37.50 feet, easterly, measured at right angles from said centerline of Winchester Boulevard;

Thence, parallel with said centerline, South 23° 55' 57'' East, 757.08 feet;

Thence, along a tangent curve to the right with a radius of 382.50 feet through a central angle of 6° 33' 06'' for an arc length of 43.74 feet to the true point of beginning.

Excepting therefrom those portions of said 52.611 acre parcel, said 0.802 acre parcel and said Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20, lying easterly of a line parallel with and distant 57.00 feet southwesterly of the centerline of Monroe Street as said centerline of Monroe Street is shown and delineated upon that certain “Official Plan Line Map of Monroe Street between El Camino Real and Newhall Street,” filed for record in Book 2 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 116 and 117, said Santa Clara County Records.

(Ord. 267; Ord. 732; Ord. 1220 § 1, 9-16-69; Ord. 1268 § 1, 10-3-72; Ord. 1318 § 1, 7-29-75. Formerly § 6-3).

2.135.040 Boundaries – Land excepted.
The provisions of SCCC 2.135.030 shall not be deemed to prohibit the burial, interment or entombment of any deceased person in any City cemetery, meaning a cemetery owned by the City. (Ord. 267; Ord. 732; Ord. 1268 § 2, 10-3-72. Formerly § 6-4).

2.135.050 Burials within part of City cemetery prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, or corporation from and after the fourth day of August, 1964, to bury or inter, or cause to be buried or interred, the whole or any portion of a dead body of any person in that portion of the City cemetery in the City of Santa Clara located in the City and County of Santa Clara, State of California, more particularly described as all and every part of every burial lot and/or family plot all or any part of which lies within the plan lines between Dome Avenue and Newhall Street as shown on the Official Plan Line Map North Winchester Boulevard and University Street which was recorded in Book 3 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 32, 33, and 34 thereof in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, State of California, and all that real property within said plan lines between Dome Avenue and Newhall Street whether said real property is divided into burial lots or not. (Ord. 1100. Formerly § 6-4.1).

2.135.060 Standards of maintenance – Regulations by City Council.
All cemeteries within the city shall be maintained in conformity with the highest modern usages and shall be subject to such regulations as may be subscribed by the City Council. (Ord. 267. Formerly § 6-5).

2.135.070 Compliance with State law.
All interments, disinterments and removals of bodies or remains of deceased persons within the cemetery shall be made in strict compliance with the laws of the State regulating the same. (Ord. 267. Formerly § 6-6).

2.135.080 Maintenance of abutting sidewalks.
All sidewalks on the public streets around the boundaries of all cemeteries in the city shall be curbed and graveled or paved and shall be maintained in conformity with reasonable regulations of the City Council and shall be kept up to the standard of other sidewalks in the vicinity of such cemeteries. (Ord. 267. Formerly § 6-7).

2.135.090 Fences or enclosures – Maintenance generally.
All cemeteries within the city shall be enclosed by modern suitable and ornate fences or enclosures. The plans and specifications of such fences or enclosures, shall first be submitted to the City Council.

All cemeteries within the city shall be maintained so as to present a pleasing view and appearance to the general public from public highways. (Ord. 267. Formerly § 6-8).

2.135.100 Reserved.
2.135.110 Foundations and excavations, etc., in City cemetery to be done by superintendent – Fees.
Foundations for all monuments and headstones in the City cemetery shall be built by the superintendent of the cemetery at the expense of the lot owner.

All excavations for graves, foundations and underground vaults and all concrete work of any kind underground in the City cemetery shall be done by the superintendent of the cemetery at the expense of the lot owner.

The superintendent’s charges for doing any of the work described in this section shall not be in excess of the reasonable market price. (Ord. 258. Formerly § 6-10).

2.135.120 Work in City cemetery to be done by cemetery employees only – Exception.
No workmen other than employees of the City cemetery will be admitted to the City cemetery for the purpose of doing work therein except for the purpose of setting stone work. This section shall not apply to work done by the owner of the lot personally. (Ord. 258. Formerly § 6-11).

2.135.130 Applicability of chapter to all cemeteries dedicated to public use.
All lands which may have been or may hereafter be set apart and dedicated to the public use as cemeteries or burying grounds of the City shall be regulated and managed according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 9. Formerly § 6-12).

Article II. Removal of All Remains

2.135.210 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall for the purpose of this article have the meanings as set out herein. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13).

2.135.220 Human remains or remains.
“Human remains” or “remains” means the body of a deceased person, and includes the body in any stage of decomposition and cremated remains. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.1).

2.135.230 Cremated remains.
“Cremated remains” means human remains after incineration in a crematory. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.2).

2.135.240 Cemetery.
“Cemetery” means any one, or a combination of more than one, of the following, in a place used, or intended to be used, and dedicated, for cemetery purposes:

(a) A burial park, for earth interments.

(b) A mausoleum, for crypt or vault interments.

(c) A crematory, or a crematory and columbarium, for cinerary interments. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.3).

2.135.250 Burial park.
“Burial park” means a tract of land for the burial of human remains in the ground, used or intended to be used, and dedicated, for cemetery purposes. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.4).

2.135.260 Mausoleum.
“Mausoleum” means a structure or building for the interment of human remains in crypts or vaults in a place used, or intended to be used, and dedicated, for cemetery purposes. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.5).

2.135.270 Crematory.
“Crematory” means a building or structure containing one or more furnaces for the reduction of bodies of deceased persons to cremated remains. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.6).

2.135.280 Columbarium.
“Columbarium” means a structure, room, or other space in a building or structure containing niches for inurnment of cremated human remains in a place used, or intended to be used, and dedicated, for cemetery purposes. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.7).

2.135.290 Crematory and columbarium.
“Crematory and columbarium” means a building or structure containing both a crematory and columbarium. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.8).

2.135.300 Interment.
“Interment” means the disposition of human remains by cremation, inurnment, entombment, or burial. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.9).

2.135.310 Grave.
“Grave” means a space of ground in a burial park, used, or intended to be used, for burial. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.10).

2.135.320 Lot, plot, and interment plot.
“Lot,” “plot,” and “interment plot” mean space in a cemetery used or intended to be used, for the interment of human remains. Such terms include and apply to one or more than one adjoining graves, one or more than one adjoining crypts or vaults, or one or more than one adjoining niches. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.11).

2.135.330 Plot owner, owner, or lot proprietor.
“Plot owner,” “owner,” or “lot proprietor” means any person in whose name an interment plot stands of record as owner in the office of the cemetery authority. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.12).

2.135.340 Cemetery authority.
“Cemetery authority” includes cemetery association, corporation sole, or other person owning or controlling cemetery lands or property. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-13.13).

2.135.350 Order of disinterment and removal of human remains.
The City as of the year 2001 has a population exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000). Consequently, the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 7700 et seq. will apply. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-14).

Article III. City-Owned Cemeteries

2.135.410 Application of rule.
The herein adopted rules and regulations are applicable to removal of all remains in cemeteries owned and controlled by the City. Said rules may be modified from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-15).

2.135.420 Declaration of abandonment – Adoption.
The resolution referred to in SCCC 2.135.350 must declare the abandonment in whole or in part of the cemetery as a burial place for the human dead and for the removal of human remains interred therein to another cemetery or cemeteries within the boundaries of the City as in this article provided. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-16).

2.135.430 Declaration of abandonment – Requisites – Provisions for removal of remains.
Any resolution or declaration for abandonment and removal adopted and made under the provisions of this chapter shall specify and declare that at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the first publication of the notice of declaration of abandonment and removal the human remains then remaining in the cemetery or part thereof will be removed by the City. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-17).

2.135.440 Declaration of abandonment – Publication – Title – Contents.
Notice of the declaration of abandonment and the proposed removal of all human remains from any abandoned cemetery, or part thereof, shall be given to all persons interested therein, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city. Publication shall be made once a week for four consecutive times. The notice shall be entitled “Notice of the Declaration of Abandonment of Lands for Cemetery Purposes and of Intention to Remove the Human Bodies Interred Therein” and shall specify a date not less than sixty (60) days after the first publication of the notice when the City owning or controlling the cemetery lands and causing the notice to be published will proceed to remove the human remains then remaining in said cemetery, or part thereof. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-18).

2.135.450 Declaration of abandonment – Posting and mailing copies.
Copies of the notice so published shall within ten days after the first publication thereof be posted in at least three conspicuous places in the cemetery from which the removal of the human remains interred therein are to be made, and a further copy of the notice shall be mailed by registered letter to every person who owns or holds or has the right of burial in any lot or plot in the cemetery, or part thereof, affected by the resolution or declaration of abandonment and removal, whose name appears as owner or controller on the records of the cemetery. The notice so mailed shall be addressed to the last known post office address of the respective lot owner or plot holder as the same appears from the records of the cemetery, and if no address appears or is known, then it shall be addressed to such persons at the County seat of the County of Santa Clara. Notice shall be mailed to any known living heir at law of any person whose remains are interred in the cemetery when the address of the heir is known. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-19).

2.135.460 Removal and reinterment of remains – When authority accrues.
After the completion of the publication, posting and mailing of the “Notice of Declaration of Abandonment of Land for Cemetery Purposes and of Intention to Remove the Human Bodies Interred Therein,” and after the expiration of sixty (60) days as specified in the notice, the City owning or controlling the cemetery shall have power to cause the removal of all human remains interred in the cemetery, or part thereof, to be abandoned as a cemetery or a burial place of the dead, and to cause the reinterment in cemeteries in the city where burials are permitted, without further notice to any persons claiming any interest in the cemetery, or part thereof, or in the remains therein interred. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-20).

2.135.470 Notice to City by friend or relative – Contents – Delivery.
At any time before the date fixed for the removal of remains by the City owning or controlling such cemetery land, any relative or friend of any person whose remains are interred in the cemetery, or part thereof, from which it is proposed to make removal, may give the City proposing to make removal written notice that he/she desires to be present when the remains of a friend or relative are disinterred or reinterred. The notice shall state the name of the person whose remains are referred to and, as accurately as possible, shall describe the lot or plot where the remains are buried and the date of the burial, and shall specify an address to which the notice provided for in SCCC 2.135.480 may be made. Notice may be delivered at the cemetery office or the City Hall, 1500 Warburton Avenue, Santa Clara, California, or may be forwarded thereto by registered mail. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-21).

2.135.480 Notice of time and place of disinterment and reinterment.
Upon receipt of such notice before the date fixed for the removal of the remains by the City proposing to make removals, it shall be the duty of the City to give written notice to the persons giving the notice provided for in SCCC 2.135.470, of the time when the remains shall be disinterred and of the time when and the place where the same shall be reinterred. The notice shall be given by delivery thereof at the address stated in the notice referred to in SCCC 2.135.470, or by mailing the same to the person giving such notice, at the address stated, delivery or mailing to be made not less than ten days prior to the date specified for the disinterment of such remains. Whenever written notice shall be given by a relative or friend of any persons interred in the cemetery lands from which removals are proposed to be made, the City owning or controlling such cemetery lands and proposing to remove the bodies interred therein shall not disinter the bodies until notice of such disinterment is given such relative or friend. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-22).

2.135.490 Voluntary removal of remains – Affidavit – Delivery and contents.
At any time prior to the removal, by the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery lands, of the remains of any persons buried in the abandoned cemetery, any relative or friend of the person may voluntarily remove the remains and deposit the same as he may desire; provided, however, that the persons desiring to cause removal prior to such removal shall deliver to the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery, an affidavit, duly sworn to before an officer qualified to administer oaths, stating the name of the person whose remains it is desired to remove and further stating, so far as known to affiant, the date of burial of the remains and the names and places of residence of the heirs at law of the deceased person. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-23).

2.135.500 Voluntary removal of remains – Consent of heirs.
In the event that the person desiring to cause such removal is not an heir at law of the person whose remains he desires to remove, removal shall not be made by him until he shall have delivered to the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery a written consent of a majority of the known heirs at law of the deceased person who are residents of the State of California. The statements in the affidavit shall be sufficient evidence of the numbers, names and residences of the heirs at law for all the purposes of this chapter and the written consent of the majority of heirs at law named in the affidavit shall be sufficient warrant and authority for the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery to permit the removal of the remains by such persons. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-24).

2.135.510 Removal by owner of burial lot.
The purchaser or owner of any burial lot or plot in the abandoned cemetery, or part thereof, or of the right of burial therein or any one of the joint purchasers of any lot or plot of burial land therein may cause the removal of any person or of the remains interred in such lot or plot without the necessity of signing any affidavit of consent as specified in SCCC 2.135.490. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-25).

2.135.520 Ownership of lot passing by succession – Removal of remains by heirs – Affidavit as evidence.
If the right, title or interest of any grantee of any burial lot or plot of the abandoned cemetery, or the right of burial therein, shall have passed by succession to the heir or heirs at law of the grantee without formal distribution by order of court, the heir or heirs at law may remove the remains of persons interred in such lot or plot, and the affidavit of any heir at law setting out the fact of heirship shall be accepted by the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery land from which removals are to be made as sufficient evidence for all the purposes of this chapter of the fact of the transfer of title or right of burial to such heir or heirs at law. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-26).

2.135.530 Place of reinterment.
Whenever the remains of any person shall have been removed from any abandoned cemetery, or the part thereof abandoned as a burial place under the provisions of this chapter, by the City having charge or control of the abandoned cemetery lands, the remains shall be transported and reinterred in any other cemetery lands within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-27).

2.135.540 Manner of reinterment.
The remains of each person reinterred shall be placed in a separate and suitable receptacle and decently and respectfully interred under the rules and regulations now in force or that may be adopted by resolution of the City making the removal. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-28).

2.135.550 Vaults and other improvements – Removal by relative or friend.
Whenever the remains of any person shall be removed from any abandoned cemetery by any relative or friend of such person, under the provisions of this chapter, the persons causing such removal shall also be entitled to remove any vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement appurtenant to the grave from which the remains have been removed, and the affidavit or written consent given under the provisions of SCCC 2.135.490 shall be sufficient warrant and authority for the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery to permit the removal of any vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement appurtenant to the grave. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-29).

2.135.560 Vaults and other improvements – Removal or disposition by City – Effect.
Whenever the remains of any person buried in any lot or plot shall have been removed, and any vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement appurtenant thereto shall remain on the lot or plot for more than sixty (60) days after removal of the last human remains therefrom, the vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement may be removed and disposed of by the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery land, and thereafter no persons claiming any interest in the lot or plot or the vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement appurtenant thereto, shall have the right to maintain in any court any action in relation to such vault, monument, headstone, coping or other improvement so removed or disposed of. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-30).

2.135.570 Sale of area abandoned – Court order unnecessary.
Whenever a cemetery or part thereof has been abandoned as a cemetery or place of burial for the human dead, as provided in this chapter, by the City owning or controlling the same, the parts or portions thereof in which no interments have been made and the parts and portions thereof from which all human remains have been removed, may be sold by the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery lands. No order of any court shall be required in order to make any sale of lands abandoned for cemetery purposes and from which the human remains have been removed. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-31).

2.135.580 Use of proceeds of sale of abandoned cemeteries.
Any moneys received by the City from the sale of the lands of the abandoned cemetery may be used for any purpose as the City may lawfully declare. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-32).

2.135.590 Conveyance of lots where remains are reinterred.
Whenever the City shall remove human bodies or the remains thereof from any abandoned cemetery lands, the City shall reinter any human remains removed in the established cemetery of City; and thereafter the lots or plots in which the human remains removed have been reinterred shall be conveyed to the person or persons, if known, who own the lot or plot in the abandoned cemetery from which the human remains were removed, and the conveyance shall be in full of all right, title and interest of any person or persons owning any lot or plot in the abandoned cemetery from which the human remains have been removed. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-33).

2.135.600 Conveyances to owners of plots in abandoned cemeteries – Effect.
In the event any person or persons owning any lot or plot within the abandoned cemetery in which no human remains have been interred, the City Council of the City shall convey to such person or persons owning any lot or plot in the abandoned cemetery a lot or plot of equal dimensions in the cemetery owned and conducted by the City, and such conveyance shall be in full of all right, title and interest in and to the lot or plot owned by such person or persons in the abandoned cemetery, and thereafter no person or persons claiming any interest in any such lot or plot shall have the right to maintain in any court an action in relation to such lot or plot owned by such person or persons in the abandoned cemetery. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-34).

2.135.610 Erection of markers on reinterment – Record of reinterment – Preparation, filing and inspection.
After the removal and reinterment of the human bodies disinterred from any abandoned cemetery, or part thereof, the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery lands and making removals shall cause to be erected upon or imbedded in any lot or plot wherein any such body is reinterred, a suitable permanent marker identifying the remains and shall prepare a complete record of the name of each person, where known, whose body was reinterred and the lot or plot in the cemetery where the body was reinterred, and such record shall be kept on file in the office of the City making the removals and reinterments and shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the relatives or friends of those so reinterred. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-35).

2.135.620 Declaration of removal of remains – Filing and acknowledgment – Effect.
After the removal of all human remains interred in any part or the whole of any cemetery lands abandoned as a burial place for the human dead as provided in this chapter, the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery lands may file for record in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, a written declaration reciting that all human remains have been removed from the part or portion of the land described in the declaration. The declaration shall be acknowledged in the manner of the acknowledgment of deeds to real property by the Mayor and the City Clerk or other corresponding officers, of the City owning or controlling the abandoned cemetery lands, and thereafter, any deed or other conveyance of any part of such lands shall be conclusive evidence in favor of any grantee therein named, his/her successors or assigns, of the fact of the complete removal of all human bodies therefrom. (Ord. 1155 § 2, 1-31-67. Formerly § 6-36).

Chapter 2.140
DISASTER COUNCIL
Sections:

2.140.010  Purpose.

2.140.020  Definition.

2.140.030  Membership.

2.140.040  Powers and duties.

2.140.050  Director of Emergency Services.

2.140.060  Powers and duties of the Director of Emergency Services.

2.140.070  Emergency organization.

2.140.080  Emergency plan.

2.140.090  Mutual aid.

2.140.100  Expenditures.

2.140.110  Compensation of volunteers – Official immunity.

2.140.120  Punishment of violations.

Stat. Ref.: For State law authorizing cities to organize Local Disaster Council, see Gov. C.A. § 8610. For State law generally as to civil defense activities of the State, see Gov. C.A. §§ 8550 et seq. For State law as to oath of allegiance for civil defense workers, see Gov. C.A. §§ 3100 – 3109. As to authorization of city to provide for a chief executive for periods of public calamity, see Gov. C.A. § 38791.

2.140.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-1).

2.140.020 Definition.
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-2).

2.140.030 Membership.
The Santa Clara Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

(a) The Mayor, who shall be chairman.

(b) The Director of Emergency Services (City Manager) who shall be vice-chairman.

(c) The members of the City Council, the City Attorney, City Clerk and emergency services coordinator.

(d) The Deputy Director, appointed by the City Manager, who, in the absence of, or at the direction of the Director, shall act on his/her behalf.

(e) Certain service chiefs as selected by the Director of Emergency Services. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-3).

2.140.040 Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the Santa Clara Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his/her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Director of Emergency Services. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-4).

2.140.050 Director of Emergency Services.
(a) There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

(b) There is hereby created the office of Deputy Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director and shall act for the Director when the Director is incapacitated or otherwise unable to carry out his/her duties. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-5).

2.140.060 Powers and duties of the Director of Emergency Services.
The Director or his/her successor as provided in SCCC 2.140.080 is hereby empowered to:

(a) Proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency." City Council is to ratify proclamation within seven days.

(b) Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

(c) Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

(d) Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

(e) Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

(f) In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director is hereby empowered to:

(1) Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;

(2) Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

(3) Require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the declaration of a "state of emergency" in the County in which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster service workers;

(4) Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

(5) Execute all his/her ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all power conferred upon him by any statute, by an agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-6).

2.140.070 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of this City together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of SCCC 2.140.060(f)(3), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-7).

2.140.080 Emergency plan.
The City of Santa Clara Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Santa Clara emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a "local emergency," "state of emergency," or "state of war emergency"; and shall provide for the structure, organization, powers and duties, functions, services, and staff of the Santa Clara emergency organization. The emergency plan will also provide for the order of emergency succession to the position of Director of Emergency Services. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. Succession may also be provided for by adoption of City resolution. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-8).

2.140.090 Mutual aid.
It is the purpose of the City Council in enacting this chapter to facilitate the rendering of mutual aid to and for the people of this City. Emergency plans adopted and approved by the City Council shall provide for the interchange of mutual aid and for coordination with the emergency plans of the County operational area. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-9).

2.140.100 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-10).

2.140.110 Compensation of volunteers – Official immunity.
All persons, other than officers and employees of the City, volunteering services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall serve without compensation from the City. While engaged in such services, they shall have the same immunity as officers and employees of the City performing similar duties. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71. Formerly § 9-11).

2.140.120 Punishment of violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by SCCC 1.05.070, for any person, during an emergency, to:

(a) Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter.

(b) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.

(c) Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. (Ord. 1241 § 1, 4-13-71; Ord. 1531 § 6, 9-17-85. Formerly § 9-12).

Chapter 2.145
RESTRICTIONS ON ACTIVITIES
OF CITY OFFICIALS AND
CERTAIN CITY EMPLOYEES
Sections:

2.145.010    Purpose.

2.145.020    Definitions.

2.145.030    Prohibitions – Post service activities for compensation.

2.145.040    Exceptions.

2.145.050    Applicability.

2.145.060    Waiver.

2.145.070    Sanctions.

2.145.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:

(a) To prevent former City officials and designated City employees from using their influence with the City or agency for personal gain.

(b) To prevent private for-profit business entities from obtaining a real or perceived unfair advantage in dealing with the City or agencies by hiring former City or agency officials and/or designated City employees.

(c) To comply with the City “Code of Ethics and Values.”

(d) To attempt to assure the independence, impartiality and integrity of City and agency officials and designated City employees in making governmental actions and decisions. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00).

2.145.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms below shall have the following meaning:

(a) “Agency official” shall mean, respectively, the Chairperson and agency members of (1) the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Santa Clara (“RDA”), (2) the Sports and Open Space Authority of the City of Santa Clara (“SOSA”), (3) the City of Santa Clara Housing Authority (“HA”) and (4) the Santa Clara Stadium Authority (“SA”). The RDA, SOSA, HA and SA may be referred to individually or collectively as “agency” as the context indicates.

(b) “City official” shall mean the Mayor and City Council members.

(c) “Commission” shall mean any body (commission, board, etc.) created by the City Charter, City Code or action of the City Council whose members are required to file statements of economic interest pursuant to the State Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Section 81000 et seq.)

(d) “Commission official” shall mean any member of a City commission.

(e) “Designated City employee” shall be those City employees designated from time to time by the City Manager as subject to the provisions of this chapter. Annually, the City Manager will provide the City Council with a list of designated City employees.

(f) “Nonprofit organization” shall mean an entity which would qualify as such under the Federal Internal Revenue Code and has engaged in programs or projects which have received financial or other formal support from the City Council or agency board within the past five years.

(g) “Transitional services” shall mean services involving technical or specialized knowledge required to complete a project or to provide temporary consulting services to the City or agency.

(h) “Work” shall mean any activity, for which compensation is received from any source, including compensation received as an independent contractor. Work includes the supervision or direction of others performing work, except as provided in SCCC 2.145.050. Work for the City or an agency also includes any action of any sort whatsoever taken in one’s official capacity. Service by a City or an agency official or designated City employee on any type of board, committee, subcommittee or similar body as a representative of the City or agency is deemed to be work for the City or an agency. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00; Ord. 1884 § 1, 4-19-11).

2.145.030 Prohibitions – Post service activities for compensation.
Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, for one year immediately following the termination of City, agency or commission office or employment, former City officials, agency officials, commission officials (collectively referred to as “affected City official(s)”) and designated City employees shall not, for compensation:

(a) Work on any matter which the affected City official or designated City employee previously worked on for the City.

(b) Represent anyone else before the City Council, a City agency, a City commission or staff of the City.

(c) Receive any gift or payment in excess of the amount determined from time to time by the Fair Political Practices Commission from any person who was, in any way, involved in or affected by the work of the affected City official or designated City employee. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00).

2.145.040 Exceptions.
The following work shall not be subject to the prohibitions of SCCC 2.145.030:

(a) As an employee or volunteer of a nonprofit organization, as defined in SCCC 2.145.020(f).

(b) As an employee of a governmental entity.

(c) As an employee pursuant to City Charter Section 802 which, subject to the civil service provisions of the City Charter, grants authority to the City Manager to make personnel appointments.

(d) As an independent contractor of the City or agency where it has been determined that it is in the best interest of the City or agency to retain the former affected City official or City employee to provide transitional services. Such determination shall be made by the person or body authorized to enter into such a contract. In the independent contractor situation, the City or agency shall contract directly with the former affected City official or City employee. The rate of compensation for such services shall not exceed the former official or employee’s rate of pay, including benefits, at the time City or agency service terminated. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00).

2.145.050 Applicability.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent a former affected City official or designated City employee from testifying as a percipient witness in any legal proceeding.

(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent a former affected City official or designated City employee from working as a supervisor of a person or persons performing work that would be prohibited by this chapter, so long as the supervisor is screened from any personal participation in the work and receives no part of the fee therefrom. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00).

2.145.060 Waiver.
The City Council, RDA, SOSA, HA or SA may waive the prohibitions of SCCC 2.145.030, upon full disclosure of the facts surrounding the proposed activity, if the City Council, RDA, SOSA, HA or SA finds that such waiver is in the best interest of the City or agency and that such waiver is not inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter as set forth in SCCC 2.145.010. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00; Ord. 1884 § 2, 4-19-11).

2.145.070 Sanctions.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this Code, the following sanctions shall also apply to any violations of this chapter where appropriate:

(a) Upon the petition of any person, a court or the presiding officer of any proceeding shall, after providing notice and an opportunity for hearing, exclude any person found to be in violation of this chapter from further participation, or from assisting or counseling any other participant, in the matter then pending before such court or body.

(b) The City or agency shall be entitled to recover from any former City or agency official or designated City employee the monetary value of any compensation or thing of value provided to such person in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1755 § 2, 7-18-00).

Chapter 2.150
PAYMENT OF PREVAILING WAGES
Sections:

2.150.010    Payment of prevailing wages.

2.150.010 Payment of prevailing wages.
Where the City enters into a contract which provides for the purchase of supplies, equipment, or services, where such supplies, equipment, or services are being purchased in connection with a “public works project,” as defined in Section 1720 and Section 1782(d)(l) of the California Labor Code, such contract shall provide for the payment of prevailing wages required by Section 1771 of the California Labor Code. (Ord. 1932 § 1, 12-9-14).

Chapter 2.155
REGULATION OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES
Sections:

2.155.010    Interpretation.

2.155.020    Definitions.

2.155.030    Registration.

2.155.040    Annual registration renewal.

2.155.050    Termination of lobbyist status.

2.155.060    Active status.

2.155.070    Registration fees.

2.155.080    Required registration information.

2.155.090    Semi-annual reports.

2.155.100    Records retention.

2.155.110    Lobbyist identification.

2.155.120    Prohibitions.

2.155.130    Gifts.

2.155.140    Enforcement.

2.155.150    Injunction.

2.155.160    Practice restrictions.

2.155.170    Exemptions.

2.155.010 Interpretation.
Unless the term is specifically defined in this chapter or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions set forth in Government Code Section 81000 et seq., shall govern the interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:

(a) “Activity expense” means any payment made by a lobbyist to or directly benefiting any City official, City official-elect or member of his or her immediate family. Activity expenses include gifts, honoraria, consulting fees, salaries and any other form of compensation, but do not include campaign contributions.

(b) “Administrative action” means the proposal, drafting, development, consideration, advocacy or recommendation of any rule, regulation, agreement or contract, permit, license or hiring action.

(c) “City official” means any public official, legislative staff member or City employee who participates in the consideration of any legislative or administrative action other than in a purely clerical, secretarial or ministerial capacity. It shall also include any City board or commission member, or City representative to any joint powers authority to which the City is a party, and any consultant to the City.

(d) “Client” means a person who is represented by a lobbyist.

(e) “Compensation” includes, but is not limited to, money of any denomination or origin; goods or services or anything of value, delivered or rendered; or promises to perform or provide services or contractual arrangements or awards.

(f) “Gift” means gift as defined in the California Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 81000 et seq., as amended from time to time.

(g) “Influencing” means the purposeful communication, either directly or through agents, promoting, supporting, modifying, opposing, causing the delay or abandonment of conduct, or otherwise intentionally affecting the behavior of a City official or official-elect, by any means, including, but not limited to, providing or using persuasion, information, incentives, statistics, studies or analyses; excepted from this definition is communication made as a part of a noticed governmental public meeting.

(h) “Legislative action” means the drafting, introduction, consideration, modification, enactment or defeat of any resolution, ordinance, amendment thereto, report, nomination or other action of the Mayor, City Council, Santa Clara Stadium Authority, City of Santa Clara Housing Authority, any other joint powers authority of which the City is a party, or City board or commission, acting in its official capacity.

(i) “Lobbying” is the influencing or attempting to influence a legislative or administrative action of the City.

(j) “Lobbyist,” unless exempt under subsection (k) of this section, means:

(1) Contract Lobbyist. A person who engages in lobbying on behalf of one or more clients (acting individually or through agents, associates, employees or contractors) and who has received or has entered into an agreement for compensation of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or equivalent nonmonetary compensation (“threshold compensation”) for engaging in lobbying during any consecutive three-month period;

(2) Business or Organization Lobbyist. Any business or organization, whose owner(s), officer(s) or employee(s) carry out lobbying on its behalf, in an aggregate amount of ten hours or more within any consecutive twelve (12)-month period, whether or not such officers or employees are specifically compensated to engage in lobbying; provided, that the activities of officers shall be considered lobbying only if those officers receive compensation by the business or organization beyond reimbursement for their reasonable travel, meals or incidental expenses; or

(3) Expenditure Lobbyist. A person who makes payments or incurs expenditures of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more during any calendar year in connection with carrying out public relations, advertising or similar activities with the intent of soliciting or urging, directly or indirectly, other persons to communicate directly with any City official in order to attempt to influence legislative or administrative action. The five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) threshold shall not include: (A) compensation paid to contract lobbyists or employees for lobbying; or (B) dues payments, donations, or other economic consideration paid to an organization, regardless of whether the dues payments, donations or other economic consideration are used in whole or in part to lobby.

(k) Exemptions to “lobbyist” include:

(1) Any public official acting in his or her official capacity or acting within the scope of his or her employment or appointment;

(2) The media, when limiting its action to the ordinary course of news gathering or editorial activity, as carried out by members of the press. “Media” shall mean newspapers or any other regularly published periodical, radio or television station or network or information published on the Internet;

(3) Persons reimbursed for only their reasonable travel, meals or incidental expenses, including, but not limited to, uncompensated members or directors of nonprofit organizations, such as chambers of commerce;

(4) Persons whose communications regarding any legislative or administrative action are limited to appearing or submitting testimony at any public meeting held by the City or any of its agencies, offices, or departments, as long as the communications thereto are public records available for public review. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons who otherwise qualify as lobbyists must register and disclose their lobbying activities directed toward City officials, in the same manner and to the same extent such registration and disclosure is required of all other lobbyists;

(5) Persons submitting bids or responding to requests for proposals, provided the provision of such information is limited to direct conversation or correspondence with the official or department specifically designated to receive such information;

(6) Persons providing oral or written information pursuant to a subpoena or otherwise compelled by law or regulation, or in response to an official request; provided, that the request and response thereto are public records available for public review;

(7) Designated representatives of a recognized employee organization whose activities are limited to communicating with City officials or their representatives regarding (A) wages, hours and other terms or conditions of employment, or (B) the administration, implementation or interpretation of an existing employment agreement;

(8) Persons who are professionally licensed by a State licensing organization pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code, including, but not limited to, attorneys, architects and engineers; provided however, the exemption for attorneys shall only be applicable if the attorney is engaged in the practice of law with respect to the subject of the employment;

(9) Board members or employees of nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporations, unless the nonprofit organization is lobbying for a specific project, issue or person for which the organization has received compensation or a contribution to lobby for or against a specific project, issue or person; or

(10) Members of neighborhood associations.

(l) “Organization” means any person that is not an individual.

(m) “Person” means any individual, domestic or foreign corporation, for-profit or nonprofit entity, firm, association, syndicate, union, chamber of commerce, joint-stock company, partnership of any kind, limited liability company, common-law trust, society, or any other group of persons acting in concert. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.030 Registration.
Lobbyists shall register with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after qualifying as a lobbyist under SCCC 2.155.020. Should a lobbyist have a change to its registration information, including, but not limited to, the legislative or administrative action for the City as to which the lobbyist has been engaged, after the annual registration period, such lobbyist shall file an amended registration with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of such change with the changed information. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.040 Annual registration renewal.
A lobbyist shall renew his or her registration by January 15th of each year unless he or she has terminated their status as a lobbyist pursuant to SCCC 2.155.050 by such date. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.050 Termination of lobbyist status.
After initial registration, annual registration renewal will not be required if a declaration attesting to the termination of lobbying services within the city has been filed with the City Clerk no later than January 15th. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.060 Active status.
All registrations, renewals and terminations will be deemed filed on the date received by the City Clerk. A lobbyist shall be deemed active for the duration of the year of registration ending December 31st, unless a declaration attesting to termination of lobbying services within the city is filed. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.070 Registration fees.
Persons subject to the registration requirements of this chapter shall pay an annual fee set by resolution of the City Council. Persons registering for the first time after June 30th of a given year shall pay a reduced registration fee set by resolution of the City Council.

(a) The applicable registration fee is due at the time of registration or registration renewal. Payment will be deemed delinquent thereafter. Delinquency fees may be assessed as specified in subsection (c) of this section, if payment occurs after the due date.

(b) In addition to the annual fee, each registrant shall pay a fee set by resolution of the City Council per client for whom lobbying is undertaken for compensation in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The fees for clients as of the date of initial registration shall be submitted with the registration. The fees for subsequent clients shall be due and submitted within fifteen (15) days of such change with the changed information pursuant to SCCC 2.155.030.

(c) A fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for delinquent fees, up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), will be assessed until in compliance with the registration provisions herein. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.080 Required registration information.
The initial registration shall contain the name, business address, telephone, email addresses and, if applicable, business license of all persons required to register pursuant to this chapter, including the names of all owners of sole proprietorships and partnerships of fewer than ten persons. If the registrant is a corporation, it shall also include the names of the president, secretary, chief financial officer, and agent for service of process, if any. Any business or organization registering under this act shall also briefly describe the nature of its business or organization and contact individual. In addition to this information, the report shall contain the following:

(a) Contract Lobbyists. The name, business address, telephone number of each client, the nature of each client’s business and the item(s) of legislative or administrative action the lobbyist is seeking to influence on behalf of the client; and the name of each person employed or retained by the lobbyist to lobby on behalf of each client.

(b) Business or Organization Lobbyists. The names of owners, officers or employees conducting lobbying activities and the item(s) of legislative or administrative action the lobbyist is seeking to influence.

(c) Expenditure Lobbyists. The item(s) of municipal legislative or administrative action the lobbyist is seeking to influence.

(d) Payment received by the reporting lobbyist for services as a consultant or in any other capacity for services rendered to a City agency, any City official or any City official-elect or their controlled committees, any officeholder committee, or ballot measure committee. The dates of payment and name of each payer shall be included.

(e) The name, address, title and telephone number of the person responsible for preparing the report, together with that individual’s signature attesting to the authority of the signatory and the accuracy and truthfulness of the information submitted. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.090 Semi-annual reports.
Semi-annual reports for the prior six-month period are to be filed with the City Clerk on or before July 15th and January 15th of each year, whether or not any lobbying activities have occurred during such period. Electronic reporting may also be permitted by the City Clerk. Each semi-annual report shall contain the same information as required to be disclosed in the initial registration, for those activities occurring in that period. If a lobbyist has terminated all lobbying activities during such period, the lobbyist may file a declaration of termination with the semi-annual report. The final semi-annual report shall include disclosure of any lobbying activities during the period of termination. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.100 Records retention.
All information, reports and statements required to be filed under the provisions of this chapter shall be compiled and preserved by the City pursuant to the City’s records retention schedule and shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the records pertaining to the above-required reports shall be preserved by the lobbyist for inspection and audit for a period of four years from date of production. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.110 Lobbyist identification.
When appearing in a lobbying capacity at any meeting with a City official or at a public meeting of the City Council or any other City board, commission or hearing, a contract lobbyist shall identify himself/herself and the client(s) on whose behalf he/she is appearing, and a business or organization lobbyist shall identify himself/herself and the business or organization he/she represents. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.120 Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any lobbyist to commit any of the following acts:

(a) Unregistered Lobbying. Acting as a lobbyist in the city without having registered in compliance with this chapter, or knowingly to employ a person or entity to serve as a lobbyist when such person is not registered pursuant to this chapter.

(b) Unauthorized Communications. Sending or causing any communication to be sent to any City official in the name of any nonexistent person or in the name of an existing person without the express or implied consent of such person.

(c) Indirect Violations. Attempting to evade the requirements of this chapter through indirect efforts or through the use of agents, associates, intermediaries or employees.

(d) Creation of Obligations. Performing or sponsoring any act with the purpose and intent of placing any City official under personal obligation to the lobbyist.

(e) Contingent Compensation. Compensation for lobbying activity when the compensation is directly dependent on the result of legislative or administrative action(s) that are the subject of the lobbying activity. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.130 Gifts.
It shall be unlawful for any lobbyist to deliver or cause to be delivered any gift to any City official, and for any City official to accept any gift from a lobbyist. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.140 Enforcement.
Persons or entities that knowingly violate this chapter may be subject to penalties as set forth in SCCC 1.05.070. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.150 Injunction.
The City Attorney may seek injunctive relief in the courts to enjoin violations of or to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.160 Practice restrictions.
No person convicted of a violation of this chapter may act as a lobbyist or otherwise attempt to influence municipal legislation for compensation for one year after such conviction. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

2.155.170 Exemptions.
Any person who in good faith and on reasonable grounds believes that he or she is not required to comply with the provisions of SCCC 2.155.030 by reason of his or her being exempt under SCCC 2.155.020(k) shall not be deemed to have violated the provisions of SCCC 2.155.030 if, within fifteen (15) days after notice from the City, he or she either complies or furnishes satisfactory evidence to the City that he or she is exempt from registration. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1-12-16).

Chapter 2.160
CALENDARS OF CERTAIN CITY OFFICIALS
Sections:

2.160.010    Calendars to be maintained.

2.160.010 Calendars to be maintained.
(a) The Mayor, members of the City Council, Chief of Police, City Clerk, City Manager, City Attorney, Assistant City Manager(s), Deputy City Manager(s), City department heads and any additional persons in management positions that are considered part of the City’s executive management team shall maintain a monthly City calendar.

(b) The calendar shall include all scheduled noninternal City-related appointments, meetings, including regular and special City Council meetings, public events or speaking arrangements, meetings with citizens, developers, union representatives, consultants, lobbyists, regional meetings and meetings of subcommittees or task forces (collectively, “constituents”). The Mayor and members of the City Council shall also include all nonscheduled City-related meetings or discussions with constituents.

(c) Each noninternal City-related appointment must include the following information: name(s), title(s), and affiliated organization(s) and a general statement of the issues discussed. The following information shall be exempted:

(1) Personal appointments, including personal business appointments;

(2) Information protected by the attorney-client privilege;

(3) Information about attorney work product;

(4) Information about City staff recruitment;

(5) Information about a personnel issue;

(6) Site specific information regarding corporate recruiting and retention;

(7) Information about criminal investigations and security;

(8) Information about whistle blowers;

(9) Information about those who may fear retaliation;

(10) Information about those seeking guidance regarding the City’s campaign and election processes; and

(11) Information that is otherwise prohibited from disclosure.

(d) The calendars of the officials in subsection (a) of this section shall be a public record subject to inspection during normal business hours. The Mayor, City Council members, City Manager, City Clerk, Chief of Police and City Attorney shall publish their calendars to the City’s website on the tenth business day of each month and shall reflect the schedules of the previous month.

(e) A record of compliance with this chapter by the City officials included in subsection (a) of this section shall be maintained; provided, that violations of this chapter shall not be a basis for any criminal prosecution or disciplinary action. (Ord. 1950 § 1, 1-12-16).

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.05    Assessment and Collection of Property Taxes

3.10    Uniform Sales and Use Tax

3.15    Dwelling Unit Tax

3.20    Minimum Wage Ordinance

3.25    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.30    Utility Service Excise Tax

3.35    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.40    Business Tax

3.45    Insurance Program Bond Law

3.50    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.55    Enforcement of Title

Charter reference – Authority of City regarding taxation generally, § 1306.

Chapter 3.05
ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF PROPERTY TAXES* (Reserved)
*Code reviser's note: Pursuant to Section 1306 of the Charter, the City has contracted with the County for the assessment and collection of property taxes. No ordinance was enacted relative to this subject.

Chapter 3.10
UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.10.010  Short title.

3.10.020  Rate.

3.10.030  Operative dates and terms.

3.10.040  Purpose.

3.10.050  Contract with State.

3.10.060  Sales tax.

3.10.070  Place of sale.

3.10.080  Use tax.

3.10.090  Adoption of provisions of State law.

3.10.100  Limitations on adoption of State law.

3.10.110  Permit not required.

3.10.120  Exclusions and exemptions.

3.10.130  Exclusions and exemptions.

3.10.140  Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

3.10.150  Amendments.

3.10.160  Enjoining collection forbidden.

Stat. Ref.: Sales and use taxes generally, Rev. & Tax. C.A. §§ 6001 – 7176; Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax, Rev. & Tax. C.A. §§ 7200 – 7207.

3.10.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-1).

3.10.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73; Ord. 1522 § 1, 3-12-85. Formerly § 27-2).

3.10.030 Operative dates and terms.
This chapter shall be operative for all purposes on January 1, 1974, and shall become inoperative for the sole purpose of imposing sales and use taxes thereafter, as distinguished from its other purposes including providing a procedure and mechanism for enforcement of this chapter and collection of taxes imposed pursuant thereto, each time that a Santa Clara County uniform local sales and use tax ordinance becomes inoperative, and concurrently therewith. No change in the operative effect of this chapter shall affect any tax indebtedness previously incurred or the procedure prescribed for its collection. All provisions of this chapter, other than those imposing sales and use taxes, shall not become inoperative. This chapter shall be operative in all respects at all such times that the County of Santa Clara has an operative local sales and use tax ordinance complying with the "Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law." (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73; Ord. 1376 § 2, 6-27-78. Formerly § 27-3).

3.10.040 Purpose.
The City Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(a) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Division 2, Part 1.5 (entitled "Uniform Local Sales and Use Taxes"), Section 7200 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(b) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Division 2, Part 1.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(c) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;

(d) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Division 2, Part 1.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-4).

3.10.050 Contract with State.
Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-5).

3.10.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in SCCC 3.10.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-6).

3.10.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-7).

3.10.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in SCCC 3.10.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-8).

3.10.090 Adoption of provisions of State law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Division 2, Part 1.5 (entitled "Uniform Local Sales and Use Taxes"), Section 7200 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Division 2, Part 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-9).

3.10.100 Limitations on adoption of State law.
In adopting the provisions of Division 2, Part 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Division 2, Part 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-10).

3.10.110 Permit not required.
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-11).

3.10.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

(a) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

(b) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Division 2, Part 1.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this State.

(c) The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels, principally outside this City.

(d) The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-12).

3.10.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
(a) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

(b) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Division 2, Part 1.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

(c) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

(d) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

(e) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

(f) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73; Ord. 1488 § 2, 12-13-83. Formerly § 27-13).

3.10.140 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
(a) SCCC 3.10.130 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time SCCC 3.10.120 shall become inoperative.

(b) In the event that SCCC 3.10.130 becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the State-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, SCCC 3.10.120 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time SCCC 3.10.130 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time SCCC 3.10.130 shall again become operative and SCCC 3.10.120 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-14).

3.10.150 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Division 2, Part 1.5 (entitled "Uniform Local Sales and Use Taxes"), Section 7200 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-14.1).

3.10.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Division 2, Part 1.5 (entitled "Uniform Local Sales and Use Taxes"), Section 7200 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 10-9-73. Formerly § 27-14.2).

Chapter 3.15
DWELLING UNIT TAX
Sections:

3.15.010  Authority.

3.15.020  Levied.

3.15.030  When payable.

3.15.040  Definitions.

3.15.050  Capital outlay recreational fund.

3.15.010 Authority.
The City Council hereby declares that the fees required to be paid pursuant to this chapter are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the City and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. (Ord. 1080; Ord. 1216 § 1, 8-5-69. Formerly § 27-15).

3.15.020 Levied.
Every person constructing any structure containing a dwelling unit, or more than one dwelling unit, in the City of Santa Clara shall pay to the City the following fees: the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each dwelling unit containing not more than one bedroom and the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each additional bedroom contained therein; provided, however, that in no event shall the total fees for any dwelling unit exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1080; Ord. 1216 § 1, 8-5-69. Formerly § 27-16).

3.15.030 When payable.
Such fees shall be due and payable upon application to the City for a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event the building permit is not approved, or is not used, for such construction. (Ord. 1080; Ord. 1216 § 1, 8-5-69. Formerly § 27-17).

3.15.040 Definitions.
(a) As used herein the term "person" means as defined in SCCC 1.05.020 and includes every person constructing a dwelling unit itself, or through the services of any employee, agent, or independent contractor.

(b) As used herein the term "dwelling unit" includes each single-family dwelling and each unit of an apartment, duplex or multiple dwelling structure designed as a separate habitation for one or more persons. (Ord. 1080; Ord. 1216 § 1, 8-5-69. Formerly § 27-18).

3.15.050 Capital outlay recreational fund.
All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the capital outlay recreational fund and shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of public park, playground and/or recreational facilities in the vicinity of such dwelling units. (Ord. 1080; Ord. 1216 § 1, 8-5-69. Formerly § 27-19).

Chapter 3.20
MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE
Sections:

3.20.010    Title.

3.20.020    Authority.

3.20.030    Definitions.

3.20.040    Minimum wage.

3.20.050    Waiver through collective bargaining.

3.20.060    Notice, posting and payroll records.

3.20.070    Retaliation prohibited.

3.20.080    Implementation.

3.20.090    Enforcement.

3.20.100    Relationship to other requirements.

3.20.110    Application of minimum wage to welfare-to-work programs.

3.20.120    Fees.

3.20.130    Repealed.

3.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the minimum wage chapter of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.020 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers vested in the City of Santa Clara under the laws and Constitution of the State of California including, but not limited to, the police powers vested in the City pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Section 1205(b) of the California Labor Law. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.030 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) “City” shall mean City of Santa Clara or any agency designated by the City to administer the terms of this chapter.

(b) “Employee” shall mean any person who:

(1) In a calendar week performs at least two hours of work for an employer as defined below.

(2) Qualifies as an employee entitled to payment of a minimum wage from any employer under the California minimum wage law, as provided under Section 1197 of the California Labor Code and wage orders published by the California Industrial Welfare Commission, or is a participant in a welfare-to-work program.

(c) “Employer” shall mean any person, including corporate officers or executives, as defined in Section 18 of the California Labor Code, who directly or indirectly through any other person, including through the services of a temporary employment agency, staffing agency or similar entity, employs or exercises control over the wages, hours or working conditions of any employee and who is either subject to Chapter 3.40 SCCC or maintains a facility in the City.

(d) “Governmental agencies” shall include federal agencies, State agencies, school districts and auxiliary organizations as defined under Education Code Sections 72670(c) and 89901. “Governmental agency” does not include the City of Santa Clara.

(e) “Minimum wage” shall have the meaning set forth in SCCC 3.20.040.

(f) “Welfare-to-work program” shall mean the CalWORKS Program, County Adult Assistance Program (CAAP) which includes the Personal Assisted Employment Services (PAES) Program, and General Assistance Program, and any successor programs that are substantially similar to them. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.040 Minimum wage.
(a) Employers shall pay employees no less than the minimum wage set forth in this section for each hour worked within the geographic boundaries of the City of Santa Clara. Governmental agencies are exempt from the minimum wage requirements under the principle of governmental immunity when the work performed is related to the agency’s governmental function.

(b) Effective January 1, 2017, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of eleven dollars and ten cents ($11.10). Effective January 1, 2018, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of thirteen dollars ($13.00). On January 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00), except when these scheduled increases are temporarily suspended under subsection (g) of this section. To prevent inflation from eroding its value, beginning on January 1, 2020, and each January 1st thereafter, the minimum wage shall increase by an amount corresponding to the increase, if any, in the cost of living. The prior year’s increase in the cost of living shall be measured by the percentage increase, if any, as of August of the preceding year of the Bay Area Consumer Price Index (Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA for All Items) or its successor index as published by the U.S. Department of Labor or its successor agency, with the amount of the minimum wage increase rounded to the nearest multiple of five cents ($0.05). If there is no net increase in the cost of living, the minimum wage shall remain unchanged for that year. Cost of living increases to the minimum wage shall not exceed five percent. The adjusted minimum wage shall be announced by October 1st of each year, and shall become effective as the new minimum wage on January 1st of the following year.

(c) Commissions or guaranteed gratuities, not including discretionary tips, may be counted toward payment of the minimum wage when the commissions or guaranteed gratuities are earned and paid together with other compensation paid to an employee and are equal to or greater than the current minimum wage. For each pay period, employers shall pay the employee an amount that equals or exceeds the current hourly minimum wage.

(d) The employer may offset a portion of the minimum wage for housing and meal costs only if the offsets are the same as those available under the California minimum wage law. The offsets shall only be recognized if there is a prior voluntary agreement between the employer and the employee.

(e) A violation for unlawfully failing to pay the minimum wage shall be deemed to continue from the date immediately following the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date immediately preceding the date the wages are paid in full.

(f) On or before September 1, 2017, and on or before every September 1st thereafter until the minimum wage is fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour, to ensure that economic conditions can support a minimum wage increase, the City Manager or his/her designee shall annually make a determination and certify to the City Council whether each condition below is met:

(1) Total Nonfarm Employment for California, Seasonally Adjusted, Decreased over the Three-Month Period from April to June, Inclusive, Prior to the September 1st Determination. This calculation shall compare seasonally adjusted total nonfarm employment in June to seasonally adjusted total nonfarm employment in March, as reported by the Employment Development Department.

(2) Total Nonfarm Employment for California, Seasonally Adjusted, Decreased over the Six-Month Period from January to June, Inclusive, Prior to the September 1st Determination. This calculation shall compare seasonally adjusted total nonfarm employment in June to seasonally adjusted total nonfarm employment in December, as reported by the Employment Development Department.

(3) California State retail sales and use tax cash receipts from a 3.9375 percent tax rate for the July 1st to June 30th, inclusive, period ending one month prior to the September 1st determination are less than retail sales and use tax cash receipts from a 3.9375 percent tax rate for the July 1st to June 30th, inclusive, period ending fourteen (14) months prior to the September 1st determination. The calculation for the condition specified in this subsection shall be made by the City Manager or designee using data posted online by the State Board of Equalization, following the procedure specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 1182.12 of the California Labor Code as follows:

(i) The State Board of Equalization shall publish by the 10th of each month on its Internet Web site the total retail sales (sales before adjustments) for the prior month derived from their daily retail sales and use tax reports.

(ii) The State Board of Equalization shall publish by the 10th of each month on its Internet Web site the monthly factor required to convert the prior month’s retail sales and use tax total from all tax rates to a retail sales and use tax total from a 3.9375-percent tax rate.

(iii) The Department of Finance shall multiply the monthly total from clause (i) by the monthly factor from clause (ii) for each month.

(iv) The Department of Finance shall sum the monthly totals calculated in clause (iii) to calculate the 12-month July 1 to June 30, inclusive, totals needed for the comparison in this subparagraph.

(g) If, for any year, the condition in either subsection (f)(1) or (2) of this section is met, and if the condition in subsection (f)(3) of this section is met, the City Council may, on or before October 1st of that year, make a determination to temporarily suspend the minimum wage increase scheduled for the following year.

(h) If the City Council makes a determination to temporarily suspend the scheduled minimum wage increases for the following year, all dates specified in subsection (b) of this section that are subsequent to the October 1st determination date shall be postponed by an additional year. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.050 Waiver through collective bargaining.
To the extent required by federal law, all or any portion of the applicable requirements of this chapter may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement; provided, that such waiver is explicitly set forth in such agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.060 Notice, posting and payroll records.
(a) By January 1st of each year, the City shall publish and make available to employers a bulletin announcing the adjusted minimum wage rate for the upcoming year, which shall take effect on January 1st. In conjunction with this bulletin, the City shall by January 1st, or as soon as practicable thereafter, of each year publish and make available to employers, in the top three languages spoken in the City based on the latest available census information for the City, a notice suitable for posting by employers in the workplace informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under this chapter.

(b) Every employer shall post in a conspicuous place at any workplace or job site where any employee works the notice published each year by the office informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under this chapter. Every employer shall post such notices in the top three languages spoken in the City based on the latest available census information for the City at the workplace or job site. Every employer shall also provide each employee at the time of hire with the employer’s name, address, and telephone number in writing.

(c) Employers shall retain payroll records pertaining to employees for a period of four years, and shall allow the City access to such records, with appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time, to monitor compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Where an employer does not maintain or retain adequate records documenting wages paid or does not allow the City reasonable access to such records, the employee’s account of how much he or she was paid shall be presumed to be accurate, absent clear and convincing evidence otherwise. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.070 Retaliation prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for an employer or any other party to discriminate in any manner or take adverse action against any person in retaliation for exercising rights protected under this chapter. Rights protected under this chapter include, but are not limited to: the right to file a complaint or inform any person about any party’s alleged noncompliance with this chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights under this chapter and to assist him or her in asserting such rights. Protection of this chapter shall apply to any person who mistakenly, but in good faith, alleges noncompliance with this chapter.

(b) Taking adverse action against a person within ninety (90) days of the person’s exercise of rights protected under this chapter shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of such rights. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.080 Implementation.
(a) Guidelines. The City shall be authorized to coordinate implementation and enforcement of this chapter and may promulgate appropriate guidelines or rules for such purposes. Any guidelines or rules promulgated by the City shall have the force and effect of law and may be relied on by employers, employees and other parties to determine their rights and responsibilities under this chapter. Any guidelines or rules may establish procedures for ensuring fair, efficient and cost-effective implementation of this chapter, including supplementary procedures for helping to inform employees of their rights under this chapter, for monitoring employer compliance with this chapter, and for providing administrative hearings to determine whether an employer or other person has violated the requirements of this chapter.

(b) Reporting Violations. An employee or any other person may report to the City in writing any suspected violation of this chapter. The City shall encourage reporting pursuant to this subsection by keeping confidential, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws, the name and other identifying information of the employee or person reporting the violation; provided, however, that with the authorization of such person, the City may disclose his or her name and identifying information as necessary to enforce this chapter or other employee protection laws. In order to further encourage reporting by employees, if the City notifies an employer that the City is investigating a complaint, the City shall require the employer to post or otherwise notify its employees that the City is conducting an investigation, using a form provided by the City.

(c) Investigation. The City shall be responsible for investigating any possible violations of this chapter by an employer or other person. The City shall have the authority to inspect workplaces, interview persons and request the City Attorney to subpoena books, papers, records, or other items relevant to the enforcement of this chapter.

(d) Informal Resolution. The City shall make every effort to resolve complaints informally, in a timely manner, and shall have a policy that the City shall take no more than one year to resolve any matter, before initiating an enforcement action. The failure of the City to meet these timelines within one year shall not be grounds for closure or dismissal of the complaint. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.090 Enforcement.
(a) Where prompt compliance is not forthcoming, the City shall take any appropriate enforcement action to secure compliance. All remedies in the SCCC are considered cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing these provisions.

(1) The City may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.10 SCCC with a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or portion thereof and for each employee or person as to whom the violation occurred or continued. The Council may modify the fine amount by resolution.

(2) Alternatively, the City may initiate a proceeding under Chapter 1.05 SCCC by issuing a compliance order.

(3) The City may initiate a civil action for injunctive relief and damages and civil penalties in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(b) Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter, any entity a member of which is aggrieved by a violation of this chapter, or any other person or entity acting on behalf of the public as provided for under applicable State law may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against the employer or other person violating this chapter and, upon prevailing, shall be awarded reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs and shall be entitled to such legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate to remedy the violation, including, without limitation, the payment of any back wages unlawfully withheld, the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter were violated for each day that the violation occurred or continued, reinstatement in employment and/or injunctive relief; provided, however, that any person or entity enforcing this chapter on behalf of the public as provided for under applicable State law shall, upon prevailing, be entitled only to equitable, injunctive or restitutionary relief to employees, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.

(c) This section shall not be construed to limit an employee’s right to bring legal action for a violation of any other laws concerning wages, hours, or other standards or rights nor shall exhaustion of remedies under this chapter be a prerequisite to the assertion of any right.

(d) Except where prohibited by State or federal law, City agencies or departments may revoke or suspend any registration certificates, permits or licenses held or requested by the employer until such time as the violation is remedied.

(e) Relief. The remedies for violation of this chapter include but are not limited to:

(1) Reinstatement, the payment of back wages unlawfully withheld, and the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this Code or State law.

(2) Interest on all due and unpaid wages at the rate of interest specified in Subdivision (b) of Section 3289 of the California Civil Code, which shall accrue from the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date the wages are paid in full.

(3) Reimbursement of the City’s administrative costs of enforcement and reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.100 Relationship to other requirements.
This chapter provides for payment of a local minimum wage and shall not be construed to preempt or otherwise limit or affect the applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard that provides for payment of higher or supplemental wages or benefits, or that extends other protections. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.110 Application of minimum wage to welfare-to-work programs.
The minimum wage established pursuant to SCCC 3.20.040(b) shall apply to the welfare-to-work programs under which persons must perform work in exchange for receipt of benefits. Participants in welfare-to-work programs shall not, during a given benefits period, be required to work more than a number of hours equal to the value of all cash benefits received during that period, divided by the minimum wage. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.120 Fees.
Nothing herein shall preclude the City Council from imposing a cost recovery fee on all employers to pay the cost of administering this chapter. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. 1969 § 1, 8-22-17).

3.20.130 Amendment by the City Council.
Repealed by Ord. 1969. (Ord. 1943 § 1, 9-22-15).

Chapter 3.25
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.25.010    Title.

3.25.020    Definitions.

3.25.030    Tax imposed.

3.25.040    Exemptions.

3.25.050    Operator’s duties to collect and pay tax.

3.25.060    Remitting and reporting requirements upon cessation of business.

3.25.070    Successor liability.

3.25.080    Operator’s duty to register.

3.25.090    Operator’s duty to report and remit.

3.25.100    Interest and penalties.

3.25.110    Interest and calculation.

3.25.120    Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by Director of Finance.

3.25.130    Appeal from decisions of Director of Finance to the City Council.

3.25.140    Operator’s duty to maintain and preserve records.

3.25.150    Refunds.

3.25.160    Actions to collect taxes and enforcement of fines.

3.25.170    Reserved.

3.25.180    Director of Finance’s regulations and enforcement authority.

3.25.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the transient occupancy tax chapter of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

(a) “Days” means calendar days, or portions thereof.

(b) “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, that is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

(c) “Occupancy” means the use, or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

(d) “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, or licensee, or in any other capacity. Where the operator performs his/her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than as an employee of operator, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his/her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

(e) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(f) “Rent” means the consideration received, whether or not actually charged by operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether said rent is received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature. An operator may provide complimentary nontaxable rooms for employee use, guest satisfaction or charitable purposes (by a qualified 501(c)3 charity) and an operator shall detail all complimentary nontaxable rooms in its regular reporting. Failure to accurately report complimentary rooms shall result in taxation of the rooms in question.

(g) “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy (hereinafter the phrase “exercises occupancy,” or similar phrase, includes entitlement to occupancy) by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less, counting portions of days as full days. Any such person exercising occupancy in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) consecutive days has expired.

For a person to avoid being deemed a transient during a thirty (30) consecutive day period, the person exercising occupancy rights in a hotel must, prior to occupancy, enter into a written agreement with the hotel operator. The written agreement shall obligate the person to pay market rate for the occupancy for a period of at least thirty-one (31) consecutive days. The minimum substance of such written agreement shall be as provided in the sample agreement, as amended from time to time, available from the Finance Department. If the written agreement requirements are satisfied, the person exercising said occupancy rights shall not be considered a transient under this chapter and, therefore, shall not be subject to the tax imposed pursuant to SCCC 3.25.030. In the absence of said written agreement prior to the commencement of occupancy, the person shall be deemed a transient and subject to the transient occupancy tax until the qualifying period (thirty (30) consecutive days) for nontransient status has been satisfied. On the thirty-first (31st) consecutive day, and on each consecutive day thereafter, the transient occupancy tax shall not apply. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.030 Tax imposed.
(a) For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax as imposed from time to time by City Council resolution. Said tax shall be a percentage of the rent charged by the operator to the occupant. An increase that exceeds ten percent of the rent charged by the operator shall be authorized only with an amendment to this section.

(b) On and as of July 22, 1992, and continuing thereafter until further change by City Council resolution, the amount of the tax imposed is nine and one-half percent of the rent charged by the operator.

(c) Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient, or any person paying rent on the transient’s behalf, shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Director of Finance may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the Director of Finance. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.040 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed upon:

(a) Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided.

(b) Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty.

(c) Any Federal or State of California officer or employee on official business who shall provide one of the following:

(1) A warrant or check drawn on the Treasury of the United States; or

(2) A copy of the official travel orders indicating the issuing governmental agency and the employee’s full name; or

(3) A copy of a letter on the official letterhead of an exempt governmental agency requesting exemption and listing the employee’s name and stating that the stay is for official government business. The dates of occupancy must also be included;

(4) These requirements are listed on the approved City form, which must be completed by the guest at the time of registration. Failure to satisfy these requirements will result in no tax exemption.

Copies of the documentation for each exemption claimed must be submitted to the Director of Finance with each return made pursuant to SCCC 3.25.090.

(d) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to occupancy of a transient occupancy facility owned or operated by a religious, educational or charitable group and used for religious, educational or charitable purposes, which is not conducted for profit and no part of the earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

(e) No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Director of Finance. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.050 Operator’s duties to collect and pay tax.
(a) Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient or from any person paying rent on the transient’s behalf.

(b) Each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator with the amount of tax separately stated from the amount of the rent charged.

(c) No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded by the operator to the transient.

(d) All tax collected by the operator under this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment of the tax is made by the operator to the Director of Finance.

(e) Failure of the operator to collect the tax due from the transient shall not excuse the operator from the obligation to pay the tax to the City. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.060 Remitting and reporting requirements upon cessation of business.
(a) An operator who is transferring, selling, or terminating the business shall notify the Director of Finance in writing of such sale, transfer, or termination and the name and address of the purchaser or transferee at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of transfer, sale, or termination, unless the decision to sell, transfer, or terminate was made within less than a thirty (30)-day period prior to the transfer, sale, or termination, in which case the operator shall immediately notify the Director of Finance. The operator shall, at the same time, notify in writing the purchaser or transferee of their responsibility for unpaid collected taxes as set forth in this chapter and further submit to the Director of Finance a written acknowledgment from the purchaser or transferee of the requirements of this chapter regarding its responsibility for unpaid collected taxes.

(b) Cessation of Business. Each operator upon cessation of business for any reason shall, on or before the same day of the next month following the cessation of business or on the last day of that month if no corresponding day exists, make a return to the Director of Finance on approved forms of the total taxable rents charged, the amount of tax collected for the reporting period, remittances made, if any, and the balance of the tax due. The approved City form is available from the Director of Finance. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the balance of the tax due, if any, shall be remitted to the Director of Finance. After filing the final return and remitting the balance due, the operator shall make his/her records of account available for a closeout audit by the Director of Finance, or duly authorized designee. Returns filed and taxes remitted and actually received by the Director of Finance on or before the same day of the next month following the cessation of business, or on the last day of that month if no corresponding calendar day exists, shall be deemed timely filed and remitted; otherwise, the taxes are delinquent and subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.070 Successor liability.
(a) If an operator who is liable for any tax or penalties under this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of his/her business, his/her successor shall notify the Director of Finance of the date of sale at least thirty (30) days before the date of sale or, if the decision to sell was made less than thirty (30) days prior to the actual sale, then immediately. The successor operator shall withhold a sufficient portion of the purchase price to equal the amount of such tax or penalty until the selling operator produces either a receipt from the Director of Finance showing that the tax or penalty has been paid or a tax clearance certificate from the Director of Finance stating that no tax or penalty is due. If the seller does not present a receipt or tax clearance certificate within thirty (30) days after such successor commences to conduct business, the successor shall deposit the withheld amount with the Director of Finance pending settlement of the account of the seller.

(b) If the successor to the business fails to withhold a portion of the purchase price as required, the successor shall be liable to the City for the payment of the amount required to be withheld. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the successor for a tax clearance certificate stating that no tax or penalty is due, the Director of Finance shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the successor, at that person’s address as it appears on the records of the Director of Finance, of the estimated amount of the tax and penalty that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate.

(c) Either the seller or the purchaser may satisfy the tax obligation owed to the City, but the successor operator is ultimately responsible for the tax. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.080 Operator’s duty to register.
(a) Within thirty (30) days after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, or within thirty (30) days after becoming an operator, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register as an operator of said hotel with the Director of Finance and obtain from the Director a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1) The name(s) of the operator(s).

(2) The address of the hotel.

(3) The address of the operator(s), if different from the address of the hotel.

(4) The date upon which the certificate was issued.

(5) “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person(s) named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Chapter by registering with the Director of Finance for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the Director of Finance. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”

(b) Penalties. See SCCC 3.25.100. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.090 Operator’s duty to report and remit.
(a) On or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period as established by the Director of Finance, each operator shall file a transient occupancy tax return with the Director of Finance by regular mail with a corresponding post mark or by remitting in person at City Hall Finance Department. Operators shall use forms provided by the Director for reporting the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies within that previous quarter.

(b) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Director of Finance.

(c) The Director of Finance may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if the Director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

(d) All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Director of Finance.

(e) If an operator fails to report and remit taxes in compliance with this section, penalties and/or interest will be assessed. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.100 Interest and penalties.
(a) Delinquency Interest. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay interest as determined by SCCC 3.25.110.

(b) Penalty for willful noncompliance or repeated delinquencies. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to willful noncompliance or repeated delinquencies, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the interest as required by SCCC 3.25.110. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.110 Interest and calculation.
(a) Calculation of Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of the United States government T-Bills sold at the latest sale prior to the date of the delinquency plus three percent prorated per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(b) Penalties and Interest Merged with Tax. Except for the purpose of calculation of interest and penalties, every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid on the date of imposition or accrual. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.120 Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by Director of Finance.
(a) Estimate of Tax Due. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Director of Finance shall proceed in such manner as the Director may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due, including, but not limited to, an audit of the operator’s records. If an audit is deemed necessary by the Director, the operator shall be liable for such costs of the audit. As soon as the Director of Finance shall procure such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter, the Director shall assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter. Regular periodic audits will also be conducted by the Director of Finance and the notice and hearing provisions of this section shall apply.

(b) Notice. The Director of Finance shall give a notice of the amount of tax, penalties, and interest assessed by serving the notice on the operator by deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the operator so assessed at his/her last-known place of address, and by posting the notice at the hotel.

(c) Request for Hearing. Operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of service and posting of the notice, request a hearing in writing on the amount assessed.

(d) No Timely Request for Hearing. If the operator fails to request a hearing in writing within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, assessed by the Director of Finance shall become conclusive and immediately due and payable.

(e) Notice of Hearing. Upon a timely written request from the operator, the Director of Finance shall give not less than thirty (30) days’ written notice by mail to the operator to show cause, at a time and place fixed in said notice, why the assessed amount should not be fixed for tax, interest, and penalties.

(f) Conduct of Hearing. The operator may appear and offer evidence why the assessed tax, interest, and penalties should not be fixed. The operator may be represented by counsel.

(g) Determination. The Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax, interest, and penalties to be remitted and shall give written final-determination notice to the operator by mail of the determination and the amount of tax, interest, and penalties due. The amount determined to be due shall be delinquent fifteen (15) days following notice of determination, unless an appeal is taken to the City Council as provided in SCCC 3.25.130. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.130 Appeal from decisions of Director of Finance to the City Council.
(a) Any operator not in agreement with the decision of the Director of Finance with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of service by mail of the Director of Finance’s final-determination notice of tax due.

(b) Time of Hearing. The City Council shall fix a time and place within thirty (30) days for the operator to show why the tax, penalty, and interest should not be assessed. This time period for the hearing may be waived in writing by an operator.

(c) Notice of Hearing. The City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his/her last-known place of address by depositing a notice of hearing in the United States mail with postage prepaid and by posting a notice at the hotel.

(d) Conduct of Hearing. No later than seven days preceding the hearing, the appealing operator shall file with the City Clerk a written summary not to exceed five pages in length of the reason(s) the Director of Finance’s decision should be amended. The appealing operator shall have the burden of demonstrating the error of the Director of Finance’s decision. The Council shall render its decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing.

(e) Decision – Tax Due. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.140 Operator’s duty to maintain and preserve records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Director of Finance shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

The records maintained by the operator under this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) A daily record of room occupancies.

(b) A written record of each occupancy charge for which an exemption is claimed, including the name of the person occupying the room, dates of occupancy, and reason(s) for exemption. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.150 Refunds.
(a) Refunds by Director of Finance. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded by the Director of Finance as specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor is filed with the Director of Finance within three years of the date of payment, stating, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director of Finance.

(b) Claim of Refund or Credit by Operator. When the Director of Finance has established that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient, an operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received. However, neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

(c) Claim of Refund by Transient. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim with the Director of Finance in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Director of Finance, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

(d) Documentation Required for Refunds. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his/her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto or by order of the City Council in the event of an appeal and overpayment ruling.

(e) No Refunds for Occupancy Extending Over Thirty (30) Days. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section when the claim for refund is made solely on the ground that the transient has extended his/her occupancy beyond thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.160 Actions to collect taxes and enforcement of fines.
(a) Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City.

(b) Failure of an operator to collect tax required to be paid by a transient shall not excuse the operator from the operator’s obligation under this chapter. Any such tax collected by an operator that has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any tax required to be paid by any transient that is not collected by the operator is deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City.

(c) Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Santa Clara for the recovery of such amount.

(d) If any amount required to be paid to the City under this chapter is not paid when due, the Director of Finance may, within four years after the amount is due, file an action to collect any unpaid amount and seek a judgment to enforce collection of the debt. All lawful means of judgment collection shall be available to the Director of Finance, including but not limited to a lien on real property. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.170 Reserved.
(Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

3.25.180 Director of Finance’s regulations and enforcement authority.
The Director of Finance may promulgate reasonable rules, interpretations, and regulations to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the City Manager is authorized to designate certain employees to arrest without a warrant any person who commits a misdemeanor in violation of this chapter in his/her presence and to issue notices to appear pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code Section 836.5. (Ord. 1847 § 2, 10-20-09).

Chapter 3.30
UTILITY SERVICE EXCISE TAX
Sections:

3.30.010  Purpose, intent and finding.

3.30.020  Amount.

3.30.030  Credit.

3.30.040  When payable.

3.30.050  Use of funds received.

3.30.060  Actions to collect.

3.30.010 Purpose, intent and finding.
It is the purpose and intent of the Council that there be a tax imposed on the privilege of having available City sewage collection and processing service and using City utility service. The Council finds that the continuous collection and processing of sewage from all places in the city benefits all City utility customers that are not serviced independently of City sewer service by a sewer system of another governmental agency, that the other sewer service and use and connection charges prescribed in Chapter 13.10 SCCC are inadequate to meet the obligations of the City in supplying such service and that, therefore, in addition to such charges, all such customers shall be made liable for the sewage collection and treatment surcharge tax prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1168 § 2, 9-5-67; Ord. 1173 § 1, 10-10-67. Formerly § 27-49).

3.30.020 Amount.
An excise tax is hereby imposed upon each City utility customer that is not served independently of City sewer service by a sewer system of another governmental agency upon the privilege of having available City sewerage collection and processing service and using City utility service. This tax, in the amount of one dollar and eighty-five cents ($1.85) per month, shall be added to each utility bill issued by the City except where the premises concerned are serviced independently of City sewer service by a sewer system of another governmental agency. This tax is in addition to the graduated charge for related services prescribed in this Code or adopted pursuant thereto, and is separate and distinct therefrom. (Ord. 1168 § 2, 9-5-67; Ord. 1173 § 1, 10-10-67; Ord. 1188 § 2, 5-28-68; Ord. 1218 § 5, 8-26-69; Ord. 1234 § 1, 11-24-70. Formerly § 27-50).

3.30.030 Credit.
In addition to all other charges for sanitary sewerage and sewage disposal service, a charge is hereby imposed upon each City utility customer that is not served independently of City sewer service by a sewer system of another governmental agency, in the amount of one dollar and eighty-five cents ($1.85) per month, for the availability of improved and enlarged sanitary sewage treatment and disposal service through the joint sewage treatment and disposal plant of the City and the City of San Jose, as said service is proposed to be improved and enlarged by the State I capital improvement program generally described in a report entitled "Summary Report, Master Plan for Water Pollution Control Facilities," on file in the office of the City Clerk, prepared by Consier, Townsend and Associates, and approved by the City Council. Said charge shall become due and payable on the first day of the month next succeeding the completion and acceptance of the State I capital improvements generally described in said report; provided, however, that changes in said capital improvement program heretofore or hereafter approved by the Council shall not affect the validity nor collectibility of said charge, which is, and is hereby declared to be, based on such plant improvements and additions as are actually constructed, completed and accepted. Any payments of the excise tax imposed by SCCC 3.30.020 shall be deemed to be payment of the charge imposed by this section, and billing of said charge shall not be required unless the excise tax is unpaid. (Ord. 1221 § 1, 10-21-69; Ord. 1234 § 1, 11-24-70. Formerly § 27-50.1).

3.30.040 When payable.
Such tax shall be due and payable monthly and concurrently with the City utility service charges rendered for the same month and shall, for purposes of collection and shut-off, be treated as a sewer service charge. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 10-10-67. Formerly § 27-51).

3.30.050 Use of funds received.
All revenue collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into the utilities fund as established by Section 1320 of the City Charter. Said revenue shall be used in accordance with the provisions of Section 1320 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 10-10-67. Formerly § 27-52).

3.30.060 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. Any person owing taxes under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City of Santa Clara for the recovery of such account. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 10-10-67. Formerly § 27-53).

Chapter 3.35
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

3.35.010  Title.

3.35.020  Tax imposed.

3.35.030  Taxpayer.

3.35.040  Exemption – Instrument to secure a debt.

3.35.050  Exemption – Certain governmental instrumentalities.

3.35.060  Certain reorganizations.

3.35.070  Certain conveyances.

3.35.080  Certain realty held by a partnership.

3.35.090  Administration.

3.35.100  Claim for refund procedure.

3.35.110  Operative date.

3.35.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "real property transfer tax ordinance of the City of Santa Clara." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Division 2, Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-54).

3.35.020 Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city of Santa Clara shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his/her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00 or) fractional part thereof. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-55).

3.35.030 Taxpayer.
Any tax imposed pursuant to SCCC 3.35.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-56).

3.35.040 Exemption – Instrument to secure a debt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-57).

3.35.050 Exemption – Certain governmental instrumentalities.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof; any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof; or the District of Columbia is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt entity of government is acquiring title. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67; Ord. 1223 § 1, 1-6-70. Formerly § 27-58).

3.35.060 Certain reorganizations.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

(a) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

(b) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Title 11, Section 1171, Subdivision (m) of the United States Code, as amended;

(c) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in Title 11, Section 506, Subdivision (3) of the United States Code, as amended; or

(d) Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections (a) to (d) inclusive of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-59).

3.35.070 Certain conveyances.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

(a) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

(b) Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

(c) Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-60).

3.35.080 Certain realty held by a partnership.
(a) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

(1) Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

(2) Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

(b) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

(c) Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-61).

3.35.090 Administration.
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Division 2, Part 6.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-62).

3.35.100 Claim for refund procedure.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Division 1, Part 9, Chapter 5 (entitled "Refunds"), Section 5096 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-63).

3.35.110 Operative date.
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of Santa Clara, pursuant to Division 2, Part 6.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is the later. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 12-5-67. Formerly § 27-64).

Chapter 3.40
BUSINESS TAX
Sections:

3.40.010    Purpose.

3.40.020    Effect on other fees and charges.

3.40.030    Chapter controlling.

3.40.040    Definitions.

3.40.050    Imposition of tax.

3.40.060    Business tax certificate required.

3.40.061    Business tax certificate application.

3.40.062    Appeal process.

3.40.070    Business location.

3.40.080    Branch establishments.

3.40.090    Notice not required by City.

3.40.100    When annual tax due and payable.

3.40.110    Penalty for delinquent or nonpayment.

3.40.120    Exemptions from tax.

3.40.130    Reserved.

3.40.140    Business tax constitutes debt to City – Collection of unpaid taxes.

3.40.150    Transferability – Changes to affidavit.

3.40.160    Issuance of business tax certificate.

3.40.170    Duplicate tax certificate.

3.40.180    Business tax certificate record.

3.40.190    Confidential documents.

3.40.200    Display of certificate.

3.40.210    Administrative rules and regulations.

3.40.220    Affidavit to be submitted where business tax based on number of employees – Information required.

3.40.230    Renewal generally – Affidavit and information required.

3.40.240    Statements not conclusive.

3.40.250    Extensions of time for filing sworn declarations.

3.40.260    Director of Finance duties.

3.40.270    Violations.

3.40.280    City Attorney’s duties.

3.40.290    Enforcement.

3.40.300    Effect of annexation.

3.40.310    General schedule for person having fixed place of business within City.

3.40.320    Application of fees schedule in SCCC 3.40.310 to certain business within City.

3.40.330    Business subject to fixed tax.

3.40.340    Business without a fixed place of business in city.

3.40.350    Rental units.

3.40.360    Rental unit – Surcharge.

3.40.370    Vehicles used for commercial purposes.

3.40.380    Public markets.

3.40.390    Vending operator – Persons exempt.

3.40.400    Automatic amusement games, devices or coin-operated machines.

3.40.410    Shooting galleries, golf ranges and similar type businesses.

3.40.420    Theaters.

3.40.430    Entertainment definitions.

3.40.440    Entertainment tax certificate.

3.40.450    Class I entertainment tax.

3.40.460    Class II entertainment tax.

3.40.470    Class III entertainment tax.

3.40.480    Procedure.

3.40.490    Transferability.

3.40.500    Handbill distribution.

3.40.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes and not for the purpose of regulation. The payment of a business tax required by this chapter, and its acceptance by the City, and the issuance of a business tax certificate to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all of the requirements of the City Code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building, on any premises, or in any location designated in such business tax certificate in the event that such building, premises or location is situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law. (Ord. 1923 § 1, 4-8-14).

3.40.020 Effect on other fees and charges.
Persons required to pay a business tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any other charge, fee, or tax as may be imposed by the City for the privilege of doing business within the city, or for the cost of regulating a business, and such persons shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other ordinances, codes, and resolutions of the City, including but not exclusive to regulations for zoning, building, fire, and safety. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.101).

3.40.030 Chapter controlling.
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other chapter of the City Code or parts thereof, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.102).

3.40.040 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) “Business tax certificate” means the document issued as a result of a completed tax affidavit and taxes paid.

(b) “Business” means all and every kind of profession, vocation, trade or activity, whether or not carried on for profit or gain.

(c) “Business community” means any and all areas of the City not zoned as residential.

(d) “Director” means the Director of Finance or his or her designee.

(e) “Employee” means any or all persons engaged in the operation or activity of any business, whether as owner, a corporate officer, a partner, agent, manager, solicitor or any and all persons employed or working in such business either full time, part-time, permanent or temporary.

(f) “Fiscal year” means an accounting period of twelve (12) months commencing upon the payment of a business tax and every twelve (12)-month period thereafter.

(g) “Handbill distributor” means one who distributes any commercial advertising, booklet, card, circular, dodger, newspaper, pamphlet, sample specimen, sheet or other printed or written notices, advertising any art, article, business, commodity, entertainment, meeting, merchandise, person, service, skill or thing offered, sold, or rendered for hire, reward, price, trade or profit.

(h) “Itinerant merchant” means any person, or employee, who engages in a business in the city by selling or offering for sale articles, goods, merchandise or wares of value, for period of not more than one hundred ninety (190) consecutive days and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room, building or structure on any real property on or adjoining any street or public place in the city. Such person shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or, by reason of conducting such business in connection with or as a part of any local business or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.

(i) “Number of employees” means the number of persons employed in the business as anticipated, or the number of employees including owner(s) at time of renewal.

(j) “Parade vendor” means any person, or employee, who engages in the business of selling or offering for sale and immediate delivery any goods, merchandise, thing or wares in the possession of the vendor, at or along the route of any parade or procession operating pursuant to a permit from the City Council.

(k) “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, limited liability company, firms, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs or common law trusts, societies and individuals engaged in any business in the city other than as an employee.

(l) “Public market” means any business location where:

(1) A public market operator rents space to public market vendors and such space is not open to members of the general public more than three days in any seven-day period starting on Sunday except in the month of December, when no time restrictions shall apply; and

(2) Any new, used, or antique goods, clothing or other personal property or food items are offered or displayed for sale or exchange, and either:

(A) A fee is charged to the public market vendors for the privilege of offering or displaying such goods for sale or exchange to members of the general public admitted to the event or location, and/or

(B) A fee is charged to prospective buyers or where a membership or other card is required for admission to the event or location where such goods are offered or displayed for sale or exchange by public market vendors to members of the general public admitted to the event or location.

(m) “Public market operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation, business association, or other person or entity that sponsors, controls, manages, operates, or otherwise conducts a public market.

(n) “Public market vendor” means any individual, partnership, corporation, business association, or other person or entity that sells, exchanges, displays, or offers for sale or exchange any new, used, or antique goods, clothing, personal property or food items, or services at a public market. (Ord. 1923 § 2, 4-8-14).

3.40.050 Imposition of tax.
The City does hereby tax, as provided in this chapter, each and every kind of business transacted, conducted, exhibited or carried on in the city, at the rates named and prescribed in this chapter. If more than one business shares a business location, each business is required to apply and pay the prescribed tax. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.104).

3.40.060 Business tax certificate required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transact or carry on any business in the city without first having paid the business tax to the City and having obtained a valid business tax certificate or renewal, in compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. (Ord. 1923 § 3, 4-8-14).

3.40.061 Business tax certificate application.
(a) Any person applying for a tax certificate shall make application upon a form provided by the Director, which form shall provide such information as may be required to show compliance with all City, State and Federal laws, and as may be necessary to determine ownership, the nature of the business, occupancy requirements, location, and the classification and amount of tax due.

(b) All applicants shall pay a tax computed on the number of employees or the fixed amount as provided in this chapter upon submitting the application.

(c) When necessary, the Director or designee shall refer an application or a notice of changed or new addresses to the appropriate City officers or staff for determination as to whether the proposed business activity and the premises in which it is to be conducted comply with applicable laws and ordinances. In the event it is determined that the proposed activity may not be maintained in compliance with the law, the Director or designee shall so inform the applicant and no new or renewed tax certificate may issue.

(d) Failure of the City to approve, deny, or act upon the application within one hundred eighty (180) days shall be deemed a denial of the application. (Ord. 1923 § 4, 4-8-14).

3.40.062 Appeal process.
An appeal from denial of issuance of a business tax certificate may be made as follows:

(a) Appeal from denial of a business tax certificate may be made in writing by the applicant to the Director within seven calendar days after issuance of such denial, or within seven calendar days from the expiration of the one hundred eighty (180)-day period referenced in SCCC 3.40.061.

(b) Said appeal shall be heard by the Director within thirty (30) calendar days from the filing of said notice.

(c) The Director shall render his/her decision in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of said hearing and the Finance Director may reverse, set aside, affirm, amend or modify the subject of appeal. The decision of the Director shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to further City appeal procedure. (Ord. 1923 § 5, 4-8-14).

3.40.070 Business location.
Business tax fees are based on the actual physical location of the business within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Santa Clara. A mail stop, post office box or other such mail address is not considered a valid business location for the purpose of fire and safety inspection. All business not physically located within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Santa Clara are considered out-of-town and must pay taxes as established for out-of-town businesses regardless of whether they have a mailing address in the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.106).

3.40.080 Branch establishments.
A separate business certificate must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business. When any person conducts, at one location, businesses classified separately by this chapter, such person shall pay the higher of the taxes. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.107).

3.40.090 Notice not required by City.
The Director of Finance is not required to send a renewal, delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter and failure to send notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.108).

3.40.100 When annual tax due and payable.
The annual business tax imposed under the provision of this chapter shall be due and payable at the time of commencement of business activity or upon occupying space in the business community and such certificate shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of application. The tax for the renewal of such certificate shall be due and payable upon expiration of the prior certificate. No tax paid herein shall be refundable. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.109).

3.40.110 Penalty for delinquent or nonpayment.
The penalty for noncompliance shall be:

(a) Any person who fails to apply for a tax certificate and fails to pay the tax as determined on or within thirty (30) days after opening, engaging in business, or occupying space in the business community, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the tax due.

(b) Every annual tax which is not received and paid within a period of thirty (30) days after the tax became due is hereby declared to be delinquent, and a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the tax will be added to the tax due.

(c) Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a business tax and said check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which said check is drawn for any reason, the taxpayer shall be liable to pay a nonsufficient funds charge, the correct tax amount due, and a penalty.

(d) If any person fails to pay the annual renewal tax within ninety (90) days after the tax becomes due, his or her business tax certificate is considered revoked. The City is not required to send a notice of revocation for the revocation to be valid. Following revocation, the person must reapply for a new business tax certificate, pursuant to SCCC 3.40.061, and pay all associated penalties. Failure to reapply for a new business tax certificate shall constitute a violation, pursuant to SCCC 3.40.270. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1923 §§ 6, 7, 4-8-14. Formerly § 15-1.110).

3.40.120 Exemptions from tax.
No tax prescribed in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons who are exempt from payment thereof upon submission of proof of exemption:

(a) Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations. Any church, school, charitable, benevolent or social organizations having exempt status under Federal tax law.

(b) Conflict With Federal and State Law. Any person conducting any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution, or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of California from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

(c) Disabled Veterans. Disabled veterans exemption pursuant to the requirements of Section 16001 or 16001.5 of the California Business and Professions Code.

(d) Employees. No person who is an employee shall be required to pay a tax for doing any part of the work of such business for which a tax certificate has been issued.

(e) Interstate Commerce. Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any tax provided for in this chapter upon the ground that such tax casts a burden upon his/her right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file an affidavit or a declaration under penalty of perjury with the Director of Finance describing the interstate or other character of his/her business which entitled him to such exemption.

(f) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California for payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.111).

3.40.130 Reserved.
(Ord. 1923 § 8, 4-8-14).

3.40.140 Business tax constitutes debt to City – Collection of unpaid taxes.
The amount of any tax imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. Any person carrying on any business covered in this chapter without having lawfully paid a tax to the City to do so shall be liable to a civil action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the required tax, penalties, and court costs. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.113).

3.40.150 Transferability – Changes to affidavit.
A certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable. When a certificate has been issued authorizing a specifically named person to transact and carry on a specific type of business at a specific location, the business shall, upon application in writing, and the payment of the prescribed fee, have such certificate records amended to include any change of name, type of business, or address. Any business for which such a change must be made shall pay a fee as fixed by resolution of the City Council for the handling and processing of such change. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.114).

3.40.160 Issuance of business tax certificate.
All certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued by the Director of Finance or authorized employees and shall state the name of the business, the location of the business, the mailing address, the type of business being conducted at the listed location, the amount of the tax paid, the expiration date of the certificate and additional information that may be required. A business tax certificate will be issued upon the determination by the Director and any other necessary City departments that the business tax has been paid and that the business tax certificate affidavit information is accurate, that the business applicant is operating legally pursuant to all applicable Federal, State and local laws, and there are no business operations that endanger the public. (Ord. 1923 § 9, 4-8-14).

3.40.170 Duplicate tax certificate.
A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued by the Director of Finance to replace a previously issued certificate that has been lost or destroyed upon the owner filing a written request attesting to such fact, and paying a fee as fixed by the resolution of City Council for handling and processing of such request. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.116).

3.40.180 Business tax certificate record.
The Director of Finance shall maintain a “public business tax certificate record,” which shall contain the name of the business, the location of the business, the type of business and the time period for which the certificate is issued. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.117).

3.40.190 Confidential documents.
Except as provided for under Section 6254 of the Public Records Act, the affidavit, statements and any other documents required by this chapter to be filed, shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof, shall not become known except to:

(a) The persons charged with administration of this chapter;

(b) City employees for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this article;

(c) Federal or State officials, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.118).

3.40.200 Display of certificate.
Every person to whom a certificate is issued, shall keep the same conspicuously posted in or about the place where the business is located or conducted. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.119).

3.40.210 Administrative rules and regulations.
The Director of Finance may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Finance shall further have the power to compromise any claims as to the amount of any tax due and paid. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.120).

3.40.220 Affidavit to be submitted where business tax based on number of employees – Information required.
Upon making application for the first certificate to be issued under this chapter where the amount of the tax is measured by the number of employees, the applicant shall furnish to the Director of Finance, for guidance in ascertaining the amount of such tax, a signed affidavit under penalty of perjury, upon a form provided by the Director of Finance, setting forth such information as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax. The amount of the tax is determined by the number of persons engaged in the business at the time of application. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.121).

3.40.230 Renewal generally – Affidavit and information required.
In all cases, the applicant for renewal of a certificate shall submit to the Director of Finance, for guidance in ascertaining the amount of the tax to be paid by the applicant, a written affidavit under penalty of perjury upon a form provided by the Director of Finance, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business as may be required by the Director of Finance to ascertain the amount of tax to be paid by such applicant pursuant to the provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.122).

3.40.240 Statements not conclusive.
No statement set forth in any affidavit required by this chapter shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. Such affidavit and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to review and verification by the Director of Finance, or authorized employees of the City. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.123).

3.40.250 Extensions of time for filing sworn declarations.
The Director of Finance shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any sworn statement required under this chapter and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.124).

3.40.260 Director of Finance duties.
The Director of Finance shall make diligent effort to discover all persons conducting any business in the city for which a certificate is required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.125).

3.40.270 Violations.
The issuance of a certificate under this chapter shall not entitle the person(s) to engage in any business which for any reason is in violation of any law or provision of this Code.

(a) Separate Violation. The conducting of business in the city or occupying space in the business community, without first having procured a business tax certificate from the City to do so, or without complying with any and all regulations of such business contained in this chapter shall be a separate violation hereof for each and every day that such business is so carried on.

(b) Violations. Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.126).

3.40.280 City Attorney’s duties.
The Director of Finance may at any time request the City Attorney to bring a civil suit in the name of the City for the recovery of any tax from any person who conducts a business without procuring the certificate required by this chapter, or not paying the prescribed tax, and the recovery of such tax and penalties due thereon. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.127).

3.40.290 Enforcement.
The Director of Finance is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the Chief of Police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance, in the exercise of the duties imposed hereunder, and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.

The Director of Finance, all duly authorized assistants and any police officers shall have the following powers:

(a) To enter free of charge, and at any reasonable time during business hours, any place of business required to be certified herein, and demand an exhibition of its certificate. Any person to whom a certificate is issued shall exhibit the same on demand.

(b) To issue citations for any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.128).

3.40.300 Effect of annexation.
All existing businesses brought under the jurisdiction of the City by annexation procedures shall conform to the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the effective date of such annexation. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.129).

3.40.310 General schedule for person having fixed place of business within City.
Every person having a fixed place of business within the city and who engages in any business not listed in SCCC 3.40.330 shall pay a tax based on the number of employees as defined and set forth in this chapter, according to the following rate schedules:

SCHEDULE NO. 100 –
COMMERCIAL EMPLOYEE(S)

 

 

1

$ 15.00

2 – 5

30.00

6 – 10

70.00

11 – 15

90.00

16 – 20

115.00

21 – 25

175.00

26 – 30

225.00

31 – 40

280.00

41 – 55

330.00

56 – 75

380.00

76 – 100

460.00

101+

500.00

SCHEDULE NO. 200 – PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE(S)

 

 

1

$ 15.00

2 – 3

30.00

4 – 6

70.00

7 – 10

90.00

11 – 20

115.00

21 – 25

175.00

26 – 35

225.00

36 – 40

280.00

41 – 45

330.00

46 – 50

380.00

51 – 55

460.00

56+

500.00

SCHEDULE NO. 300 – MANUFACTURING EMPLOYEE(S)

 

 

1 – 3

$ 15.00

4 – 20

45.00

21 – 30

65.00

31 – 50

100.00

51 – 75

135.00

76 – 100

175.00

101 – 125

225.00

126 – 175

280.00

176 – 225

330.00

226 – 300

380.00

301 – 400

460.00

401+

500.00

(Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.130).

3.40.320 Application of fees schedule in SCCC 3.40.310 to certain business within City.
Unless such business is otherwise specifically taxed by other provisions of this chapter, every business in the city shall pay a tax according to the following classification and rate schedule:

(a) Commercial. Any person engaged in the business of offering for sale or selling to the public at wholesale or retail any materials, commodities, goods, wares or merchandise shall pay a tax according to Schedule 100; or

(b) Professional and Semiprofessional Services. Any person engaged in the business of offering professional or semiprofessional services, as that term is ordinarily and commonly used and understood, and shall include those professions requiring governmental certification or a professional degree, but not limited to the practice or profession of: accounting, administrative support, advertising, analyst, appraiser, architectural services, auditing, chiropractic, consultant (all fields), dentistry, drafting, education, engineering (all fields), finance, law, medicine, mortician, optometry, physical therapist, property management, real estate (broker and agent), research and development, taxidermist, technical support, veterinary and writers shall pay a tax according to Schedule 200; or

(c) Manufacturing. Any person engaged in the business of making any article, device, good, or item from raw material, to be sold for wholesale shall pay a business tax according to Schedule 300; or

(d) Any person engaged in any other business and businesses herein not defined, including but not limited to those identified as home occupations by Chapter 18.100 SCCC, shall pay a tax according to Schedule No. 100. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1923 § 10, 4-8-14. Formerly § 15-1.131).

3.40.330 Business subject to fixed tax.
Any person carrying on or rendering any service as described in this section shall pay a tax in accordance with the following schedule, and shall be exempt from the tax set forth in SCCC 3.40.310:

Ambulance service
plus $15.00 per ambulance used in such service

$ 45.00

Carnival, per day

150.00

Carnival concession, ride, sideshow, per each, per day

15.00

Christmas tree sales (as defined in SCCC 5.15.030)

150.00

Circus, per day

150.00

Circus concession, ride, sideshow, per each, per day

15.00

Detective agency

150.00

Entertainment permit Class I

 

First year

263.00

Annual renewal

210.00

Entertainment permit Class II

 

First year

90.00

Annual renewal

75.00

Entertainment permit Class III

 

First year

413.00

Annual renewal

360.00

Escort service (personal)

150.00

Escort service (funeral)

150.00

Fortuneteller, (as defined in SCCC 5.45.010)

15.00

Intracity bus service and public transportation

150.00

Itinerant merchant (maximum 190 days)

225.00

Parade vendor (per parade)

15.00

Pawnbroker (as defined in SCCC 5.30.020)

150.00

Peddler (as defined in SCCC 5.05.010)

113.00

Promotional show, per day

150.00

Promotional show concession, ride, or sideshow, per each, per day

15.00

Pumpkin sales lots (as defined in SCCC 5.15.030)

150.00

Seasonal item sales lot (as defined in SCCC 5.15.030)

150.00

Secondhand dealer (as defined in SCCC 5.30.020)

150.00

Solicitor (as defined in SCCC 5.05.010)

113.00

State-licensed contractors

45.00

Taxicab, per vehicle

15.00

Taxicab stand

90.00

(Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.132).

3.40.340 Business without a fixed place of business in city.
Unless such business is otherwise specifically taxed by other provisions of this chapter, every person who does not have a fixed place of business in the city, but who is engaged in a business within the city, shall pay a tax of forty-five dollars ($45.00) a year, payable in advance. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.133).

3.40.350 Rental units.
(a) Every person engaged in the business of renting rooms, apartments, single-family houses, or other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging purposes, in the city shall pay the following tax:

(1) Three dollars ($3.00) per annum for each rental unit;

(2) Provided, however, that no tax shall be payable under this section, unless the person engaged in such business operates three or more rental units in the city.

(b) As used in this section, unit means a room or suite of two or more rooms (including, but not limited to single-family houses) designed for or used as separate accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging purposes by a person living alone or two or more persons living together. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.134).

3.40.360 Rental unit – Surcharge.
(a) It is contemplated that the City Council will from time to time adjust the amount of the surcharge fee by resolution to cover the changing cost of the mediation services involved with these businesses and to insure that the surcharge fee amount prorated to the rental units shall not exceed the cost of the program services made available.

(b) Any and all fees collected pursuant to this section are dedicated to and shall be used exclusively to pay the costs of the above services rendered in response to needs generated by the subject type of rental businesses.

(c) Those businesses covered under Chapter 3.25 SCCC, and paying the business tax under SCCC 3.40.310, Schedule No. 100, are exempt from paying the rental unit surcharge. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.135).

3.40.370 Vehicles used for commercial purposes.
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city, who engages in any business in the city by means of a regular and established route or delivery system shall pay a tax of twenty-three ($23.00) per vehicle, per year. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.136).

3.40.380 Public markets.
(a) Each public market operator shall pay a tax and obtain a tax certificate from the Director of Finance. Without any reduction for any payment for a tax due or collected from any public market vendor, every public market operator also shall obtain a master certificate in lieu of an individual revenue certificate for each public market vendor who operates a business concession on the premises of a public market. Each public market operator shall collect a tax from each of its public market vendors and each public market vendor shall pay such tax to the respective public market operator in the amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75) per space for each space rented to each public market vendor for each day the public market is open to members of the public for business. This tax, measured by such space rentals, shall be paid to the Director of Finance by the public market operator on a monthly basis, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and in addition to any other tax that each public market vendor may have paid at any other location in the city.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, every person who engages in any business, whether upon a cost, rental, commission basis, or other form of compensation as a concession, or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person covered under any provision of this section, shall be required to pay a tax and obtain a separate and independent tax certificate pursuant to the appropriate provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter.

(c) The tax payable by any public market vendor to any public market operator shall be paid by the public market operator to the City by the fifteenth (15th) day of the calendar month following the month during which the tax occurred, notwithstanding any other provisions of this section. Any such tax not paid as set forth above shall be delinquent and a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) will be added to the tax and charged to the public market operator responsible for payment.

(d) If the public market operator is an entity or organization that is otherwise exempted from the payment of the tax under this chapter, such public market operator shall be required, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, to collect the tax from each public market vendor to whom the public market operator rents space and is obligated to pay the tax as set forth above. Each public market operator may collect tax from the public market vendors but failure to do so shall not relieve the public market operator of any obligations for payment.

(e) At the City’s request, each public market operator shall provide written lists of all public market vendors who operated a business concession and the dates, the number of spaces and the number of days each public market vendor rented space at its public market.

(f) No public market vendor tax shall be paid by or collected from any public market vendor for participating in any display, fair, or other event held on or in City-leased or City-owned facilities. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.137).

3.40.390 Vending operator – Persons exempt.
Any person engaged in the business of a vending operator shall pay a tax of seventy-nine dollars ($79.00) per year.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to any newspaper publishing business which makes use of such machines in the distribution of newspapers. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.138).

3.40.400 Automatic amusement games, devices or coin-operated machines.
Any person who owns, keeps or maintains, or allows to be kept or maintained, in any building or place in the city owned, leased, managed or controlled by such person, any automatic amusement game for the purpose of permitting the same to be played or operated shall pay the following tax:

(a)

Automatic amusement games including, but not limited to pinball machines, video display games, electronic amusement devices, and peep show devices, per machine, per year

$60.00

(b)

Juke boxes, per machine, per year

$30.00

(c)

Billiard and pool tables

$ 8.00

Maximum

$80.00

(d)

Bowling or tenpin lanes (non-coin-operated), per lane, per year

$ 8.00

Maximum

$80.00

 

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the operation, keeping, maintaining or use of any gambling device or any apparatus or device, the use, possession, operation or control of which is prohibited by the laws of the State. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1923 § 11, 4-8-14. Formerly § 15-1.139).

3.40.410 Shooting galleries, golf ranges and similar type businesses.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a shooting gallery, trampoline, skating rink, miniature golf range, pitch and putt course, golf driving range, baseball batting range, or any similar place of business shall pay an annual tax according to rate Schedule 200 of SCCC 3.40.310. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.140).

3.40.420 Theaters.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a live or motion picture theater shall pay a tax based on the following rate schedule:

(a)

Theaters having zero to five hundred (500) seats shall pay, per year

$23.00

(b)

Theaters having five hundred one (501) to one thousand (1,000) seats shall pay, per year

$30.00

(c)

Theaters having one thousand one (1,001) or more seats shall pay, per year

$45.00

(Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.141).

3.40.430 Entertainment definitions.
The words and terms used for issuance of an entertainment tax certificate shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) “Class I entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, poetry recitation, fashion or style show conducted or participated in by any professional entertainer in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted.

(b) “Class II entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, poetry recitation, fashion or style show conducted or participated in by a nonprofessional person or persons in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted.

(c) “Class III entertainment” means the act of any person while visible to any customer, in any public place, unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to any person any portion of the body having a different pigmentation than the remainder of the body or any part of the pubic region or the anal region or crease of the buttocks of any such person.

(d) “Entertainment” does not mean or include:

(1) Mechanical music alone; or

(2) Dancing participated in only by customers; however, this subsection does not exempt exhibition dancing by a person or persons receiving compensation for such exhibition dancing.

(e) “Professional entertainer” means a person or persons who engages for livelihood or gain in the presentation of entertainment. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.142).

3.40.440 Entertainment tax certificate.
(a) No person shall conduct, permit or assist in conducting or permitting any entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430(a), to be shown, staged, exhibited or produced in any premises to which the public is admitted as, or as part of, a business unless and until a Class I entertainment tax certificate has been obtained from the Director of Finance.

(b) No person shall conduct, permit or assist in conducting or permitting any entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430(b), to be shown, staged, exhibited or produced in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted as, or as a part of, a business unless and until a Class II entertainment tax certificate has been obtained from the Director of Finance.

(c) No person shall conduct, permit or assist in conducting or permitting any entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430(c), to be shown, staged, exhibited or produced in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted as, or as a part of, a business unless and until a Class III entertainment tax certificate has been obtained from the Director of Finance. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.143).

3.40.450 Class I entertainment tax.
(a) The first year Class I entertainment tax shall be two hundred and sixty-three dollars ($263.00).

(b) The annual renewal tax for Class I entertainment shall be two hundred and ten dollars ($210.00).

(c) Where the applicant has a valid business tax certificate pursuant to SCCC 3.40.310 for the same location covering the same period of time, the amount of business tax paid shall be deducted from the first year Class I entertainment tax of two hundred and sixty-three dollars ($263.00) due. If the Class I entertainment tax is not paid within thirty (30) days of notification, the amount due shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred percent (100%). (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.144).

3.40.460 Class II entertainment tax.
(a) The first year Class II entertainment tax shall be ninety dollars ($90.00).

(b) The annual renewal tax for Class II entertainment shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).

(c) Where the applicant has a valid business tax certificate pursuant to SCCC 3.40.310 for the same location covering the same period of time, the amount of business tax paid shall be deducted from the first year Class II entertainment of ninety dollars ($90.00) due. If the Class II entertainment tax is not paid within thirty (30) days of notification, the amount due shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred percent (100%). (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.145).

3.40.470 Class III entertainment tax.
(a) The first year Class III entertainment tax shall be four hundred and thirteen dollars ($413.00).

(b) The annual renewal tax for Class III entertainment shall be three hundred and sixty dollars ($360.00). (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.146).

3.40.480 Procedure.
No Class III entertainment certificate shall be obtained from or issued by the Director of Finance unless and until approval from the City Council has been issued in accordance with Chapter 5.60 SCCC. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.147).

3.40.490 Transferability.
An entertainment certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable from person to person or location to location. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.148).

3.40.500 Handbill distribution.
The business tax imposed for handbill distribution by a business without a fixed location in the city is set forth in SCCC 3.40.340. Where handbill distribution is by the owner of the business advertised with a fixed location in the city, the business tax is set forth in SCCC 3.40.310 or 3.40.330. If the business holds an active business tax certificate and requests to distribute handbills, a change in the type of business shall be made according to SCCC 3.40.150. (Ord. 1721 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 15-1.149).

Chapter 3.45
INSURANCE PROGRAM BOND LAW
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

3.45.010  Title.

3.45.020  Purpose.

3.45.030  Definitions.

Article II. Issuance of Bonds to Finance Program

3.45.040  General powers.

3.45.050  Authorization of bonds.

3.45.060  Issuance of bonds.

3.45.070  Terms of bonds.

3.45.080  Trust agreement.

3.45.090  Personal liability.

3.45.100  Refunding bonds.

3.45.110  Repayment of bonds.

3.45.120  Trust funds.

3.45.130  Purchase of bonds by City.

3.45.140  Bond anticipation notes.

Article III. Miscellaneous Provisions

3.45.150  Liberal construction.

3.45.160  Provisions complete, additional, and alternative.

3.45.170  Actions to determine validity of bonds and proceedings.

3.45.180  Amendment of chapter.

3.45.190  Chapter controlling.

3.45.200  Partial invalidity.

Cross reference – For provisions relative to the Housing Code see SCCC 15.25.010 et seq.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

3.45.010 Title.
This chapter may be cited as the City of Santa Clara insurance program bond law. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-1).

3.45.020 Purpose.
The Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose, and a municipal affair for the City to be authorized to provide financing for the creation of insurance reserves for the City in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-2).

3.45.030 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:

(a) "Bonds" means any bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures, or other obligations issued by the City pursuant to this chapter, which are payable exclusively from proceeds of the bonds, the escrow, and other funds permitted by this chapter.

(b) "Chapter" means this chapter of the Santa Clara City Code, as amended from time to time in accordance herewith.

(c) "Charter" means the Charter of the City, as amended from time to time.

(d) "City" means the City of Santa Clara, California, a charter city in the State existing under and exercising powers pursuant to the Charter and the Constitution of the State.

(e) "City Council" means the City Council of the City.

(f) "Escrow" means any agreement between the City, a bond trustee, and an escrow holder under which the proceeds of the bonds are deposited with such escrow holder and dedicated to:

(1) The payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds; and

(2) The discharge of one or more judgments.

(g) "Judgment" means a judgment entered in a court of competent jurisdiction against the City or any of its members, officers, agents, and employees determining that the City is liable to a third party to pay monetary damages for direct or contingent loss or liability for damages for bodily and personal injury, death, or property damage for any reason whatsoever.

(h) "Program" means the self insurance program of the City under which the City has set aside certain reserves, including proceeds of the bonds, to discharge one or more judgments.

(i) "State" means the State of California. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-3).

Article II. Issuance of Bonds
to Finance Program

3.45.040 General powers.
The City is authorized and empowered:

(a) To issue bonds for the purpose of financing or otherwise assisting the program authorized by this chapter and for the purpose of funding or refunding bonds.

(b) To establish the terms and conditions for the financing of the program undertaken pursuant to this chapter.

(c) To employ or contract for such legal, consultant, underwriting, economic feasibility, or other services in connection with the financing of the program, as may be necessary in the judgment of the City Council for the successful financing of the program and the issuance and sale of bonds.

(d) In addition to all other powers specifically granted in this chapter, to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-4).

3.45.050 Authorization of bonds.
The City may issue its bonds for the purpose of financing the program as authorized by this chapter. Every issue of bonds shall be, until the proceeds of the bonds are used to pay a judgment, a limited obligation of the City, payable solely from all or any part of one or more escrows, and thereafter shall be obligations of the City payable from any funds of the City lawfully available therefor. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-5).

3.45.060 Issuance of bonds.
The bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds or the City Council, in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the City Council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America, at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption as the resolution or resolutions of the City Council may provide. The bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the City Council shall determine. Pending preparation of the definitive bonds, the City may issue interim receipts, certificates, or temporary bonds, which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-6).

3.45.070 Terms of bonds.
Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the owners of the bonds:

(a) The pledge of all or any part of one or more escrows, subject to such agreements with bond owners as may then exist.

(b) The source of payment for the bonds in the event funds held under an escrow are used to discharge a judgment.

(c) The interest and principal to be received and other charges to be charged and the amounts to be raised each year thereby, and the use and disposition of an escrow.

(d) The setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof.

(e) Limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of a sale of any issue of bonds, then or thereafter issued, may be applied, and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds or any issue of bonds.

(f) Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds.

(g) The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bond owners may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the owners of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given.

(h) Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the City to the owners of the bonds, and providing the rights and remedies of such owners in the event of default.

(i) Such other terms and conditions pertaining to the issuance of the bonds as are deemed advisable by the City Council. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-7).

3.45.080 Trust agreement.
In the discretion of the City Council, any bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture by and between the City and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the State. Such trust agreement or the indenture may pledge or assign one or more escrows to be received or proceeds of any contract or contracts pledged, and may convey or mortgage any property. Such trust agreement or indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bond owners as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including such provisions as is permitted to be included in any resolution or resolutions of the City Council authorizing the issuance of bonds hereunder. Any bank or trust company doing business under the laws of the State which may act as depositary of the proceeds of bonds or of one or more escrows or other moneys may furnish such indemnity bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the City. Any such trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bond owners and of the trustee or trustees, and may restrict the individual right of action by bond owners. In addition to the foregoing, any such trust agreement or indenture may contain such other provisions as the City Council may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond owners. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-8).

3.45.090 Personal liability.
Neither the members of the City Council nor any person executing the bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-9).

3.45.100 Refunding bonds.
The City Council may provide for the issuance of bonds any portion of which is to be used for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds, including the payment of the principal thereof and interest and redemption premiums, if any, thereon. The proceeds of bonds issued to refund any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the City Council, be applied to the retirement of such outstanding bonds at maturity, or the redemption (on any redemption date) or purchase of such outstanding bonds prior to maturity, upon such terms and subject to such conditions as the City Council shall deem advisable. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-10).

3.45.110 Repayment of bonds.
The escrow, or any portion thereof, as designated in the resolution, agreement, or indenture authorizing the issuance of the bonds, shall be the sole source of funds pledged by the City for repayment of bonds issued hereunder until the proceeds of the bonds are needed to pay a judgment, whereupon the allocable portion of the bonds, the proceeds of which have been used to discharge such judgment, shall be payable from all funds of the City legally available therefor.

The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the City Council to levy or pledge any form of taxation. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-11).

3.45.120 Trust funds.
All moneys received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whether proceeds from the sale of bonds or one or more escrows or other moneys or assets authorized by this chapter to be pledged to secure payment of bonds, shall, to the extent set forth in the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the issuance of the bonds, be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely for the purposes of this chapter. Any bank or trust company in which such moneys are deposited shall act as trustee of such moneys and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes specified in this chapter, subject to the terms of the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the bonds. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-12).

3.45.130 Purchase of bonds by City.
The City shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its bonds. The City may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with its agreement with bond owners. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-13).

3.45.140 Bond anticipation notes.
In anticipation of the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter, the City is hereby authorized to issue bond anticipation notes, and to renew the same from time to time, in such series and amounts as are determined by the Council to be necessary or appropriate for the program approved by the Council. Such notes shall be payable from one or more escrows or other moneys or assets authorized by this chapter to be pledged to secure payment of bonds, and which are not otherwise pledged, or from the proceeds or sale of the particular bonds in anticipation of which they are issued. Such notes shall be issued in the same manner as bonds. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-14).

Article III. Miscellaneous Provisions

3.45.150 Liberal construction.
This chapter, being necessary for the health, welfare, and safety of the City and its residents, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. Furthermore, the City Council hereby declares that this chapter is an exercise of the power granted to the City by the City Charter and the Constitution of the State and is an exercise by the City of its powers as to municipal affairs and its police powers, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to uphold its validity under the laws of the State. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-15).

3.45.160 Provisions complete, additional, and alternative.
This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional, and alternative method for doing the things authorized hereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and bonds are authorized to be issued for any such purposes under this chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-16).

3.45.170 Actions to determine validity of bonds and proceedings.
An action may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860 of Title 10 of Part 2) of the Code of Civil Procedure to determine the validity of bonds and the legality and validity of all proceedings previously taken and proposed to be taken for the authorization, issuance, sale, and delivery of the bonds and for the payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-17).

3.45.180 Amendment of chapter.
This chapter shall not be amended so as to have a material, adverse effect upon the rights of the owners of any outstanding bonds theretofore issued hereunder, without the written consent of such bond owners; provided, however, that this chapter may be amended at any time (a) to make such provisions for the purpose of curing any ambiguity, or of curing, correcting, or supplementing any defective provision herein contained, as the City may deem necessary or desirable; or (b) if such amendment does not materially impair or adversely affect the interests of any such bond owner or City in the opinion of the City Council; or (c) if such amendments apply solely to bonds not theretofore issued. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-18).

3.45.190 Chapter controlling.
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-19).

3.45.200 Partial invalidity.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held illegal or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each and every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase hereof and authorized the proceedings authorized to be taken pursuant thereto irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter may be held illegal, invalid, or unenforceable. (Ord. 1562 § 1, 2-3-87. Formerly § 14-20).

Chapter 3.50
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections:

3.50.010  Creation.

3.50.020  Payments into fund.

3.50.030  Expenditures.

3.50.010 Creation.
There is hereby created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 472 § 1. Formerly § 25-15).

3.50.020 Payments into fund.
All moneys received by the City from the State under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State highways shall be paid into the fund created in SCCC 3.50.010. (Ord. 472 § 2. Formerly § 25-16).

3.50.030 Expenditures.
All money in the fund established by SCCC 3.50.010 shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the applicable provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 472 § 3. Formerly § 25-17).

Chapter 3.55
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

3.55.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 3.

3.55.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 3.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 3 [entitled "Revenue and Finance"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the city, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 3 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Title 4
(RESERVED)
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.05    Solicitors and Peddlers

5.10    Closing-Out and Fake Sales

5.15    Christmas Tree, Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Sales Lots

5.20    Gas, Oil, Electric and Water Franchises

5.25    Cable System Franchises

5.26    State Video Service Franchises

5.30    Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers

5.35    Taxicabs and Pedi-Cabs

5.40    Massage Services and Massage Establishments

5.45    Fortunetelling

5.50    Peep Shows

5.55    Private Patrol Operator and Regulations

5.60    Public Entertainment

5.61    Public Entertainment Generally

5.65    Carnivals, Circuses, Tent Shows, Promotional Shows, and Similar Business Enterprises

5.70    Card Rooms

5.75    Bingo

5.80    Automatic Amusement Games

5.85    Public Dance Halls and Public Dances

5.90    Public Benches

5.95    Procedure – Suspension, Revocation

5.100    Enforcement of Title

Chapter 5.05
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.05.005  Purpose.

5.05.010  Definitions.

5.05.020  Permit requirements and exemptions.

5.05.030  Responsibility of supplier – Goods to be peddled.

5.05.040  Permit application.

5.05.050  Fingerprints required.

5.05.060  Background investigation fees.

5.05.070  Application review and permit issuance.

5.05.080  Identification and photograph required.

5.05.090  Denial of permit.

5.05.100  Appeal from denial of permit.

5.05.110  Permit expiration.

5.05.120  Transfer prohibited.

5.05.130  Business tax certificate required.

5.05.140  Persons claiming tax exemption.

5.05.150  Application to persons requiring a certificate under other provisions of this chapter.

5.05.160  Application to certain persons not maintaining a fixed location within the city.

5.05.170  Conditions of permit – Operating regulations.

5.05.180  Noise restrictions.

5.05.190  Observance of "No Solicitors" or "No Peddlers" signs.

Article II. Solicitation of Employment, Business or Contribution of Money or Other Property from Vehicles and Motor Vehicle-Based and Mobile Unit Peddlers

5.05.210  Prohibition of solicitation in public right-of-way or public parking lots.

5.05.220  Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas.

5.05.230  Parking restrictions – Motor vehicle-based and mobile unit peddlers.

5.05.240  Congestion restriction for motor vehicle-based and mobile unit peddlers.

5.05.250  Inspections of motor vehicle-based and mobile units.

5.05.260  Approved location permit terms and conditions.

5.05.270  Limitations on approved locations.

5.05.280  Solicitation and peddling in parks prohibited.

Article III. Operating Regulations and Permit Conditions for Ice Cream Trucks

5.05.300  Definitions.

5.05.310  Permit required.

5.05.320  Conditions of permit.

5.05.330  Operating regulations.

5.05.340  Noise restrictions.

5.05.350  Restriction on riders.

5.05.360  Vehicle inspections – Certification.

Article I. General Provisions

5.05.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of privacy, avoid traffic congestion and accidents, and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and controlling door-to-door and place-to-place solicitors and peddlers. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.010 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) "Approved location" means a site designated by the Chief of Police as an approved site from which a peddler, operating from a mobile unit, may sell his or her products.

(b) "Business" means and includes any type of product, good, service, performance or activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be provided or performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods or any other form of consideration.

(c) "Charitable" means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal, either actual or purported.

(d) "Chief of Police" means the elected Chief of the Santa Clara Police Department, or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(e) "Contributions" means and includes the words alms, money, subscription, property or any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property.

(f) "Employee" means any person who works for or on behalf of the business operator.

(g) "Employment" shall mean and include services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of hire, written or oral, express or implied.

(h) "Mobile unit" means any vehicle, truck, trailer, push cart, wagon, bicycle, dray, conveyance or structure on wheels, not firmly fixed to a permanent foundation, which is not required to have a license to operate issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

(i) "Motor vehicle" means any automobile, truck, trailer or other conveyance requiring a license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

(j) "Peddler" means any person who sells and makes immediate delivery or offers for sale and immediate delivery any goods, wares, merchandise, or thing in the possession of the seller, at any place in the City other than at a fixed place of business.

(k) "Peddling" means traveling by foot, motor vehicle, mobile unit or any other type of vehicle, from place to place, and selling or vending any goods, wares, merchandise, products, or any other thing on any private property, or on any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or other public place. Peddling also means selling or vending any goods, wares, merchandise, products or any other thing from an approved location on any private property or on any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or other place.

(l) "Peddling activities" means the business of peddling; or the business of supplying, providing, or selling goods, wares, merchandise, products, or any other thing on consignment to be peddled by another person; or the business of supplying, providing, or renting mobile units or motor vehicles for use by another person in peddling.

(m) "Permittee" means the holder of a business permit.

(n) "Person" means a natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization.

(o) "Solicit" means and includes any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability of a person for employment or availability to provide services for compensation, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property; or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure employment or goods, or to solicit a contribution of money or other property. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place.

(p) "Solicitor" means any person who goes from place to place in the City, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offers property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes from place to place to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes.

(q) "Solicitation" includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor. A solicitation is deemed complete when made, whether or not an employment relationship is created, a transaction completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-1).

5.05.020 Permit requirements and exemptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation or peddling activities within the City without first obtaining a permit issued by the Chief of Police; provided, however, that the following are exempt from the provisions of this section:

(a) Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made.

(b) Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such solicitation.

(c) Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable person.

(d) Employees for wholesale houses or firms who sell to retail dealers for resale or sell to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes or to bidders for public works or supplies.

(e) Newspaper employees delivering newspapers by subscription.

(f) Any City-run or City-sponsored or sanctioned program. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-2).

5.05.030 Responsibility of supplier – Goods to be peddled.
Any person who supplies independent contractors or employees with goods, merchandise or wares to be sold by means of soliciting or peddling within the city shall make known in writing, to said person, the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-3).

5.05.040 Permit application.
Every person or business intending to engage in the business of soliciting or peddling shall file an application for a permit with the Chief of Police. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury and contain the following information:

(a) Name, physical description, residential address and telephone number of the applicant.

(b) The date of birth and driver's license or other identification number of the applicant.

(c) The type of goods, merchandise, wares or services offered for sale.

(d) The method of solicitation, order taking or peddling.

(e) The name, address and telephone number of the company, sponsor or individual for which the orders are to be secured.

(f) The method of delivering the order.

(g) The hours of the peddling or solicitation.

(h) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense, other than minor traffic violations. For any such offense, the nature of the offense, the date and place of conviction and the penalty imposed must be provided. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-4).

5.05.050 Fingerprints required.
In addition to the information required in SCCC 5.05.040, at the time of filing an applicant shall be fingerprinted with a record of such filed in the Police Department bureau of identification. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the statements in the application and of the background of the applicant. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-5).

5.05.060 Background investigation fees.
At the time the application is filed with the Department, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost to the City of investigating the facts stated therein and processing and providing the identification card required in SCCC 5.05.080. The fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall apply to each individual solicitor or peddler. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-6).

5.05.070 Application review and permit issuance.
(a) Upon receipt of an application, the Chief of Police, or designee, shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.

(b) Within a reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall endorse his/her approval on the application if the Chief determines that there is no ground for denial of the permit, as set forth in SCCC 5.05.090. Applicant shall be directed to pay a business tax as required in SCCC 5.05.130. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.080 (prior code § 7-8)).

5.05.080 Identification and photograph required.
Upon approval of permit application by the Chief of Police, the solicitor or peddler will be issued an identification card with photograph. Such identification issued shall be kept in the applicant's immediate possession at all times when engaged in the business of soliciting or peddling. Such individual shall present the identification card for examination upon demand by a City official enforcing the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.070 (prior code § 7-7)).

5.05.090 Denial of permit.
(a) Upon the Chief of Police's review of the application, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

(1) The investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application, concealed a material fact or otherwise committed any fraud in the application;

(2) The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor/felony involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, kidnapping, or any violent acts against persons and/or children;

(3) The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor/felony involving an offense against private property interests, such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application. Such property offenses include, but are not limited to, larceny, false pretense, fraud, grand theft and embezzlement;

(4) The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist;

(5) The applicant has failed to pay the application fee.

(b) The Chief of Police's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-9).

5.05.100 Appeal from denial of permit.
(a) Whenever the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit exists, he/she shall give the applicant or permittee written notice stating the alleged grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation and the effective date of any suspension or revocation. This notice will be by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address shown on the most recent application or renewal, or by personal service. The decision of the Chief of Police to deny, revoke or suspend a permit may be appealed to the City Manager or designee. The notice shall provide the applicant or permittee with information on the appeal process.

(b) The applicant or permittee must submit a request for an appeal hearing to the City Manager within ten days' receipt of written notice.

(c) Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) days of the request. The City Manager, or designee, shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall not be less than ten days after the service of the notice of hearing by postage of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(d) Any suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal hearing.

(e) At the hearing, the applicant or permittee and the Chief of Police shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the appeal, as stated in the written grounds for the appeal hearing. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written decision which states whether the decision of the Chief of Police is upheld, modified, or reversed; the length of any suspension; and the effective date of any suspension or revocation. The decision of the City Manager shall be served on the applicant or permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(f) The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

(g) Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the applicant or permittee in any hearing or other matter under this chapter.

(h) Upon a written decision of the City Manager which suspends or revokes a permit, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police immediately after service of the notice of the decision. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-10).

5.05.110 Permit expiration.
The expiration of all permits issued under the provisions of this article shall coincide with the business tax certificate, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-11).

5.05.120 Transfer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit or badge issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-12).

5.05.130 Business tax certificate required.
Each and every person or persons engaged in the business of soliciting or peddling shall be subject to business tax as stated in SCCC 3.40.330. The business tax certificate shall be issued if the Director of Finance finds:

(a) Approval to solicit or peddle has been granted by the Chief of Police; and

(b) The required tax therefor has been paid to the Director of Finance. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-13).

5.05.140 Persons claiming tax exemption.
Any solicitor or peddler who claims to be entitled to an exemption from the payment of any tax provided for under SCCC 3.40.120 shall inform the Chief of Police and provide him with information as to the individuals who will solicit and when the solicitation will be performed. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 7-14).

5.05.150 Application to persons requiring a certificate under other provisions of this chapter.
Any person maintaining a fixed place of business in the City; provided, that a tax is specifically required under Chapter 3.40 SCCC, shall not be required to pay any additional tax under the provisions of this chapter but shall be required to obtain the necessary peddler's or solicitor's permit and photo identification pursuant to SCCC 5.05.080 for each employee so engaged according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.160 (prior code § 7-16)).

5.05.160 Application to certain persons not maintaining a fixed location within the city.
Every person not previously mentioned in this chapter and not maintaining a fixed place of business in the City but who regularly renders personal or other services or products either by appointment, calls, referral or otherwise from place to place or in the City shall be classified as a peddler and subject to the peddler provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.170 (prior code § 7-17)).

5.05.170 Conditions of permit – Operating regulations.
Each permit issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, as well as any other conditions specifically set forth in the permit. The provisions of this chapter shall constitute operating regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation or peddling in violation of these provisions.

(a) All motor and mobile units operated by the permittee shall be inspected and certified by the Santa Clara County Health Department annually. (Per Health and Safety Code Section 113700.)

(b) All motor and mobile units operated by the permittee must have a current Health Department certificate, a current Department of Motor Vehicle registration sticker (if needed) and current vehicle insurance.

(c) All solicitation and peddling upon any private place, or any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or other public place in the City shall not occur between one-half hour after sunset and 10:00 A.M. of the following day, except this provision shall not apply to the sale of food items by licensed catering vehicles to employees of industrial establishments at or adjacent to such establishments, or to workers or employees at any construction job site.

(d) Each person who is engaged in solicitation or peddling shall, at all times while so engaged, wear in plain sight on his or her person an identification (ID) card, provided by the Chief of Police, containing such information, including a suitable photograph, as the Chief of Police may determine appropriate.

(e) Every peddler, upon the request of any public safety officer or official of the City, shall sign the peddler's name for comparison with the signature upon the license or card or the signature upon the license application.

(f) Every peddler who solicits orders for future delivery shall, if requested by the customer, provide a receipt plainly stating the quantity of each article or commodity ordered, the price to be paid therefor, the total amount ordered and the amount to be paid on or after delivery.

(g) Every peddler shall, if requested by the customer, provide his/her name, business address and telephone number and the name, business address and telephone number of the person, organization, or entity on whose behalf solicitation is being made. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.180 Noise restrictions.
(a) No solicitor or peddler shall use, play or cause to be used or played any amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound between one-half hour after sunset and 10:00 A.M. of the following day.

(b) No solicitor or peddler shall use, play or cause to be used or played an amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound in such a manner as to create a disturbance of the peace.

(c) No motor vehicle-based solicitor or peddler or mobile peddler shall use, play or employ any amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound when the motor vehicle or mobile unit from which the solicitor or peddler is operating is stationary upon any private place, or any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or other public place. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.190 Observance of "No Solicitors" or "No Peddlers" signs.
It is unlawful for any solicitor or peddler, whether licensed or unlicensed, to perform or attempt to perform the acts described in this chapter by ringing the doorbell or knocking at the door or otherwise calling attention to the person's presence of or at any residence whereon a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors," "No Peddlers" or words of similar import is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view, and no solicitor or peddler shall perform or attempt to perform any of the acts described in any building, structure or place of business whereon or wherein a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors," "No Peddlers" or words of similar import is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

Article II. Solicitation of Employment, Business or Contribution of Money or Other Property from Vehicles and Motor Vehicle-Based and Mobile Unit Peddlers

5.05.210 Prohibition of solicitation in public right-of-way or public parking lots.
(a) It is unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions of money or other property from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways or driveways.

(b) It is unlawful for any person, while the occupant of any vehicle, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions of money or other property from a person who is within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to a public street, highway, sidewalk or driveway.

(c) It is unlawful for any person to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions of money or other property from any occupant of a vehicle, or from any person getting into or out of a vehicle within any parking lot or structure open to the public, where such parking lot is posted with a sign prohibiting such activity. (Ord. 1686 § 2, 4-9-96; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.220).

5.05.220 Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or contributions of money or other property from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner (or the property owner's authorized representative) for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to a solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises.

(b) For purposes of this section, "commercial parking area" shall mean privately owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments.

(c) This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where all of the following occur:

(1) The owner (or person in lawful possession) of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for the lawful solicitation of employment, business, or contributions of money or other property in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with the normal business operations of the commercial premises;

(2) A copy of said policy is submitted to the City Manager (or his/her designee) to be maintained in City files, including a copy to be maintained at the City Police Department; and

(3) The owner (or person in lawful possession) of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area. Said notice shall not be less than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, and the notice shall not exceed, in total area, six square feet. The notice shall read substantially as follows:

It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment, business or contributions of money or other property in areas of this commercial parking lot which are not approved for such activity by the property owner.

(Ord. 1686 § 2, 4-9-96; Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06. Formerly § 5.05.230).

5.05.230 Parking restrictions – Motor vehicle-based and mobile unit peddlers.
(a) It is unlawful for any motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler to:

(1) Remain standing or stopped, for peddling purposes, at any place on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, public park or other public place, for a total period of time exceeding ten minutes within any two-hour period; or

(2) Make any stop, for the purpose of making any sale upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, public park, or other public place, within five hundred (500) feet, measured along the traveled way of any public street or streets, of any school property.

(b) It is unlawful for any motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler to peddle from any motor vehicle or mobile unit upon any public street except from or at the side of such motor vehicle, which is nearest to the curb of such street. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.240 Congestion restriction for motor vehicle-based and mobile unit peddlers.
It is unlawful for any motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler to stop to peddle from a motor vehicle or mobile unit within two hundred (200) feet of another motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler that has already stopped to peddle. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.250 Inspections of motor vehicle-based and mobile units.
(a) All motor vehicle-based or mobile units, except bicycles, operated by the business operator shall be inspected and certified annually by the Santa Clara County Health Department.

(b) The business operator shall present each motor vehicle-based or mobile unit for inspection and certification annually by the Chief of Police.

(c) The exterior of the motor vehicle-based and mobile units shall be clean and in good repair, and not have any peeling, dents, rust, scratches or missing components which are discernible at a distance of five feet or more from the motor vehicle. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.260 Approved location permit terms and conditions.
(a) It is unlawful for a person to peddle from, at, or in conjunction with, a mobile unit or temporary structure except at the approved location. An approved location permit to peddle may be issued by the Chief of Police, subject to the following terms and conditions:

(1) The person requesting an approved location permit at all times holds a current, valid business permit.

(2) Permits shall be issued only for a specific approved location which is stated on the permit.

(3) Permits shall be issued only for the street side of the sidewalk portion of a public street.

(4) Permits shall be issued only for sidewalks with an overall minimum of eight feet where there is at least three feet of unobstructed sidewalk area for pedestrian traffic.

(5) The mobile unit or temporary structure shall not exceed four feet high, five feet wide, and six feet long. Any mobile unit or temporary structure shall be parked in such a way as to use as little of the sidewalk as possible.

(6) No person shall use or have any movable or permanent stand, table, chair, ice chest or other ice container, equipment or device at any approved location other than the permitted mobile unit or temporary structure, one stool for his or her own use, and one trash/garbage container of no more than thirty-three (33) gallon capacity.

(7) No person shall block the movement of pedestrians along the sidewalk with a permitted mobile unit or temporary structure, stool, or trash/garbage container.

(8) Each approved location peddler, at his or her sole cost and expense, and during the entire term of his or her permit or any renewal thereof, shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect a commercial general liability insurance policy or other such policy as the office of the risk manager shall require with minimum policy limits to be set by the risk manager; issued by an admitted insurer or insurers as defined by the California Insurance Code; and providing that no cancellation, change in coverage, or expiration by the insurance company or the insured shall occur during the term of the business permit, without thirty (30) days' written notice to the City prior to the effective date of such cancellation or reduction in coverage.

(b) The Chief of Police shall make approved location permits subject to such other terms and conditions, as the Chief deems necessary, to promote vehicular traffic safety and convenience and pedestrian safety and convenience.

(c) Permits issued under this section shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, and shall cover only the permittee to whom the permit is issued. A permittee may not move from the approved location without permission of the permits unit.

(d) If more than one application is received at the same time for the same location not currently assigned, assignment of the location shall be determined by lot. The drawing shall be made by someone other than the Chief and witnessed by another department employee. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.270 Limitations on approved locations.
Approved location permits shall not be issued when any of the following conditions exist:

(a) The location is immediately adjacent to residentially zoned property.

(b) The location is within twenty (20) feet of any no-parking zone, red zone, fire hydrant, bus zone (marked or unmarked), passenger loading zone, loading zone, handicapped parking zone or driveway.

(c) The location is within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to any building.

(d) The location is within twenty (20) feet of any merchandise display window.

(e) The location is within twenty (20) feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk.

(f) The location impedes a free running right turn lane on an inside corner island, traffic lane, bike lane or any area where a vehicle cannot stop or park legally.

(g) The location is wholly or partly within the right-of-way of a freeway or expressway, including any on-ramp, off-ramp, or roadway shoulder that lies within the right-of-way of a freeway or expressway.

(h) The location is considered hazardous due to unusual volume, accident history or restricted visibility, or similar reasons. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.280 Solicitation and peddling in parks prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person in any public park, including any adjacent parking area, to:

(a) Expose, offer for sale or peddle any article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing, or offer or provide any service for fee or compensation, or to solicit the future provision of any service for fee or compensation except any approved concessionaire acting by and under the authority of the director of parks and recreation;

(b) Announce, advertise or call public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, including paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription;

(c) Solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or contributions of money or other property from any other person in the park or within an adjacent public right-of-way. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

Article III. Operating Regulations and Permit Conditions for Ice Cream Trucks

5.05.300 Definitions.
(a) "Ice cream truck" means any motor vehicle requiring a license from the California Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used to peddle, sell, or vend at retail prepackaged frozen dairy or water-based food products; or soft-serve or hand-dipped frozen dairy or water-based products; or prepackaged snack foods, bottled water and nonalcoholic beverages.

(b) "Ice cream truck business" means the business of peddling, selling or vending at retail, from a truck that travels from place to place on the streets within the city, prepackaged frozen dairy or water-based food products; or soft-serve or hand-dipped frozen dairy or water-based products; or prepackaged snack foods, bottled water and nonalcoholic beverages. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.310 Permit required.
(a) It is unlawful for a person to maintain, manage, operate, conduct, control or own an ice cream truck business operating within the City unless the business is maintained and operated in strict compliance with a valid business permit.

(b) It is unlawful for a person, other than the business operator, to drive or ride on an ice cream truck that is in operation without having first obtained an ice cream business employee permit from the Chief of Police. A business permittee is deemed to have an employee permit for the purposes of driving or riding in the permittee's ice cream trucks. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.320 Conditions of permit.
Each ice cream truck business permit issued by the Chief of Police shall be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, as well as any other conditions specifically set forth in the permit. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.330 Operating regulations.
It is unlawful for any person to violate the operating regulations set forth in this section in addition to the regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.

(a) Only prepackaged food items, soft-serve or hand-dipped frozen dairy products, bottled water, or nonalcoholic beverages may be offered for sale or sold.

(b) Sales from an ice cream truck shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 A.M. to one half-hour after sunset.

(c) Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to streets that have thirty (30) mile per hour speed limits or less.

(d) An ice cream truck shall not park for a period exceeding ten minutes at any one place.

(e) No sales shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked within seventy-five (75) feet of any intersection with any public street or streets, as measured along the traveled way.

(f) No person shall stop to vend from an ice cream truck within two hundred (200) feet of another ice cream truck that has already stopped to vend.

(g) The standard warning flashers shall be in operation immediately upon the truck stopping to vend and cease operation as the truck begins to move after vending. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.340 Noise restrictions.
(a) No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck when the ice cream truck is stationary, after 7:00 P.M. or one half-hour after sunset, whichever occurs first, or in such a manner as to create a disturbance of the peace.

(b) The Chief of Police may set reasonable restrictions on the type and use of any amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound employed on an ice cream truck in order to prevent a disturbance of the peace. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.350 Restriction on riders.
No one other than one driver and one additional person shall be allowed to ride in or on an ice cream truck that is in operation. The driver and the additional person may be the business operator or an employee of the business operator. In no event shall more than two persons ride in or on the truck while the truck is in operation. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

5.05.360 Vehicle inspections – Certification.
(a) It is unlawful for a business operator to operate an ice cream truck that does not have a current, valid Health Department certificate, a current Department of Motor Vehicles registration sticker and current vehicle insurance. All ice cream trucks operated by the business operator shall be inspected and certified by the Santa Clara County Health Department annually. (Per Health and Safety Code Section 113700.)

(b) The business operator shall present each ice cream truck for inspection and certification by the Chief of Police or designee annually. For trucks which pass inspection, the Chief of Police or designee shall affix a suitable inspection sticker on each certified truck, identifying the truck as having successfully passed vehicle inspection.

(c) The business operator shall maintain each ice cream truck being operated in such condition that:

(1) All doors, windows, the hood and the trunk shall open and close securely;

(2) The inside of the ice cream truck shall be clean and free of litter and trash;

(3) There is a trash receptacle that shall be made accessible to the public when sales occur in which patrons can place package wrappers and trash;

(4) The exterior of the ice cream truck shall be clean and in good repair, and not have any peeling, dents, rust, scratches or missing components, which are discernible at a distance of five feet or more from the truck;

(5) Advertising decals and price lists shall be placed only on the vending side of ice cream trucks.

(d) The business operator shall have and maintain in clean operating condition on each ice cream truck the following safety equipment:

(1) Signs painted or mounted on the front and rear of each truck using black four-inch-tall letters on a yellow background with a black one-inch border around each sign. The sign on the front and rear of each vehicle shall read "CHILDREN CROSSING" and be eight inches high by forty-eight (48) inches wide. An additional sign or signs shall be painted or mounted on the rear of each truck above the first sign and shall read "Warning," using the same size letter and paint requirements.

(2) Standard warning flashers.

(3) Any other safety equipment required by the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 10-10-06).

 

Chapter 5.10
CLOSING-OUT AND FAKE SALES
Sections:

Article I. In General

5.10.010  Definitions.

5.10.020  Duties and responsibilities of person operating closing-out sale.

5.10.030  Chief of Police – Power to make examinations and investigations.

5.10.040  False advertising generally.

5.10.050  Rules and regulations applicable to sale generally.

Article II. Application and Fees

5.10.060  Required.

5.10.070  Application – Information required generally.

5.10.080  Application – Fee – Generally – When payable.

5.10.090  Application – Investigation and recommendation – Issuance.

5.10.100  Terms and conditions generally.

5.10.110  Transferability or assignability.

5.10.120  Revocation.

5.10.130  Characteristics of permit – Procedures.

Article I. In General

5.10.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms shall be construed as set forth below:

(a) "Advertise, advertisement or advertising" shall mean any and all means, whether verbal or written, used for conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale as defined in this section or notice of intention to conduct such sale.

(b) "Closing-out sale" shall include the following:

(1) Any sale of or any offer to sell to the public or any group thereof goods, merchandise or wares on order in transit or in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory of or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, removal, dissolution or abandonment of the business or that portion of the business conducted at any location.

(2) All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be removed, discontinued or changed.

(3) All sales advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the goods, merchandise or wares to be sold or any part thereof have been involved in any business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed, sustained damage, been closed, discontinued or liquidated.

(4) All sales accompanied by notices or advertising indicating that the premises are available for purchase or lease or are otherwise to be vacated.

(c) "Fake sale" shall mean any one of the following:

(1) The sale of goods, merchandise or wares at auction or otherwise to agents or other persons purchasing the same for or on behalf of the owner or other person interested in the selling thereof.

(2) The offering for sale of goods, merchandise or wares of a different quality or brand or bearing a different trademark than the merchandise previously advertised for sale.

(3) The sale of any goods, merchandise or wares misrepresented as to quantity, quality or otherwise.

(4) The sale or offering for sale of any goods, merchandise or wares transported or brought into the City and not constituting the original legitimate stock for such place of business within the city, as the original and legitimate stock of such place of business. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent, nor shall it be considered unlawful to sell original stock of goods, merchandise and wares of any place of business, but the bringing of a new stock into any such place of business or the adding of new stock to such original stock of goods, merchandise or wares and selling or offering to sell such new stock or added stock at such place of business at any such sale is hereby declared unlawful and to be a fake sale within such meaning. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-1).

5.10.020 Duties and responsibilities of person operating closing-out sale.
The person operating the closing-out sale shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) Adhere to Inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the duration of the sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application.

(b) Advertise Properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising and conduct the sale in strict conformity with the advertising.

(c) Keep Duplicate Inventory Records. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request.

(d) Segregate Non-Inventoried Goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods.

(e) Revised Daily Inventory. At the close of business each day the stock inventory shall be revised and items on such list disposed of during such day shall be noted thereon. Suitable books and records, as prescribed by the Chief of Police, shall be kept by the owner and shall be open at all times to inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representatives. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-2).

5.10.030 Chief of Police – Power to make examinations and investigations.
The Chief of Police shall at all times have the power to make an examination or investigation of the business and the books, records and accounts and other papers pertaining thereto of any person authorized to conduct a sale regulated by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-3).

5.10.040 False advertising generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a sale referred to in SCCC 5.10.010(c) to advertise or otherwise represent to the public a reduction in the price of any goods, merchandise or wares offered to the public, whether such price reduction is represented in complete price figure or by percentage of reduction under a previous price where such reduction is not based upon a price customarily charged by other vendors for the articles offered to the public. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-4).

5.10.050 Rules and regulations applicable to sale generally.
The following regulations shall apply to sales under this chapter:

(a) Interval Between Sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this chapter, at the location stated in the application, shall not be granted another going out of business permit within a period of one year.

(b) Restricted Location. Where a person operates more than one place of business, the permit issued shall apply only to the location specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in such sale.

(c) Persons Exempt from Section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons:

(1) Persons acting pursuant to an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code.

(2) Persons acting in their official capacities as public officials.

(3) Auctioneers holding a current business tax certificate issued by the City, selling at an auction.

(4) Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes, in good faith, any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-5).

Article II. Application and Fees

5.10.060 Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a closing-out sale as defined in SCCC 5.10.010 without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police of the City in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-6).

5.10.070 Application – Information required generally.
Any person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall make a written application to the Chief of Police setting forth and containing the following information:

(a) The true name and address of the owner of the goods, merchandise, or wares to be sold.

(b) The address of the place where such sale is to be conducted.

(c) The date or dates when the sale is to be conducted.

(d) The name and address of the person conducting the sale, if not the same as the owner of the goods.

(e) The name and address of the persons from whom the goods were acquired, the manner of acquisition, the time of acquisition and the cost of the goods acquired within thirty (30) days of the start of sale.

(f) A full and complete statement of the facts relating to the sale, including the reasons for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods, merchandise or wares thereby, and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.

(g) The means proposed for advertising the sale, together with the proposed content of such advertising, if any.

(h) At the discretion of the Chief of Police, provide an itemized stock list of inventory of the goods, merchandise and wares to be offered for sale, together with the cost at which the goods were obtained by the person conducting such sale. All goods listed upon such inventory shall be so described in detail by the manufacturer's name and lot number, the individual number of articles so numbered, colors, sizes and otherwise, in order that the identity of such goods listed on such inventory can be readily determined. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-7).

5.10.080 Application – Fee – Generally – When payable.
Each applicant holding a current business tax certificate shall pay an amount established by resolution of the City Council of the City which shall be retained by the City as compensation for making an investigation of the statements in the application. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-8).

5.10.090 Application – Investigation and recommendation – Issuance.
Upon the filing of the application as provided in SCCC 5.10.070, the Chief of Police will make or cause to be made an examination, audit or investigation of the applicant and his/her affairs in relation to the proposed sale.

If the Chief of Police finds that the statements in the application are true, that the inventory is complete, that the advertising set forth is not false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect and that the methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the sale are not such, the Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of a permit to conduct such sale in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; otherwise, the Chief of Police shall recommend denial of the application. The Chief of Police may refuse the applicant because of insufficiency of the information set forth in the application, but in such event the Director of Finance shall grant the applicant permission to file an amended application.

The Chief of Police shall issue the permit upon approval of the application. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-9).

5.10.100 Terms and conditions generally.
A permit shall be issued hereunder on the following terms:

(a) Permit Period, Renewal. The permit shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days. The Chief of Police may, upon application and accompanied by a renewal fee established by resolution of the City Council, renew such permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Such application for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods not sold named in such original application. Upon receipt of such application for renewal, the Chief of Police shall investigate the statements made in the application and if satisfied of the truth of the statements contained therein, the Chief of Police shall grant such renewal.

(b) Nature of Sale. The certificate shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein.

(c) Salable Goods. The certificate shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-10).

5.10.110 Transferability or assignability.
Any permit provided for in this chapter shall not be assignable or transferable. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-11).

5.10.120 Revocation.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to revoke at any time the permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter whenever any such sale or special sale is being conducted in violation of any provisions of this chapter or in such a manner as to deceive or defraud the public. The Chief of Police shall also have such power to revoke the permit when the permit-holder has:

(a) Made any material misstatement in the application.

(b) Participated in fraudulent practice in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit.

(c) Failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this chapter the goods, merchandise and wares required to be contained in such inventory.

(d) Added, caused to be added or permitted to be added any goods, merchandise or wares not described in the original inventory.

(e) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter or laws pertaining to advertising. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-12).

5.10.130 Characteristics of permit – Procedures.
This permit shall have the characteristics of permits as described in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. The procedures governing its issuance, revocation, suspension and the like of such permits, including appeal from refusal to endorse application "Approved" shall be as prescribed in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1719 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 8-13).

Chapter 5.15
CHRISTMAS TREE, PUMPKINS AND OTHER SEASONAL SALES LOTS
Sections:

5.15.010  Business tax certificate.

5.15.020  Business tax certificate exceptions.

5.15.030  Requirements and fees.

5.15.040  Application for business tax certificate.

5.15.050  Rules and regulations – Authority of the Fire Department and Building Department.

5.15.060  Conditions – Special.

5.15.070  Duration of certificate – Deposit.

5.15.010 Business tax certificate.
No person, firm, or corporation shall set up or offer for sale any Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items on any property located outside of a building or on a lot within the city without first applying for and paying the business tax and other required fees to the municipal services/business tax division. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-20).

5.15.020 Business tax certificate exceptions.
(a) This chapter shall not apply to any retail place of business within the city, holding a valid business tax certificate, selling or offering for sale Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items within a building of the business establishment.

(b) Those businesses exempted from paying a business tax under SCCC 3.40.120 must still comply with the Fire and Building Department safety conditions according to SCCC 5.15.050 through 5.15.070. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-21).

5.15.030 Requirements and fees.
Issuance of the business tax certificate to sell Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items in the City shall be restricted to one non-assignable certificate. A separate business tax certificate shall be required for each type of seasonal lot. Sellers may receive not more than one business tax certificate and shall be required to pay the business tax as stated in SCCC 3.40.330 in addition to all other applicable City fees such as fire inspection and clean-up fees. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-22).

5.15.040 Application for business tax certificate.
The application shall be submitted to the municipal services/business tax division on the form provided and shall be accompanied by the business tax and additional fees as required by the City with a suitable plot plan, showing the location of the sales stand, accessory structures, lot lines and street lines. A copy of the application and plans shall be referred to the Building Department and the Fire Department for approval or denial. The Fire Department and/or the Building Department may deny the issuance of the certificate if, upon inspection, fire, electrical, structural or health hazards are created at the location where the Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items are to be sold. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-23).

5.15.050 Rules and regulations – Authority of the Fire Department and Building Department.
The Building Department and the Fire Department may, with approval of the City Council, prescribe such rules and regulations for the sale of Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items, the construction and use of temporary stands or structures for such sale, the places where such sales will be conducted, the removal of such structures, and the removal of unsold stock in trade, the storage of such Christmas trees, and other rules as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-24).

5.15.060 Conditions – Special.
The granting of a business tax certificate shall be conditioned upon the following requirements:

(a) No certificate shall be approved for the sale of Christmas trees, pumpkins or other seasonal items in a residentially zoned district.

(b) Electrical installations, if any, shall be made by an electrical contractor. Electric permits shall be obtained prior to the start of any work, and all electric wiring shall conform to the National Electric Code and State laws.

(c) The location of tents and other structures shall be readily accessible to fire equipment. Certificate of treatment of tents for fire resistance shall be exhibited upon demand.

(d) Removal of combustible weeds and other fire hazards from tree lot area. Provision of suitable containers for rubbish and trash.

(e) Provision of adequate sanitation facilities.

(f) House trailer shall obtain a permit for purposes of sheltering a night watchman pursuant to SCCC 18.60.030.

(g) All sales stands and structures of a temporary nature shall not be subject to the Building Code of the City; however, all such stands shall be constructed in a manner that will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons, and shall be approved as to their safety and compliance with this chapter by the Building Department of the City.

(h) Minimum setback for such temporary stands or structures from street curbing of front property line shall be ten feet. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-25).

5.15.070 Duration of certificate – Deposit.
Prior to the granting of the business tax certificate, the applicant shall post with the municipal services/business tax division a cash deposit in the sum established by resolution of the City Council, which shall be forfeited to the City in the event that the applicant does not thoroughly clean the premises and remove all trees, pumpkins, temporary structures, rubbish and debris therefrom on or before January 2nd for Christmas tree sales lots and November 7th for pumpkin sales lots following the issuance of the certificate. If such premises are thoroughly cleaned, and all trees, pumpkins, temporary structures, rubbish and debris are so removed as aforesaid, said deposit shall be returned to the applicant. The pumpkin lot business tax certificate shall expire on November 30th following the date of application. The Christmas tree lot business tax certificate shall expire on January 30th following the date of application. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 11-26).

Chapter 5.20
GAS, OIL, ELECTRIC
AND WATER FRANCHISES
Sections:

Article I. Generally

5.20.010  Grantee.

5.20.020  Powers – Purposes.

5.20.030  Franchises – Authority to grant.

Article II. Manner of Granting

5.20.040  Application – Filing, contents.

5.20.050  Resolution of intention to grant franchise – Notice of hearing – Publication of notice – Time for hearing.

5.20.060  City Council's discretion.

5.20.070  Contents of notice of hearing.

5.20.080  Protests – Hearing – Grant of franchise.

5.20.090  Written acceptance.

Article III. Scope of Franchise

5.20.100  Effect of acceptance of grant.

5.20.110  Franchise rights.

5.20.120  Acquisition of grantee's property – Eminent domain.

5.20.130  Valuation of franchise.

Article IV. Duties and Liabilities

5.20.140  Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.

5.20.150  Duty of grantee – Construction and maintenance.

5.20.160  Payment for repairs to public property.

5.20.170  Indemnification of City.

5.20.180  Removal or relocation of facilities.

5.20.190  Filing of franchise transfer.

5.20.200  Annual statements.

5.20.210  Payment – Effect of failure to file statement or make required payment.

5.20.220  Records and accounts.

5.20.230  Right to inspection of books.

5.20.240  Bond of grantee – Conditions –Refusal or forfeiture of franchise.

5.20.250  Reserved.

5.20.260  Forfeiture.

5.20.270  Appointment of a receiver.

5.20.280  Suit by City for forfeiture of franchise.

5.20.290  Violation by grantee – Liability for damages to City for nonfaithful performance.

5.20.300  Exemplary damages.

5.20.310  Necessity for legal proceeding –Payment of legal fees.

Article I. Generally

5.20.010 Grantee.
"Grantee" shall include any successor or assign of the original grantee of any franchise granted hereunder. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-1).

5.20.020 Powers – Purposes.
This chapter is enacted by ordinance pursuant to the authority of Section 1400 of Article XIV of the Charter of the City of Santa Clara which vests in the City Council the power to provide a procedure for the granting of franchises upon such terms, conditions, restrictions, and limitations as may be prescribed by ordinance, but that no franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City adequate compensation for the privilege conferred. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an exclusive procedure for the granting of gas, oil, electric, and water franchises by the City, including resettlement franchises in lieu of existing franchises and claims, upon terms, conditions, restrictions, and limitations which will provide greater protection of the interests of the public than is provided for by general law. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-2).

5.20.030 Franchises – Authority to grant.
The City Council is hereby empowered to grant a franchise to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, to use, or to construct and use, poles, wires, conduits, and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing electricity for all purposes, or to use, or to lay and use pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas for any and all purposes, or to use, or to lay and use, pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing oil or products thereof for any and all purposes, or to lay and use pipes, ditches, flumes, conduits, and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing water for any and all purposes, under, along, across or upon the public streets, ways, alleys, and places as the same now, or hereafter, exist within the city, upon the terms and conditions provided in the City's Charter and this chapter, and may, in such franchise, impose such other and additional terms, conditions, restrictions, and limitations not in conflict with said Charter or this chapter, whether governmental or contractual in character, as in the judgment of said Council are to the public interest. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-3).

Article II. Manner of Granting

5.20.040 Application – Filing, contents.
An applicant for a franchise shall file with the City Council an application stating:

(a) The name of the applicant.

(b) The purpose for which the franchise is desired.

(c) The term for which the franchise is desired.

(d) The amount or percentages applicant, if granted the franchise, proposes to pay to the City during the life of such franchise and any other terms or conditions that applicant may desire so long as they are supplemental to and not inconsistent with those set forth in this chapter.

(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the application is for a franchise for a nonpublic utility pipeline for oil or products thereof, the application shall state that the applicant, if granted the franchise, will pay to the City during the life of the franchise either a specified percentage agreed to by the applicant and the City of the gross annual receipts of the applicant arising from the use, operation, or possession of the franchise or an annual franchise fee in an amount agreed to by the applicant and the City or an annual franchise fee computed by multiplying the sum of one cent ($0.01) times the nominal internal diameter of the pipe, expressed in inches, times the number of lineal feet of such pipe, within the public streets, ways, alleys, or other public places within the city. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 1, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-4).

5.20.050 Resolution of intention to grant franchise – Notice of hearing – Publication of notice – Time for hearing.
(a) Upon receipt of the application, the City Council may pass a resolution stating the character of the franchise, setting forth a notice of the day, hour, and place when and where all persons having any objection to the granting thereof may appear before the City Council and be heard thereon, and directing the City Clerk to publish the notice at least once within fifteen (15) days after the passage of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

(b) The time fixed for the hearing shall be not less than twenty (20) nor more than sixty (60) days after the date of the passage of the resolution. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-5).

5.20.060 City Council's discretion.
Nothing in this chapter shall make it mandatory for the Council to authorize publication of said notice.

The Council may consider applicant's ability to carry out its proposal, its financial and business standing, experience, and any other pertinent factors. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-6).

5.20.070 Contents of notice of hearing.
The notice of the time and place of hearing objections shall state that the grantee of the franchise and its successors and assigns, will during the life of its franchise, pay to the City the amounts or percentages specified in the application, and in the event such payment is not made the franchise will be forfeited. The notice shall also designate the term, whether definite or indeterminate, for which the franchise is proposed to be granted. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 2, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-7).

5.20.080 Protests – Hearing – Grant of franchise.
Any interested person may protest, stating objections against the granting of the franchise. At the time set for the hearing, the City Council shall hear the application and the protests. The City Council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall decide if the franchise shall be granted. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive, subject to the right of referendum of the people and the following provisions. The franchise shall be granted by ordinance upon the terms, conditions, and restrictions stated in the application and upon such other terms, conditions, and restrictions as the City Council deems are in the public interest. The decision of the City Council to grant a franchise shall not be made until such an ordinance is duly adopted, whereas the decision to deny is made on passage of a motion to deny. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-8).

5.20.090 Written acceptance.
Any franchise granted under this chapter shall not become effective until the grantee files written acceptance thereof with the City Clerk. When so filed, the acceptance constitutes a continuing agreement by the grantee that if and when the City thereafter annexes, or consolidates with, additional territory, all franchises, rights, and privileges of the grantee therein, except a franchise derived under Section 19 of Article XI of the Constitution as that section existed prior to the amendment thereof adopted October 10, 1911, shall be deemed abandoned within the limits of the additional territory. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-9).

Article III. Scope of Franchise

5.20.100 Effect of acceptance of grant.
Any franchise granted under this chapter with respect to a given utility service is in lieu of all other franchises, rights, or privileges of the grantee, or of any successor of the grantee to any rights under the franchise for transmitting and distributing the utility service within the limits of the City as such limits exist at the time of the granting of the franchise or as they may hereafter exist, except any franchise derived under Section 19 of Article XI of the Constitution as that section existed prior to the amendment thereof adopted October 10, 1911. The acceptance of any such franchise granted under this chapter shall operate as an abandonment of all other franchises, rights, and privileges of grantee or of any successor of grantee within the limits of the City as such limits at any time exist. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-10).

5.20.110 Franchise rights.
Every gas franchise granted pursuant to this chapter confers upon the grantee the right to use, or to lay and use, gas pipes and appurtenances for the purpose of transmitting and distributing gas; every oil franchise so granted confers upon the grantee thereof the right to use, or lay and use, oil pipes and appurtenances for the purpose of transmitting and distributing oil or products thereof; every water franchise so granted confers upon the grantee thereof the right to use, or to lay and use, pipes, ditches, flumes, conduits, and appurtenances for the purpose of transmitting and distributing water; and every electric franchise so granted confers upon the grantee thereof the right to use, or to construct and use, poles, wires or conduits and appurtenances for the purpose of transmitting and distributing electricity for any and all purposes, under, along, across, or upon the public streets, ways, alleys, and places as they now or hereafter exist within the city.

Such rights shall not include the right to occupy any park, playground, or other municipal property (exclusive of public thoroughfares), unless a special permit therefor shall be granted by the City Council. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-11).

5.20.120 Acquisition of grantee's property – Eminent domain.
No franchise granted under this chapter in any way impairs or affects the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee by purchase or condemnation, and nothing contained in such a franchise shall be construed to contract away, modify or abridge either for a term or in perpetuity the City's right of eminent domain. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-12).

5.20.130 Valuation of franchise.
No franchise granted under this chapter shall ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary publication and any other sum paid by it to the City therefor at the time of acceptance. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-13).

Article IV. Duties and Liabilities

5.20.140 Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.
The applicant for a franchise shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the application and processing thereof. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the applicant with a written statement of the expenses. The City Council may by resolution require the deposit of a sufficient sum to cover such expense in advance of processing the application. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-14).

5.20.150 Duty of grantee – Construction and maintenance.
The grantee of a franchise under this chapter shall construct, install, and maintain all pipes, conduits, poles, wires and appurtenances in accordance and in conformity with all of the lawful ordinances and regulations adopted by the City Council in the exercise of its police powers, and, as to State highways, subject to the laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities therein. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 2, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-15).

5.20.160 Payment for repairs to public property.
The grantee shall pay to the City on demand the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any of the operations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-16).

5.20.170 Indemnification of City.
The grantee shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers and employees from all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under the franchise. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-17).

5.20.180 Removal or relocation of facilities.
The grantee shall remove or relocate without expense to the City any facilities installed, used, or maintained under the franchise when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street, way, alley, or place, including the construction for or by the City of any subway or viaduct or any other lawful public work of governmental character. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-18).

5.20.190 Filing of franchise transfer.
The grantee shall file with the City Council no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed sale, transfer, assignment, or lease, of the franchise or any part thereof, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the proposed transaction certified to by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. No franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be sold, transferred, assigned, or leased without the consent of the City Council, and any attempt to sell, transfer, assign or lease without such consent is a nullity. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-19).

5.20.200 Annual statements.
The grantee shall file with the City Clerk, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of the franchise and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of the grantee, its successors, or assigns during the preceding calendar year or fractional calendar year arising from the use, operation and possession of the franchise and the gross receipts from the sale within the city of the utility service for which the franchise was granted. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 3, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-20).

5.20.210 Payment – Effect of failure to file statement or make required payment.
The grantee shall pay to the City within 15 days after the time for filing its statement of gross receipts, in lawful money of the United States, the specified percentage of its gross receipts, and any other sum, for the calendar year or fractional calendar year covered by the statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by the grantee to file the verified statement, or to pay the percentage at the time or in the manner provided constitutes grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of the franchise and of all the rights thereunder. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 3, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-21).

5.20.220 Records and accounts.
The grantee shall keep and maintain for the term of the franchise and three years thereafter suitable and accurate accounts and records in such form as to enable the City to readily ascertain and check the amounts due it pursuant to the requirements of any franchise granted; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require noncompliance with the provisions of applicable Federal or State law or regulations being paramount hereto. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-22).

5.20.230 Right to inspection of books.
The City shall have free access to and the right at any time to inspect and audit any books and records of the grantee involving or relating to calculations and transactions related to the franchise. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-23).

5.20.240 Bond of grantee – Conditions –Refusal or forfeiture of franchise.
(a) The grantee of a franchise under this chapter may be required to file a bond running to the City with at least two good and sufficient sureties approved by the City Council, or with a corporate surety approved by the City Council, in a penal sum prescribed by the City Council and set forth in the resolution of intention to grant the franchise, conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition of the franchise, and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount of the penal sum therein shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties upon the bond.

(b) The bond, if required by the City Council, shall be filed with the City Council within five days after the date of the granting of the franchise; and if the bond is not so filed, or does not receive the approval of the City Council, the franchise may be refused or forfeited and any money paid to the City in connection therewith shall be retained by the City. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-24).

5.20.250 Reserved.
5.20.260 Forfeiture.
If the grantee of any franchise granted under this chapter fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions or conditions prescribed in this chapter and does not, within ten days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning, does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the City, by its City Council, may declare the franchise forfeited. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-26).

5.20.270 Appointment of a receiver.
If for any reason a person provides service within the purview of this chapter within the city without authority of a franchise, the City Council may cause a receiver to be appointed who shall have authority to take custody of the property and gross receipts of the person providing service without a franchise and, from the property and gross receipts which are impounded, pay to the City an amount equal to that which would be paid to the City if the person were providing service under lawful authority of a franchise in addition to any costs to be incurred incidental to the receivership. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-27).

5.20.280 Suit by City for forfeiture of franchise.
The City shall also have the right to sue in its own name for the forfeiture of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter because of the noncompliance of the grantee with any of the terms or conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-28).

5.20.290 Violation by grantee – Liability for damages to City for nonfaithful performance.
The grantee of the franchise under this chapter shall be liable to the City for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of the grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform any provisions of the franchise and any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-29).

5.20.300 Exemplary damages.
The City shall be allowed exemplary damages for violation of any of the terms hereof or of any franchise issued hereunder if, and to the extent, allowed by law. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. 1208 § 4, 3-18-69. Formerly § 12A-30).

5.20.310 Necessity for legal proceeding –Payment of legal fees.
If legal proceedings are necessary to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter against any grantee of a franchise, said grantee shall be liable for the value of attorneys' services, services of other personnel, and other expenses of City which are necessary to gain compliance herewith. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 9-5-67. Formerly § 12A-31).

Chapter 5.25
CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISES*
Sections:

5.25.010  Short title.

5.25.020  Definitions and word usage.

5.25.030  Grant of franchise.

5.25.040  Scope of franchise.

5.25.050  Franchise required.

5.25.060  Length of franchise.

5.25.070  Franchise characteristics.

5.25.080  Franchisee subject to other laws, police power.

5.25.090  Acts at franchisee's expense.

5.25.100  Eminent domain.

5.25.110  Application – Filing.

5.25.120  Contents of application.

5.25.130  Application for grant of franchise other than Cable Act renewal franchise.

5.25.140  Application for grant of a Cable Act renewal franchise.

5.25.150  Application for modification of a franchise.

5.25.160  Public hearings.

5.25.170  Consistency.

5.25.180  System construction schedule.

5.25.190  Construction procedures.

5.25.200  Construction standards.

5.25.210  Participation with other utilities.

5.25.220  Underground Services Alert.

5.25.230  Provision of service – Quality of service.

5.25.240  Publicizing proposed construction work.

5.25.250  System maintenance.

5.25.260  Continuity of service.

5.25.270  Open books and records.

5.25.280  Communication with regulatory agencies.

5.25.290  Reports.

5.25.300  Records required.

5.25.310  Voluminous materials.

5.25.320  Retention of records – Relation to privacy rights.

5.25.330  Maps and plans.

5.25.340  Performance evaluation.

5.25.350  Consumer protection provisions – General provisions.

5.25.360  Telephone and office availability.

5.25.370  Scheduling work.

5.25.380  Notice to subscribers.

5.25.390  Interruptions of service.

5.25.400  Billing.

5.25.410  Disconnection/downgrades.

5.25.420  Deposits.

5.25.430  Parental control option.

5.25.440  Rate regulation.

5.25.450  Franchise fee – Amount.

5.25.460  Franchise fee – Payment.

5.25.470  Quarterly statement of gross revenues.

5.25.480  Acceptance of payment not a release.

5.25.490  Franchise fee not in lieu of taxes.

5.25.500  Annual statement of gross revenue.

5.25.510  City's right to audit books and records.

5.25.520  Failure to pay franchise fee.

5.25.530  Final statement of gross revenues.

5.25.540  Franchise fee – Holding over after expiration.

5.25.550  Insurance required.

5.25.560  Insurance – Franchise provisions.

5.25.570  Insurance – Material term.

5.25.580  Indemnification.

5.25.590  Security fund.

5.25.600  Performance bond.

5.25.610  Remedies.

5.25.620  Revocation or termination of franchise.

5.25.630  Procedures upon revocation or abandonment of a franchise.

5.25.640  City's establishment of a cable system.

5.25.650  Remedies cumulative.

5.25.660  Recovery – Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements.

5.25.670  Reserved.

5.25.680  Transfer – City approval required.

5.25.690  Transfer – Application.

5.25.700  Transfer – Determination by City.

5.25.710  Transferee's agreement.

5.25.720  Transfer – Exceptions.

5.25.730  Transfer – Approval does not constitute waiver.

5.25.740  Discriminatory practices prohibited.

5.25.750  Equal employment opportunity.

5.25.760  Subscriber privacy.

5.25.770  Compliance with laws.

5.25.780  Captions.

5.25.790  No recourse against the City.

5.25.800  Connections to cable system – Use of antennas.

5.25.810  Calculation of time.

5.25.820  Publication expenses.

*Code reviser's note: Ordinance 1692 adds these provisions as Article II of Chapter 12-A.

5.25.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Code." (Ord. 1692 § 2(1), 8-6-96).

5.25.020 Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number, and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, Part 1 (Section 521 et seq.), as amended, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision.

(a) "A" definitions:

(1) "Access channel" means any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for public, educational, or governmental use.

(2) "Affiliate" means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee.

(3) "Applicant" means any person submitting an application within the meaning of this chapter.

(4) "Application" means any proposal, submission or request to (i) construct and/or operate a cable system within the city; (ii) transfer a franchise; (iii) renew a franchise; or (iv) modify a franchise. An application includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as well as any and all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence.

(5) "Applicable law" means all lawfully enacted and applicable Federal, State, and City laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time.

(b) "B" definitions:

(1) "Basic cable service" or "basic service" means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

(c) "C" definitions:

(1) "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as further amended from time to time.

(2) "Cable operator" shall have the same meaning as in the Cable Act.

(3) "Cable service" means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(4) "Cable system" has the meaning ascribed to it under Title VI of the Cable Act and also includes facilities which are "community antenna television systems" under California law. A reference to a franchisee's cable system includes pedestals, equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment necessary to operate the cable system.

(5) "City" means the City of Santa Clara, California. Any act that may be taken by the City may be taken by the City Council or any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on the City's behalf.

(6) "City Council" means the governing body of the City of Santa Clara, California.

(7) "Construction," "operation," or "repair" and similar formulations of those terms mean the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and tree trimming.

(d) "D" definitions:

(1) "Director of Communications" means the City Manager of the City. Any act that may be taken by the Director of Communications may be taken by any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on behalf of the City Manager.

(e) "E" definitions:

(1) "Equitable price" means fair market value adjusted downward for the harm to the City or subscribers, if any, resulting from a franchisee's breach of its franchise agreement or violation of this chapter and as further adjusted to account for other equitable factors that may be considered consistent with 47 U.S.C. Section 547.

(f) "F" definitions:

(1) "Fair market value" means the price for the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.

(2) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or its designee.

(3) "Franchise" means a nonexclusive authorization granted in accordance with this chapter and exercised in accordance with a franchise agreement to install cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system along the public rights-of-way within a franchise area. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include:

(A) Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the City;

(B) Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on public streets or property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way;

(C) Express or implicit authorization to provide service to, or install a cable system on private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621(a)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. 541(a)(2)).

(4) "Franchise agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised.

(5) "Franchise area" means the area of the City that a franchisee is authorized to serve by its franchise agreement.

(6) "Franchisee" means a natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind that has been granted a cable television franchise by the City.

(g) "G" definitions:

(1) "Governmental access channel" means any channel or capacity on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for government use.

(2) "Gross revenues" means any and all cash or other consideration of any kind or nature derived by a franchisee or by another person subject to a franchise fee under 47 U.S.C. Section 542 or applicable law governing the provision of cable service. In the case of a franchisee, the term "gross revenues" means the gross revenues of the franchisee or any other entity that is a cable operator of such system in any way derived from the operation of a franchisee's cable system in the franchise area to provide cable services. Gross revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, or per-program service; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative fees; revenues received from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system; revenues from rentals or sales of converters or other equipment; advertising revenues; revenues from program guides; and revenues from home shopping channels.

Gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee under any franchise. Gross revenues shall not include: (i) any taxes on services furnished by a franchisee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the State, City, or other governmental unit and which are collected by a franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit; (ii) programming revenues of any affiliate of a franchisee whose programming is carried on the cable system where such revenues are paid to said affiliate by the franchisee and recovered by the franchisee through charges to subscribers that are included in gross revenues; (iii) amounts paid to a franchisee by a subscriber but refunded to the subscriber; and (iv) amounts booked as revenues which are bad subscriber debt, net of any collections. A franchisee which takes advantage of this bad debt exception must exercise due diligence and utilize all reasonable means to collect debt owed to it.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) "N" definitions:

(1) "Non-cable service" means any service that is authorized to be distributed over the cable system, other than a cable service, and may include, but not be limited to, transmission of voice, data or interactive video.

(o) "O" definitions:

(1) "Overbuild" means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers in an area of the City served by an existing cable system.

(p) "P" definitions:

(1) "Person" is as defined in SCCC 1.05.020, "P" definitions. The term does not include the City.

(2) "Public access channel" means any channel or capacity on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for use by the general public, including groups and individuals, and which is available for such use on a nondiscriminatory basis.

(3) "Public rights-of-way" means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the City now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the City and as the City may have the undisputed right and power to give.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) "S" definitions:

(1) "Sale" means any sale, exchange, or similar transaction.

(2) "Service tier" means a package of two or more cable services for which a separate charge is made by the franchisee, other than a package of premium and pay-per-view services that is not subject to rate regulation under the Cable Act and applicable FCC regulations because those services are also sold on a true a la carte basis.

(3) "Subscriber" means the City or any person who legally receives any cable service from a cable operator delivered over that cable operator's cable system.

(t) "T" definitions:

(1) Transfer.

(A) "Transfer" means any transaction in which:

(i) All or substantially all of the cable system is sold or assigned; or

(ii) There is any change, acquisition, or transfer of control of the franchisee; or

(iii) The rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under the franchise are transferred, sold, assigned, or leased, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, to another party.

(B) "Control of the franchisee" for purposes of this section means the ability to exert actual working control, in whatever manner exercised, over the affairs of a franchisee or a cable operator of a cable system, either directly or indirectly. Without limiting the above, any change in the managing general partners of a franchisee shall be presumed a change in control.

(u) "U" definitions:

(1) "User" means a person or the City utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1692 § 2(2), 8-6-96).

5.25.030 Grant of franchise.
The City may grant one or more cable system franchises, and each such franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter. In no event shall this chapter be considered a contract between the City and a franchisee such that the City would be prohibited from amending any provision hereof. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.040 Scope of franchise.
A franchise shall, by its terms, authorize the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system to provide cable services. A franchisee may at any time (as part of an application for a franchise under this chapter, or separately) apply to expand the scope of its franchise, subject to appropriate conditions, or may apply for a separate authorization to provide non-cable services, pursuant to such procedures as the City may lawfully establish from time to time. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.050 Franchise required.
Except as Federal law may otherwise provide, no person may construct or operate a cable system without holding a valid franchise granted by the City. No person may be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the City pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.060 Length of franchise.
No franchise shall initially be granted for a period of more than ten years, except that a franchisee may apply for renewal or extension pursuant to SCCC 5.25.110 through 5.25.170. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.070 Franchise characteristics.
(a) A franchise is nonexclusive and will not explicitly or implicitly preclude, subject to SCCC 5.25.050, the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the city; affect the City's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate; or affect the City's right to itself construct, operate, or maintain a cable system, with or without a franchise.

(b) All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way, and the City reserves the right to designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way.

(c) A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to the original franchisee. No transfer of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the City and unless application is made by the franchisee and transferee and City approval is obtained, all in accordance with this chapter, the franchise agreement and other applicable law.

(d) A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from entering into an otherwise lawful exclusive arrangement with a building owner or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial subscriber. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.080 Franchisee subject to other laws, police power.
(a) Except as specified in the franchise, the franchisee shall be subject to all requirements of City ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. However, a franchisee, by entering into a franchise, does not waive its rights to challenge the lawfulness of any such enactment, including on the ground that a particular action is an unconstitutional impairment of contractual rights.

(b) There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any applicable law.

(c) Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision thereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City.

(d) The City Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter. The Director of Communications or its designee is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy involving performance or charges arising from the operations of any franchisee under this chapter on behalf of the City. The Council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the Director of Communications, and the Council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any franchisee or from any provision of this chapter.

(e) Without limiting the foregoing, a franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable laws.

(f) The City shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate cable systems, franchisees, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible, except where rights are expressly waived by the City in a franchise agreement, they are reserved, whether expressly enumerated or not. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.090 Acts at franchisee's expense.
Any act that a franchisee is or may be required to perform under this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law shall be performed at the franchisee's expense, unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the franchise agreement, or applicable law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.100 Eminent domain.
Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the City's exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to enlarge or limit, modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain with respect to any public utility. (Ord. 1692 § 2(3)(h), 8-6-96).

5.25.110 Application – Filing.
(a) A written application shall be filed with the City for:

(1) Grant of an initial franchise;

(2) Renewal of a franchise under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) through (g); or

(3) Modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement.

(b) To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with six copies. The application must conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all information required under SCCC 5.25.120. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application.

(c) All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the City for public inspection. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.120 Contents of application.
A request for proposals for a franchise, including for a renewal franchise under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(c), shall require, and any application submitted pursuant to SCCC 5.25.110 (and expressly not an informal renewal application submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h)) shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(a) Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant including: the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant and in all persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain, the names and addresses of all persons with ten percent or more ownership interest in the applicant and in persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; the persons who control the applicant and persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; and all officers and directors of the applicant and persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain;

(b) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel;

(c) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the following criteria:

(1) The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements of a franchise agreement as the City may lawfully require.

(2) The applicant must not have submitted an application for an initial or renewal franchise to the City, which was denied on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and interests of the community, or as to which any challenges to such franchising decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application.

(3) The applicant must not have had any cable television franchise validly revoked (including any appeals) by any franchising authority within three years preceding the submission of the application.

(4) The applicant must have the necessary authority under California law to operate a cable system.

(5) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it may not hold the franchise as a matter of applicable law. An applicant must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, any necessary Federal or State authorizations or waivers required to operate the cable system proposed.

(6) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during the ten years preceding the submission of the application, the applicant was convicted of any act or omission of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the City and the subscribers of the cable system, or to substantially comply with its lawful obligations under applicable law, including obligations under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct.

(7) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.

(8) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected official of the City holds a controlling interest in the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of subsections (c)(3) and (6) of this section, the City shall provide a reasonable opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise under subsection (c)(3) or (6) of this section, by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of cable systems. Nothing in this section prevents an applicant from raising other issues with the City relevant to the consideration of the applicant's legal qualifications under subsections (c)(3) or (6) of this section;

(d) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed;

(e) A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of cities and counties in California in which the applicant or any of its principals have a cable franchise or any interest therein; provided, that an applicant that holds a franchise for the City and is seeking renewal of that franchise need only provide this information for other cities and counties in California where its franchise is scheduled to expire during the twelve (12)-month period prior to the date its application is submitted to the City and for other cities and counties in California where its franchise had been scheduled to expire during the twelve (12)-month period after the date its application is submitted to the City. If an applicant has no other franchise in California, it shall provide the information for its operations in other states;

(f) Identification of the area of the City to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed franchise area's boundaries;

(g) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities;

(h) Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed cable system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities;

(i) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and all other proposed equipment or services;

(j) A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including descriptions of the capacity, facilities and support for public, educational, and governmental use of the cable system (including institutional networks) applicant proposes to provide and why applicant believes that the proposal is adequate to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community;

(k) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules;

(l) If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area that would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of the public rights-of-way and other property that would be used by the applicant to accommodate an additional system;

(m) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter; and

(n) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.130 Application for grant of franchise other than Cable Act renewal franchise.
(a) A person may apply for a franchise by submitting a request for issuance of a request for proposals ("RFP") and requesting an evaluation of its application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. Upon receipt of a request for an RFP, the City shall, if necessary, commence a proceeding to identify the future cable-related needs and interests of the community and, upon completion of that proceeding, shall promptly issue an RFP and proposed franchise agreement, which shall be mailed to the person requesting its issuance and any existing cable system franchisee, and made available to any other interested party. The applicant shall respond within the time directed by the City, providing the information and material set forth in SCCC 5.25.120. The procedures, instructions, and requirements set forth in the RFP shall be followed by each applicant as if set forth and required herein. The City or its designee may seek additional information from any applicant and establish deadlines for the submission of such information (which deadlines shall be not less than twenty (20) days from issuance of a request for additional information). An existing franchisee shall have the right to file comments regarding any applicant and their application, which comments shall be treated as part of the record before the City.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited application containing the information required in SCCC 5.25.120 and requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. Prior to evaluating that application, the City may conduct such investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application satisfies the standards set forth in subsection (c) of this section and may seek additional applications.

(c) In evaluating an application for a franchise, the City shall consider, among other things, the following factors:

(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable franchise for the City;

(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any existing franchise in the City, including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities served;

(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to hold a cable franchise;

(4) Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the City and is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests;

(5) Whether, to the extent not considered as part of subsection (c)(4) of this section, the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support;

(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-of-way and private property that would be used by the cable system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rights-of-way; the effect of granting an overbuild franchise on the ability of any existing franchisee to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing applications; and

(7) Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the City.

(d) If the City finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise considering the factors set forth above, and subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise agreement, it shall issue a franchise. If the City denies a franchise, it will issue a written decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the City may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an application may be received. The City also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject any application that is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.140 Application for grant of a Cable Act renewal franchise.
Requests for renewal under the Cable Act shall be received and reviewed in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 546. It is the proposal submitted by a franchisee under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(b), and not the request for commencement of the renewal proceedings submitted under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a), that must contain the information required under SCCC 5.25.120. If neither a franchisee nor the City activates in a timely manner, or can activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) through (g) (including, for example, if the provisions are repealed), and except as to applications submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h), the provisions of SCCC 5.25.130 shall apply and a renewal request shall be evaluated using the same criteria as any other request for a franchise. The following requirements shall apply to renewal requests properly submitted pursuant to the Cable Act:

(a) If the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) through (g) are properly invoked, the City shall issue an RFP after conducting a proceeding to review on the franchisee's past performance and to identify future cable-related community needs and interests. The City shall make available for review by a franchisee the results of the City's review and ascertainment proceedings. The City shall establish deadlines and procedures for responding to the RFP (which deadlines shall not be less than thirty (30) days after issuance of the RFP), may seek additional information from the franchisee related to the City's evaluation of the proposal given the standards for review of that proposal under applicable law, and shall establish deadlines for the submission of that additional information (which deadlines shall not be less than 20 days after issuance of the request). Following receipt of the application responding to that RFP (and such additional information as may be provided in response to requests), the City Council will determine that the franchise should be renewed, or make a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act applicable to that preliminary decision. The preliminary determination shall be made by resolution. If the City Council determines that the franchise should not be renewed, and the franchisee notifies the City, either in its RFP response or within thirty (30) business days of the preliminary assessment, that it wishes to pursue any rights to an administrative proceeding it has under the Cable Act, then the City shall commence an administrative proceeding after providing prompt public notice thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act. If the City Council decides preliminarily to grant renewal, the City shall prepare a final franchise agreement that incorporates, as appropriate, the commitments made by the franchisee in the application. If the franchisee accepts the franchise agreement, and the final agreement is ratified by the City Council, the franchise shall be renewed. If the franchise agreement is not so accepted and ratified within the time limits established by 47 U.S.C. Section 546(c)(1), renewal shall be deemed preliminarily denied, and an administrative proceeding commenced if the franchisee requests it within thirty (30) business days of the expiration of the time limit established by 47 U.S.C. Section 546(c)(1), unless the time limit is extended by mutual agreement of the City and the franchisee.

(b) If an administrative hearing is commenced pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(c), the franchisee's application shall be evaluated considering such matters as may be considered consistent with Federal law. The following procedures shall apply:

(1) The proceeding shall be conducted with all deliberate speed in accordance with such lawful procedures as the City may adopt by resolution.

(2) The City Council may appoint an administrative hearing officer or officers. The entity that will conduct the administrative hearing is referred to as "hearing officer."

(3) The hearing officer shall establish a schedule for proceeding. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the production of evidence from any person as the interests of justice may require. Any order regarding the production of evidence may be enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction or by imposing appropriate sanctions in the administrative hearing.

(4) The hearing officer may conduct a prehearing conference and establish appropriate prehearing orders. Intervention by non-parties is not authorized except to the extent required by the Cable Act.

(5) The hearing officer shall require the City and the franchisee to submit prepared testimony prior to the hearing. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the franchisee shall present evidence first, and the City shall present evidence second.

(6) Any reports or the transcript or summary of any proceedings conducted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) shall be, for purposes of the administrative hearing, regarded no differently than any other evidence. The City and the franchisee shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation in the proceeding, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a)), to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses.

(7) Following completion of any hearing, the hearing officer shall require the parties to submit proposed findings of fact with respect to the matters that the City is entitled to consider in determining whether renewal ought to be granted. Based on the entire record of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall then prepare written findings, and submit those findings to the City Council and to the parties (unless the hearing officer is the City Council, in which case the written findings shall constitute the final decision of the City).

(8) If the hearing officer is not the City Council, the parties shall have thirty (30) days from the date the findings are submitted to the City Council to file exceptions to those findings. The City Council shall thereafter issue a written decision granting or denying the application for renewal, consistent with the requirements of the Cable Act and based on the record of such proceeding. A copy of the final decision of the City Council shall be provided promptly to the applicant.

(9) This section does not prohibit any franchisee from submitting an informal renewal application pursuant to 47 U.S.C Section 546(h), which application may be granted or denied in accordance with the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h). If such an informal renewal application is granted, then the steps specified in SCCC 5.25.130(a) and (c)(1) through (7), or subsections (a) and (b)(1) through (8) of this section, need not be taken, notwithstanding the provisions of those subsections. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.150 Application for modification of a franchise.
(a) An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information:

(1) The specific modification requested;

(2) The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved, demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of pro forma financial statements;

(3) A statement indicating whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 545;

(4) Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the City to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and

(5) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or applicant's authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with the requirements of applicable law.

(b) A request for modification submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 545 shall be considered in accordance with the requirements of that section. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.160 Public hearings.
An applicant shall be notified of any public hearings held in connection with the evaluation of its application and shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. In addition, prior to the issuance of a franchise, the City shall provide for the holding of a public hearing within the proposed franchise area, following reasonable notice to the public, at which each applicant and its application shall be examined and the public and all interested parties afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Reasonable notice to the public shall include causing notice of the time and place of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the proposed franchise area once a week for two consecutive weeks. The first publication shall be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.170 Consistency.
The provisions of SCCC 5.25.110 through 5.25.160 shall be read and applied so that they are consistent with Sections 625 and 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Sections 545 and 546. (Ord. 1692 § 2(4)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.180 System construction schedule.
Every franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable system. The schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the amount and type of construction required. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.190 Construction procedures.
(a) A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain the cable system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the City who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations affecting the cable system.

(b) Inspection.

(1) Every cable system shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, a franchise agreement, or other applicable law. Responsibility for the City's costs for inspections performed pursuant to applicable law (such as fees for inspections performed under the City's permitting procedures) shall be determined by that applicable law. The City shall bear its own costs associated with any independent technical tests of the cable system conducted under this section.

(2) The City shall provide reasonable advance written notice to a franchisee where the inspection will require the City to move franchisee's cable system or attach a device to any portion of the franchisee's cable system located more than 12 inches outside of a subscriber's premises. Inspections will be conducted in a manner so as not to unreasonably interfere with the operations of the cable system or provision of service to subscribers. The City shall notify the franchisee when and if an inspection report is completed, and shall provide a copy of the completed report to the franchisee on request; provided, that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or control the City's inspection of the franchisee's plant under other laws of the City, such as the City's Fire Code. Inspection does not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to build a cable system in compliance with all provisions of its franchise agreement and applicable law.

(c) No construction, operation or repair of the cable system within the public rights-of-way shall be commenced until written permits have been properly filed for and obtained from the proper City officials and all permit and associated fees paid. In any permit so issued, the City may impose such conditions and regulations as a condition of the granting of the permit as are necessary for the purpose of protecting any structures in the public rights-of-way, for the proper restoration of such public rights-of-way and structures, and for the protection of the public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.200 Construction standards.
(a) The construction, operation, or repair and maintenance of a cable system shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws, including without limitation, zoning laws, construction codes, and the City's standard provisions and details. In addition, the construction, operation and maintenance shall be performed in a manner consistent with high industry standards, which obligation shall, without limitation, require a franchisee to comply with the latest edition of the listed manuals which are available at the time of submission of the construction and/or maintenance request: this includes, but is not limited to, AT&T Manual of Construction Procedures (Blue Book); and Franchisee's Construction Procedures Manual. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the most stringent code or standard shall apply (except insofar as that standard, if followed, would result in a system that could not meet requirements of Federal, State or local law). A franchisee shall at all times employ reasonable care, within the meaning of applicable law, and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public.

(b) Without limiting the foregoing, all of a franchisee's cable system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced and properly trained maintenance and construction personnel.

(c) Except in underground utility service areas, franchisee's cable system may be constructed overhead where poles now exist and electric and telephone lines are now overhead, but where either electric or telephone lines are underground, or are being initially placed underground, the cable system shall be constructed underground in accordance with existing City practices at the time the cable system is constructed subject to any waivers that may be granted. Whenever and wherever the owner of the poles moves its plant from overhead to underground placement in an area, all cable system facilities and plant in that area shall be similarly moved underground by the franchisee as directed by the City Engineer in accordance with then-existing City practices, subject to any waivers that may be granted. The City will cooperate in good faith with a franchisee in any waiver process.

(d) A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain its cable system so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the City shall deem appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner with the public rights-of-way or legal rights of any property owner or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, telecommunications, water, sewer, or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner such entities' use of any public rights-of-way. Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged by franchisee during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction of a cable system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee.

(e) A franchisee shall by a time specified by the City, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the City or any other governmental entity by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public rights-of-way construction; public rights-of-way maintenance or repair (including resurfacing or widening); change of public rights-of-way grade; construction, installation or, repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of government-owned communications system, public work or improvement or any government-owned utility; public rights-of-way vacation; or for any other purpose where the work involved would be aided by the removal or relocation of the cable system; provided, however:

(1) Except in the case of emergencies, the City shall provide written notice describing where the work is to be performed at least one week prior to the deadline for performing the work; a franchisee may seek an extension of the time to perform the work where it cannot be performed in a week even with the exercise of due diligence, and such request for an extension shall not be unreasonably refused;

(2) That the franchisee may abandon any property in place upon notice to the City, unless the City determines, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion exercised within ninety (90) days of the date the City receives notice, that the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public rights-of-way and facilities in the public rights-of-way will be adversely affected thereby; and

(3) If a State or local statute requires the City to compensate users of the right-of-way (including franchisee) for the cost of relocation or removal, nothing in this chapter shall be read to abrogate any right a franchisee may have to obtain an appropriate share of funds available for relocation or removal.

(f) Within thirty (30) days after its receipt of a written request from the City, a franchisee shall expose its subsurface cable system facilities by potholing (digging a test hole) to a depth of one foot below the bottom of such facilities.

(g) If any removal, relaying, or relocation is required to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of another person that is authorized to use the public rights-of-way, a franchisee shall, after thirty (30) days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract or a State or Federal law or regulation, the reasonable cost of removal, relaying or relocation shall be borne by the party requesting the removal, relaying or relocation. The City may direct a franchisee to remove, relay or relocate its facilities pending resolution of a dispute as to responsibility for costs, if the person requesting removal, relaying or relocation posts a satisfactory bond or provides other adequate security.

(h) In the event of an emergency, or where a cable system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the City may remove, relay, or relocate any or all parts of that cable system without prior notice; however, the City shall make reasonable efforts to provide prior notice.

(i) A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to estimate the reasonable material and labor costs and require payment of the same in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than seven days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

(j) A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang public rights-of-way of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cable system of the franchisee. Notwithstanding that grant of authority, if the franchisee performs the work, it shall be fully liable for any damages caused thereby, and shall be responsible for replacing damaged trees and shrubs. Franchisee shall be responsible for notifying affected property owners prior to trimming trees and shall obtain permission from the City arborist. At the option of the City, such trimming may be done by it and charged to the franchisee.

(k) The franchisee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision or parcel map approved by the City, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing without obtaining the prior written approval of the Director of Communications.

(l) The City shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit owned by a franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable system operations of the franchisee; provided, that if the City uses a franchisee's conduit or poles to install a cable system that competes with that franchisee in the provision of cable service to residential subscribers, the franchise agreement may provide that the franchisee may charge the City a fair market rate pursuant to the franchise agreement for using the poles and conduit. Franchisee shall notify the City when it enters into an agreement for use of its poles and conduits. Copies of agreements for use of franchisee's conduits or poles in the public rights-of-way or on other public property shall be available for review upon the City's request. A franchise agreement may include a provision under which the City shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless a franchisee for all claims arising out of the City's use of that franchisee's poles and conduits where the franchisee and the City do not have a joint pole or conduit use agreement.

(m) Any contractor or subcontractor used for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of cable system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the State and all applicable local ordinances, and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as franchisee would have under this chapter and applicable law if the work were performed by franchisee. The franchisee shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of contractors and subcontractors is performed consistent with its franchise agreement and applicable law, shall be responsible for all acts or omissions of contractors or subcontractors, shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by any contractor or subcontractor, and shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the work is properly performed. This section is not meant to alter tort liability of franchisee to third parties. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.210 Participation with other utilities.
Each franchisee shall cooperate in the planning, locating and construction of its cable system in utility joint trenches or common duct banks with other telecommunications providers. The City will provide advance notice to any franchisee when it plans to open a trench and each franchisee shall provide notice to the City when it plans to open a trench. A franchisee and the City will offer to make space available to the other, and to other persons who participate in joint trenching, on reasonable terms. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.220 Underground Services Alert.
Each franchisee shall be a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (Underground Services Alert) and shall field mark, at its sole cost and expense, the locations of its underground cable system facilities upon notification in accordance with the requirements of Section 4216 of the Government Code, and any other applicable law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.230 Provision of service – Quality of service.
In addition to satisfying such requirements as may be established in a franchise, every cable system shall be subject to the following conditions, except as prohibited by Federal law:

(a) Provision of Service. It is the policy of the City to ensure that every franchisee provide service in the franchise area upon request to any person or any City building. Each franchisee shall extend service upon request within its franchise area; provided, that a franchise agreement may permit a franchisee to require a potential subscriber to contribute a fair share of the capital costs of installation or extension as a condition of extension or installation in cases where such extension or installation may be unduly expensive. Service must be provided within time limits specified in subsection (b) of this section.

(b) Time for Extension. Except as a franchise agreement otherwise provides, a franchisee must extend service to any person or to any City building in the franchise area who requests it (1) within seven days of the request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a drop; (2) within 90 days of the request where an extension of one-half mile or less is required; or (3) within six months where an extension of one-half mile or more is required; provided, that in cases where a franchise agreement permits a franchisee to require a potential subscriber to bear a share of extension or installation costs, and franchisee requires the potential subscriber to bear such costs, the time for extension shall be measured from the date the subscriber agrees to bear such costs or, if a franchisee requires prepayment of all or a portion of the estimated costs, from the date the prepayment is made. A franchisee that requires a potential subscriber to bear a portion of installation or extension costs must prepare a written estimate of extension costs within seven days of a request for an installation or extension that would be subject to cost-sharing.

(c) Technical Standards. Any cable system within the city shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 Code of Federal Regulations Section 76.601 and any other applicable technical standards.

(d) Tests. A franchisee shall perform all tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement and other technical and performance standards established by applicable law. Unless a franchise agreement or applicable law provides otherwise, all tests shall be conducted in accordance with Federal rules and in accordance with the most recent edition of National Cable Television Association's "Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems," or if no recent edition exists, such other appropriate manual as the parties may designate. A written report of any test results shall be filed with the City within seven days of a request by the City. If a location fails to meet technical or performance specifications, the franchisee, without requirement of additional notice or request from City, shall promptly take corrective action, and retest the locations.

(e) Interconnection. Every cable system and every cable operator shall be required to interconnect with every other cable system and cable operator within the city on fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG (Public, Education, Government) and I-Net (Institutional Network) services. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.240 Publicizing proposed construction work.
(a) A franchisee shall publicize the initial build or any substantial rebuild or upgrade of its cable system in each affected neighborhood at least one week prior to commencement of that work by causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the City and by notifying those persons whose property is within three hundred (300) feet of the work in at least two of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail, by distribution of flyers to residences, by publication in local newspapers, or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice. Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or upgrade, any underground construction will be publicized in accordance with applicable notice requirements. In addition, before entering onto any person's property, a franchisee shall contact the property owner or (in the case of residential property) the resident at least one day in advance. If a franchisee must enter a residence or building, it must schedule an appointment at the convenience of the owner or resident.

(b) During the period of any cable system initial build or rebuild, a franchisee shall maintain a file open to public inspection showing its timetable for construction of the cable system by area of the City. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.250 System maintenance.
Scheduled maintenance shall be performed so as to minimize the effect of any necessary interruptions of cable service. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(h), 8-6-96).

5.25.260 Continuity of service.
Each franchise agreement shall, during the term of the franchise, ensure that subscribers are able to receive continuous service and that, in the event the franchise is revoked or terminated, the franchisee may be obligated to continue to provide service for a reasonable period to assure an orderly transition of service from the franchisee to another entity. (Ord. 1692 § 2(5)(i), 8-6-96).

5.25.270 Open books and records.
(a) The City shall have the right upon thirty (30) days' advance written notice to inspect and copy at any time during normal business hours at the nearest cable system office or at such location within the city as the City may designate, all books and records reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law; or reasonably necessary for the exercise of any right or duty of the City under the same. This right includes the right to inspect not only the books and records of a franchisee, but any such books and records held by an affiliate regardless of who holds them, a cable operator of the cable system, or any contractor/ subcontractor or any person holding any form of management contract for the cable system. Each franchisee shall be responsible for collecting the information and producing it. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "books and records" shall be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored. Books and records requested shall be produced to the City at City Hall, except by agreement or pursuant to subsection (b) of this section or SCCC 5.25.310. Books and records shall be maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

(b) Access to a franchisee's books and records shall not be denied by the franchisee on the basis that said books and records contain proprietary information. However, all proprietary information received by the City from a franchisee and clearly marked as such shall not be publicly disclosed insofar as permitted by the California Public Records Act, Government Code Section 6254 et seq., and other applicable law. The City will notify franchisee if any third party seeks release of any document marked confidential and the City will withhold release for the maximum period permitted by law to provide the franchisee the opportunity to seek court protection against the release of the requested documents.

(c) The franchisee shall maintain a file of records open to public inspection in accordance with applicable FCC rules and regulations. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.280 Communication with regulatory agencies.
(a) Upon request, and except as provided under SCCC 5.25.290, a franchisee shall file with the City all reports required by the FCC including, without limitation, any proof of performance tests and results, Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") reports, and all petitions, applications, and communications of all types directly related to the cable system, or a group of cable systems of which the franchisee's cable system is a part, submitted or received by the franchisee, an affiliate, or any other person on the behalf of the franchisee, either to or from the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of the franchisee's cable system; provided, that nothing herein requires the franchisee to produce regulatory or court filings that are treated by the agency or court as confidential, such as Hart-Scott-Rodino Act filings. Nothing in this subsection (a) affects any rights the City may have to obtain books and records under SCCC 5.25.270(a).

(b) Franchisee shall also deliver to the City the following:

(1) Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the cable system; and

(2) Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the franchisee or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the franchisee directly or indirectly. This material shall be submitted to the City at the time it is filed or within ten days of the date it is received. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.290 Reports.
(a) Quarterly Report. Within 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter, a franchisee shall submit a report to the City containing the following information:

(1) The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received by type during the prior quarter, and the percentage of service calls compared to the subscriber base by type of complaint; and

(2) The number and type of outages known by the franchisee for the prior quarter, identifying separately the following:

(A) Each planned outage, the time it occurred, its duration, and the estimated area and number of subscribers affected;

(B) Each known unplanned outage, the time it occurred, its estimated duration and the estimated area and the number of subscribers affected, and if known, the cause;

(C) The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total hours of cable system operation. An outage is a loss of sound or video on any signal, or a significant deterioration of any signal affecting two or more subscribers; and

(D) Other information a franchisee is required to submit to the City on a quarterly basis pursuant to this chapter.

On or before September 1st of each year, the City shall provide an annual notice to each franchisee. The annual notice shall state whether any or all of the quarterly reports are required in the coming year, state any changes in the form or content of the reports that the City proposes, and ask each franchisee to comment on the utility of any report, and on any proposed changes in the reports. The City may also meet with any franchisee to discuss changes in the quarterly reports.

(b) Annual Report. No later than ninety (90) days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit a written report containing the information set forth in this subsection (b) and any other information that is required under subsection (e) of this section to the Director of Communications in accordance with forms prepared by the Director of Communications after providing a period for notice and comment and providing interested parties an opportunity to comment on the forms. Until such forms are prepared after notice and comment, the reports shall be prepared in accordance with the general business practices of a franchisee. The information requested in subsection (b)(4) through (7) shall be filed within sixty (60) days of the effective date of a franchise agreement, and thereafter need only be filed as part of the annual report if, at the time of filing, the information provided has changed. The information provided shall include:

(1) A summary of the previous year's activities in the development of the cable system, including descriptions of services begun or discontinued, the number of subscribers gained or lost for each category of cable service;

(2) A summary of complaints for which records are required under SCCC 5.25.300(a), identifying both the number and nature of the complaints received and an explanation of their dispositions;

(3) A fully audited or certified revenue report from the previous calendar year for the cable system;

(4) An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of ten percent or more;

(5) A list of officers of the board and members of the board of directors of the franchisee and any affiliates directly involved in the operation or the maintenance of the cable system;

(6) An organizational chart showing all corporations or partnerships with more than a ten percent interest ownership in the franchisee, and the nature of that ownership interest (limited partner, general partner, preferred shareholder, etc.); and showing the same information for each corporation or partnership that holds such an interest in the corporations or partnerships so identified and so on until the ultimate corporate and partnership interests are identified;

(7) An annual report of each entity identified in subsection (b)(6) of this section which issues an annual report;

(8) A report on the cable system's technical tests and measurements;

(9) A complete report on its plant. This plant report shall state the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the prior calendar year, identify any cases where subscribers contributed to plant extension, provide revisions to the cable system maps filed with the City, and report the results of appropriate electronic measurements to show conformity with FCC technical standards;

(10) A report showing, for each customer service standard in SCCC 5.25.350 through 5.25.430, the franchisee's performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of the preceding year. In each case where franchisee concludes it did not comply fully, the franchisee will describe the corrective actions it is taking to assure future compliance.

(c) Presentation of Annual Report. An annual report submitted under subsection (b) of this section may be presented at a regular public meeting of the City Council to be held no earlier than ten days following submission of the report.

(d) Special Reports. Upon the City's request, each franchisee shall submit construction reports and make available for review updated as-built system design maps for its cable system for any construction undertaken during the term of the franchise. The maps shall be developed on the basis of post-construction inspection by the franchisee and construction personnel to assess compliance with system design. Any material departures from design must be indicated.

(e) General Reports. Each franchisee shall prepare and furnish to the City such reports as requested by the City if such reports are prepared in the ordinary course of business or are reasonably necessary to enforce franchisee's compliance with its franchise agreement. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.300 Records required.
A franchisee shall at all times maintain:

(a) Records of all complaints received with information sufficient to allow the franchisee to prepare the reports required in SCCC 5.25.270 through 5.25.320. The term "complaints" as used herein and throughout this chapter refers to complaints about any aspect of the cable system or franchisee's operations, including, without limitation, complaints requiring service calls, and complaints about employee courtesy, billing, prices, programming, outages and signal quality;

(b) Records of outages known to the franchisee, with information sufficient to allow a franchisee to prepare the reports required in SCCC 5.25.270 through 5.25.320;

(c) Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the date of acknowledgement and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was solved; and

(d) Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.310 Voluminous materials.
If any books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a franchisee may request that the inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the City and the franchisee; provided, that (a) the franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying documents selected by the City after its review; and (b) the franchisee must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the City (above those that would have been incurred had the documents been produced in the City) in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected by its designee. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.320 Retention of records – Relation to privacy rights.
Each franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required, if any, to ensure that it is able to provide the City all information which must be provided or may be requested under this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law, including by providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Nothing in this section shall be read to require a franchisee to violate 47 U.S.C. Section 551. Each franchisee shall be responsible for redacting any data that applicable law prevents it from providing to the City. Books and records required to be retained under this chapter or a franchise agreement shall be kept for at least five years from the date such book or record was prepared. However, a franchise agreement may specify an exception to this requirement for particular voluminous materials, so long as the information contained in those materials is reflected in other documents. (Ord. 1692 § 2(6)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.330 Maps and plans.
Each franchisee shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans which show the location, size, and a general description of all cable system facilities installed in the public rights-of-way and any power supply sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-construction inspection to verify location. Within thirty (30) days of a request from the City, a franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, deliver to the City copies of such maps and plans. A franchisee shall provide to a third party interested in performing work within the public rights-of-way, for a reasonable charge payable in advance and upon request, such maps and plans. (Ord. 1692 § 2(7), 8-6-96).

5.25.340 Performance evaluation.
(a) Performance Evaluation Sessions. The City may, at its discretion, but not more frequently than once every two years, hold performance evaluation sessions. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public, and announced in a newspaper of general circulation. The City and a franchisee shall each provide written notice to the other identifying any items it intends to raise at such performance evaluation not later than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled date of the performance evaluation session.

(b) Performance Evaluation Topics. Topics that may be discussed at any performance evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, cable system construction and performance, franchisee compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. (Ord. 1692 § 2(8), 8-6-96).

5.25.350 Consumer protection provisions – General provisions.
Each franchisee must satisfy consumer protection provisions established by the City from time to time. In addition, each franchisee shall at all times satisfy any additional or stricter requirements established by applicable law including, without limitation, FCC customer service standards and consumer protection laws. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.360 Telephone and office availability.
(a) Each franchisee shall maintain an office at a convenient location in the City that shall be open for walk-in traffic at least ten hours per day (except legal holidays) Monday through Friday, with some evening hours, and at least five hours on Saturday to allow subscribers to pay bills, to drop off equipment and to pick up standard analog converters. Each franchisee shall perform service calls, installations, and disconnects at least ten hours per day Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays; provided, that a franchisee shall respond to outages twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week.

Each franchisee shall establish a publicly listed local toll-free telephone number. The phone must be answered by customer service representatives at least ten hours per day, Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, for the purpose of receiving requests for service, inquiries, and complaints from subscribers.

After such business hours the phone shall be answered so that customers can register complaints and report service problems on a twenty-four (24)-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis, and so that the franchisee can respond to service outages as required herein. Phones shall be answered in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.

(b) Telephone answering time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds or four rings, and the time to transfer the call to a customer service representative (including hold time) shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) seconds. Under normal operating conditions, this standard shall be met ninety percent (90%) of the time, measured quarterly. Under normal operating conditions customers will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. When the business office is closed, an answering machine or service capable of receiving and recording service complaints and inquiries shall be employed. The after-hours answering service shall comply with the same telephone answer time standard set forth in this subsection (b). (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.370 Scheduling work.
(a) All appointments for service, installation, or disconnection shall be specified by date. Each franchisee shall specify a specific time at which the work shall be done, or offer a choice of time blocks, which shall not exceed four hours in length. A franchisee may also, upon request, schedule service installation calls outside normal business hours, for the express convenience of the customer. If at any time an installer or technician is running late for an appointment and believes it will not be able to make a scheduled appointment time, an attempt to contact the customer will be made prior to the time of appointment and the appointment rescheduled at a time convenient to the customer, if rescheduling is necessary. It is the operator's burden to prove it met the appointment.

(b) The franchisee shall offer and fully describe to subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment (where the missed appointment was not the subscriber's fault) that the subscriber may choose between the following options: (1) installation or service call free of charge, if the appointment was for an installation or service call for which a fee was to be charged; one month of the most widely subscribed to service tier free of charge if an installation or service call was to have been provided free of charge; one month of such service, free of charge for other appointments, and (2) an opportunity to elect remedies under California Civil Code Section 1722, if applicable.

(c) With regard to disabled customers, upon subscriber request, each franchisee shall arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other franchisee equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).

(d) Under normal operating conditions, requests for service, repair, and maintenance must be acknowledged by a trained customer service representative within twenty-four (24) hours, or prior to the end of the next business day, whichever is earlier. A franchisee shall respond to all other inquiries (including billing inquiries) within five business days of the inquiry or complaint. Under normal operating conditions, repairs and maintenance for outages or service interruptions must be completed within twenty-four (24) hours after the outage or interruption becomes known to franchisee where the franchisee has adequate access to facilities to which it must have access in order to remedy the problem. Under normal operating conditions, work to correct all other service problems must be begun by the next business day after notification of the service problem, and must be completed within five business days from the date of the initial request. When normal operating conditions do not exist, a franchisee shall complete the work in the shortest time possible. The failure of the franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train its staff shall not justify a franchisee's failure to comply with this provision.

(e) A franchisee shall not cancel a service or installation appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day preceding the scheduled appointment.

(f) Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (d) and (e) of this section shall be met at least ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.

(g) Under normal operating conditions, the installation time standard in SCCC 5.25.230(b) and below will be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:

Requests for additional outlets, service upgrades or other connections (e.g., DMX, VCR, A/B switch) separate from the initial installation will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.380 Notice to subscribers.
(a) A franchisee shall provide each subscriber at the time service is installed, clear and accurate written information: on placing a service call, filing a complaint, or requesting an adjustment (including when a subscriber is entitled to refunds for outages and how to obtain them); showing the telephone number of the City office responsible for administering the franchise; providing a schedule of rates and charges, channel positions, services provided, a copy of the service contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures; notifying subscribers of the availability of parental control devices; and describing any other of the franchisee's policies in connection with its subscribers. The same information shall be provided to the subscriber annually thereafter, except another copy of the service contract need not be provided. Copies of the notices provided to the subscribers shall be provided to the City. Subject to the rate regulation provisions of SCCC 5.25.440, franchisee shall provide the Director of Communications at least sixty (60) days' notice and all subscribers at least thirty (30) days' notice of any significant changes in the information required to be provided under this subsection (a). Such notice shall be made in writing.

(b) Each franchisee shall take appropriate steps to ensure that all written franchisee promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of residential cable service to subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed in any manner, clearly and accurately discloses price terms. In the case of telephone orders, a franchisee shall take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are clearly and accurately disclosed to potential customers in advance of taking the order.

(c) Each franchisee shall maintain a file open for public inspection containing all notices provided to subscribers under these customer service standards, as well as all promotional offers made to subscribers. The notices and offers shall be kept in the file for at least one year from the date of such notice or promotional offer. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.390 Interruptions of service.
A franchisee shall provide forty-eight (48) hours' prior notice to subscribers and the City before interrupting service for planned maintenance or construction; provided, however, that planned maintenance that does not require more than two hours' interruption of service and that occurs between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 A.M. shall not require such notice to subscribers, and notice to the City must be given no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the anticipated service interruption. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.400 Billing.
(a) A franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service change shall be prorated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit.

(b) A franchisee's billing statement must be clear, concise and understandable, must itemize each category of service and equipment provided to the subscriber and must state clearly the charge therefor.

(c) A franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not earlier than the later of (1) fifteen days after the date the statement is mailed; or (2) the fifteenth (15th) day of the thirty (30) day period in which the service being billed is rendered. A late fee or administrative fee may not be imposed for payments before the due date. Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by a franchisee, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made.

(d) A franchisee's bill must permit a subscriber to remit payment by mail or in person at the franchisee's local office.

(e) The account of any subscriber shall be credited a prorated share of the monthly charge for the service upon subscriber request if a subscriber is without service or if service is substantially impaired for any reason for a period exceeding four hours during any twenty-four (24)-hour period; or automatically after November 1, 1998, if the loss of service or impairment is for twenty-four (24) hours or longer, except where it can be documented that a subscriber will obtain a refund for a loss of service or impairment which was caused by the subscriber or by subscriber-owned equipment (not including, for purposes of this section, in-home wiring installed by the franchisee).

(f) Franchisee shall respond to all written billing complaints from subscribers within thirty (30) days.

(g) Refunds to subscribers shall be issued no later than:

(1) The earlier of the subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the refund request, or thirty (30) days; or

(2) The date of return of all equipment to franchisee, if cable service has been terminated.

(h) Credits for cable service shall be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle after the determination that the credit is warranted. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.410 Disconnection/downgrades.
(a) A subscriber may terminate service at any time.

(b) A franchisee shall promptly disconnect from the franchisee's cable system or downgrade any subscriber who so requests. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of cable service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. Charges for any voluntary disconnection, and any downgrade charges shall conform to applicable law.

(c) Any security deposit and/or other funds due a subscriber that disconnects or downgrades service shall be returned to the subscriber within thirty (30) days or in the next billing cycle, whichever is later, from the date disconnection or downgrade was requested except in cases where the subscriber does not permit the franchisee to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts owed shall be paid to subscribers within thirty (30) days of the date the equipment was recovered, or in the next billing cycle, whichever is later.

(d) A franchisee may not disconnect a subscriber's cable service for nonpayment unless:

(1) The subscriber is delinquent in payment for cable service;

(2) A separate, written notice of impending disconnection, postage prepaid, has been sent to the subscriber at least twenty (20) days prior to the date on which service may be disconnected, at the premises where the subscriber requests billing, which notice must state the date by which disconnection may occur, and the amount the subscriber must pay to avoid disconnection;

(3) The subscriber has failed to pay the amounts owed to avoid disconnection by the date of disconnection; and

(4) No pending inquiry exists regarding the bill to which franchisee has not responded in writing.

Payment is not delinquent until the fifteenth (15th) day of the month in which the service being billed for is rendered; the notice required under subsection (d)(2) of this section may not be sent to a subscriber prior to the delinquency date. If the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges, before the date scheduled for disconnection, the franchisee shall not disconnect service. After disconnection (except in cases where disconnection is also subject to subsection (e) of this section, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate service.

(e) A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if (1) the subscriber is damaging, destroying, or unlawfully tampering with or has damaged or destroyed or unlawfully tampered with the franchisee's cable system; (2) the subscriber is not authorized to receive a service, and is facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized receipt of service by others; or (3) subscriber-installed or attached equipment is resulting in signal leakage which is in violation of FCC rules, provided the subscriber has failed to correct the leakage within three business days after receiving written notice of the problem from the franchisee. After disconnection, the franchisee shall restore service after the subscriber provides adequate assurance that it has ceased the practices that led to disconnection, and paid all proper fees and charges, including any reconnect fees and all amounts owed the franchisee for damage to its cable system or equipment.

(f) Except as Federal or State law may otherwise provide, a franchisee may remove its property from a subscriber's premises within thirty (30) days of the termination of service. If a franchisee fails to remove its property in that period, the property shall be deemed abandoned unless the franchisee has been denied access to the subscriber's premises, or the franchisee has a continuing right to occupy the premises under Federal or State statutes. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.420 Deposits.
A franchisee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Deposits shall be placed in an interest-bearing account, and the franchisee shall return the deposit, plus interest earned to the date the deposit is returned to the subscriber, less any amount the franchisee can demonstrate should be deducted for damage to such equipment. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(h), 8-6-96).

5.25.430 Parental control option.
Without limiting a franchisee's obligations under Federal law, two years after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter (September 5, 1996), a franchisee must provide parental control devices at no charge to all subscribers who request them that enable the subscriber to block the video and audio portion of any channel or channels of programming. (Ord. 1692 § 2(9)(i), 8-6-96).

5.25.440 Rate regulation.
(a) Scope and Applicability. The City reserves all rights to implement and impose regulation of a franchisee's rates and charges to the maximum extent permitted by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, by separate ordinance, by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner.

(b) Affirmation of Regulation of Rates For Basic Cable Service and Equipment. As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Resolution No. 5895, as amended from time to time, governs the regulation of rates for basic cable service and equipment within the city for any franchisee which has been notified that (1) the City has been certified to regulate its basic service and equipment rates; and (2) the City has adopted regulations governing regulation of basic service and equipment rates. (Ord. 1692 § 2(10), 8-6-96).

5.25.450 Franchise fee – Amount.
Franchisee shall pay to the City a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of gross revenues. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.460 Franchise fee – Payment.
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the City on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the City not later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.470 Quarterly statement of gross revenues.
Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a franchisee or other entity subject to a fee under this provision shall file with the City within forty-five (45) days of the end of each calendar quarter a statement showing the franchisee's or such entity's gross revenues during the preceding quarter and the number of subscribers served. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.480 Acceptance of payment not a release.
No acceptance by the City of any franchise fee payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such franchise fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.490 Franchise fee not in lieu of taxes.
The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers), consistent with Section 622(g)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 542(g)(2). (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.500 Annual statement of gross revenue.
A franchisee or other entity subject to a franchise fee under this provision shall file within ninety (90) days following the end of each of its fiscal years a statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method of computation showing (a) gross revenues by category (e.g., basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late charges, miscellaneous, other); and (b) what, if any, deductions were made from gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee (e.g., bad debt, credits and refunds), and the amount of each deduction. The statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant, the chief financial officer of the person or persons paying the fee, or such other person who is authorized and qualified to make representations on behalf of such person regarding its revenues. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.510 City's right to audit books and records.
The City may, from time to time, and upon reasonable advance written notice, inspect and audit any and all books and records reasonably necessary to the determination of whether gross revenues and franchise fees have been accurately computed and paid. If, as a result of the audit, the City determines that the franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount exceeding five percent of the franchise fees actually paid or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is less, the cost of the audit shall be borne by the person responsible to pay the fee. It shall be the responsibility of the person subject to the fee to have all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available in the City to the persons performing the audit, or at such other convenient location as the City and a franchisee may provide in a franchise agreement. Nothing in this section expands or extends the document retention period set out in SCCC 5.25.270 through 5.25.320. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.520 Failure to pay franchise fee.
In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the City on or before the due date set forth in SCCC 5.25.440(b), or is underpaid, the person subject to the fee will be charged interest from the due date at an interest rate equal to three percent above the rate for three-month Federal Treasury Bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department sale of such Treasury Bills occurring prior to the due date of the franchise fee payment. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(h), 8-6-96).

5.25.530 Final statement of gross revenues.
In the event that a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee shall file with the City within ninety (90) calendar days of the date its operations in the City cease (the "termination date") a final statement of gross revenues for the period from the beginning of the calendar year in which the franchise terminated to the termination date, which statement shall contain the information and be certified as required by SCCC 5.25.510. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(i), 8-6-96).

5.25.540 Franchise fee – Holding over after expiration.
In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the consent of the City, the franchisee shall pay to the City the maximum franchise fee permitted by law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(11)(j), 8-6-96).

5.25.550 Insurance required.
Each franchisee must maintain adequate insurance during the entire term of the franchise against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which in any way relate to, arise from, or are connected with the holding of the franchise by the franchisee, its agents, representatives, contractors, subcontractors and employees. Each franchisee must keep insurance in effect in accordance with the minimum insurance scope the City may set from time to time. (Ord. 1692 § 2(12)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.560 Insurance – Franchise provisions.
Each franchise agreement shall specify the initial minimum amounts, form, quality and proof of insurance that must be provided and maintained through the franchise term, in accordance with the insurance policies of the City in effect at the time the franchise is issued. (Ord. 1692 § 2(12)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.570 Insurance – Material term.
Every franchise shall state that the insurance provisions of the franchise are material terms. (Ord. 1692 § 2(12)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.580 Indemnification.
(a) Each franchise agreement shall contain an indemnification provision which shall provide that, to the extent permitted by law, the franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction, maintenance, or operation of its cable system; copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or franchisees of programs to be delivered by the cable system; the conduct of the franchisee's business in the City; or in any way arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise granted hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by applicable law or a franchise agreement, except in cases where liability is (1) solely caused by the gross negligence of the person or persons covered by the indemnity; or (2) results from programming contributed or produced by the City and transmitted over the cable system.

(b) Without limiting the foregoing, the franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise, subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation, construction, operation, or maintenance of its system, including but not limited to any claim against the franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark, or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm, or corporation. This indemnity does not apply to programming carried on any channel set aside for public, educational, or government use, or channels leased pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 532, except for programming contributed or produced by the franchisee.

(c) The City shall notify the franchisee in writing of its duty to indemnify in any case subject to the indemnity in which the franchisee is not a named defendant or plaintiff. The franchisee shall employ competent counsel, reasonably acceptable to the City Attorney. (Ord. 1692 § 2(12)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.590 Security fund.
(a) Prior to a franchise becoming effective, the franchisee shall post with the City a cash security deposit to be used as a security fund to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of and compliance with all provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of the City, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system. The amount of the security fund shall be specified in a franchise agreement.

(b) In lieu of a cash security fund, a franchisee may file and maintain with the City an irrevocable letter of credit with an acceptable surety in the amount specified in the franchise agreement to serve the same purposes as set forth therein. Said letter of credit shall remain in effect for the full term of the franchise plus an additional six months thereafter. The letter of credit shall provide for thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the City of any intention on the part of the franchisee to fail to renew or otherwise materially alter its terms. Neither the filing of a letter of credit with the City, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the letter of credit or otherwise.

(c) The rights reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by other law or a franchise agreement, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund or letter of credit will affect any other right the City may have.

(d) The following procedures shall apply to drawing on the security fund and letter of credit:

(1) If the franchisee fails to make timely payment to the City of any amount due as a result of a franchise, fails to make timely payment to the City of any amounts due under a franchise agreement or applicable law, fails to make timely payment to the City of any taxes due, or fails to compensate the City within ten days of written notification that such compensation is due, for any damages, costs, or expenses the City suffers or incurs by reason of any act or omission of the franchisee in connection with its franchise agreement or the enforcement of its franchise agreement after ten days' notice to comply with any provision of the franchise or franchise agreement that the City determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the City may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund or from funds available under the letter of credit.

(2) Within three days of a withdrawal from the security fund or under the letter of credit, the City shall mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date, and purpose of such withdrawal to the franchisee.

(3) If at the time of a withdrawal from the security fund or under the letter of credit by the City, the amounts available are insufficient to provide the total payment towards which the withdrawal is directed, the balance of such payment shall continue as the obligation of the franchisee to the City until it is paid.

(4) No later than thirty (30) days after mailing of notification to the franchisee by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a withdrawal from the security fund or under the letter of credit, the franchisee shall deliver to the City for deposit in the security fund an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn or shall restore the letter of credit. Failure to make timely delivery of such amount to the City or to restore the letter of credit shall constitute a material violation of the franchise.

(5) Franchisee's recourse, in the event franchisee believes any taking of security funds is improper, shall be through legal action after the security has been drawn upon. If the City's action or taking is found to be improper by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, franchisee shall be entitled to a refund of the funds plus interest and/or any other specific performance which such court or agency shall order.

(6) Upon termination of the franchise, the balance then remaining in the security fund shall be withdrawn by the City and paid to the franchisee within ninety (90) days of such termination; provided, that there is then no outstanding obligations secured by the security fund, in which case the amount paid may be reduced by the amount of the outstanding obligations; provided, that the security fund shall be deemed forfeited if the franchise is revoked or the cable system is abandoned. If a franchisee's obligations are secured through a letter of credit, the City shall authorize the franchisee to release the letter of credit within ninety (90) days of termination, unless there are outstanding obligations secured by the letter of credit. The letter of credit shall be deemed forfeited if the franchise is revoked or the cable system abandoned. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.600 Performance bond.
(a) Prior to any cable system construction, upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way, a franchisee shall obtain all required bonds, which shall be in amounts and subject to such terms established by the City consistent with its normal practices, and which shall further contain these additional conditions:

(1) The bond shall state that it ensures the franchisee's faithful performance of the construction, upgrade, or other work required by the franchise agreement. It shall further state that the City may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund required by a franchise agreement where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund.

(2) The bond shall provide that, in the event franchisee fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way in a safe, timely, and competent manner in accord with the provisions of a franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of completing or repairing the cable system construction, upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond.

(b) Material Term. Every franchise shall state that the security fund, letter of credit, or performance bond provisions of the franchise are material terms. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.610 Remedies.
In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the City may apply any one or a combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates this chapter, its franchise agreement, or applicable law:

(a) Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in this chapter.

(b) In addition to or instead of any other remedy, seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.

(c) Apply any remedy provided for in a franchise agreement, including enforcement provisions, if any. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.620 Revocation or termination of franchise.
(a) A franchise may be revoked by the City Council for the franchisee's failure to construct, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this chapter or the franchise agreement, or for any other material violation of this chapter or material breach of the franchise agreement. Prior to revoking the franchise, the City must give a franchisee notice (which notice shall describe the nature of an alleged violation or breach) and opportunity to cure. If within sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of written notice from the City to the franchisee the franchisee has not, to the City's satisfaction, taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued to the City's satisfaction, the City may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to consider revocation of the franchise.

(b) Prior to revoking a franchise, and no sooner than thirty (30) calendar days after notifying the franchisee of its intent to consider revoking a franchise as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the City Council shall hold a public hearing, at which the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A franchise agreement may provide for more specific procedures to streamline resolution of any dispute. Following the public hearing the City Council may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other evidence of record. If the City Council determines to revoke a franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee.

(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any franchise may, at the option of the City following a public hearing before the City Council, be revoked one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that one hundred twenty (120) day period:

(1) Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or

(2) Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the City may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the City Council, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless:

(1) The City has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and

(2) The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this chapter. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.630 Procedures upon revocation or abandonment of a franchise.
If the City revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee fails to operate its cable system or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective:

(a) The City may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the City may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense except the franchisee may abandon any portion of its cable system in place that could have been abandoned in place under SCCC 5.25.200(e)(2);

(b) The City, by resolution of the City Council, may acquire ownership or effect a transfer of the cable system at an equitable price; or

(c) If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, abandoned portions shall become the property of the City and the City may keep, sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the cable system. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.640 City's establishment of a cable system.
The provisions of this chapter governing the City's acquisition of a cable system upon revocation or termination of a franchise do not limit the City's ability to acquire a cable system in any other lawful manner. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.650 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies under this chapter and the franchise agreement are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated damages or penalties relieve a franchisee of its obligations to comply with its franchise. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition, the City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. Nothing herein shall be read to authorize the double recovery of damages. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(g), 8-6-96).

5.25.660 Recovery – Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements.
Recovery by the City of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond, the security fund or letter of credit, or otherwise does not limit a franchisee's duty to indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a franchisee of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed to the City, or in any respect prevent the City from exercising any other right or remedy it may have. Nothing herein shall be read to authorize the double recovery of damages. (Ord. 1692 § 2(13)(h), 8-6-96).

5.25.670 Reserved.
5.25.680 Transfer – City approval required.
No transfer shall occur without prior written notice to and approval of the City Council. Transfer without the prior written approval of the City shall be considered to impair the City's assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.690 Transfer – Application.
(a) The franchisee shall promptly notify the City of any proposed transfer. If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the City, the franchisee will promptly notify the City that such a transfer has occurred.

(b) At least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the franchisee shall submit to the City an application for approval of the transfer. Such an application shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the following information must be included in the application; provided, that a franchisee is not required to duplicate information that it submits to the City to comply with its obligations under Federal or State law:

(1) All information and forms required under Federal law or the equivalent of such forms if no longer required by Federal law;

(2) All information required in SCCC 5.25.120(a) through (e), (l), and (n);

(3) A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization and management structure of the proposed transferee, together with an explanation of how decisions regarding the cable system will be made if the proposed transaction is approved;

(4) Any contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein;

(5) Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") that discuss the transaction;

(6) Other information necessary to provide a complete and accurate understanding of the financial position of the cable system before and after the proposed transfer;

(7) Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service;

(8) A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the next five years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades, channel capacity, expansion or elimination of services, and any other changes affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system.

(c) For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer, the City or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the prospective transferee and such other matters as the City may deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied, or conditioned as provided under SCCC 5.25.700. The franchisee and any prospective transferees shall assist the City in any such inquiry, and if they fail to do so, the request for transfer may be denied. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.700 Transfer – Determination by City.
(a) In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions an application for a transfer of a franchise, the City shall consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or services; whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this chapter and if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the City, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the City; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the City's interest under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or other applicable law.

(b) Any transfer without the City's prior written approval shall be ineffective, and shall make this franchise subject to revocation and to any other remedies available under the franchise or other applicable law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.710 Transferee's agreement.
No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee under this chapter and the franchise agreement for all purposes, including renewal, unless the City, in its sole discretion, expressly waives this requirement in whole or in part. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.720 Transfer – Exceptions.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of the system to secure the construction, operation or repair of the cable system may be made without the City's prior consent, except that no such arrangement may be made which would in any respect under any condition prevent the franchisee or any successor from complying with the franchise and applicable law, nor may any such arrangement permit a third party to succeed to the interest of franchisee, or to own or control the cable system, without the prior consent of the City. Any mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the City under this chapter or other applicable law.

(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchise agreement may provide that transfers to affiliates of a franchisee shall be excepted from the requirements of SCCC 5.25.680 through 5.25.700 where:

(1) The affiliate is wholly owned and managed by an entity that will guarantee the performance under a franchise agreement; and

(2) The transferee affiliate:

(A) Notifies the City of the transfer at least sixty (60) days before it occurs and, at that time, provides the agreements and warranties required by this section, describes the nature of the transfer, and submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect ownership and control of the cable system after the transfer;

(B) Warrants that it has read, accepts and agrees to be bound by each and every term of the franchise and related amendments, regulations, ordinances and resolutions then in effect;

(C) Agrees to assume all responsibility for all liabilities, acts and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor franchisees for all purposes, including renewal;

(D) Agrees that the transfer shall not permit it take any position or exercise any right which could not have been exercised by its predecessor franchisees;

(E) Warrants that the transfer will not substantially increase the financial burdens upon or substantially diminish the financial resources available to the franchisee (the warranty to be based on comparing the burdens upon and resources that will be available to the transferee compared to its predecessors), or otherwise adversely affect the ability of the franchisee to perform;

(F) Warrants that the transfer will not in any way adversely affect the City or subscribers (including by increasing rates);

(G) Notifies the City that the transfer is complete within five business days of the date the transfer is complete; and

(H) Agrees that the transfer in no way affects any evaluation of its legal, financial or technical qualifications that may occur under the franchise or applicable law after the transfer, and does not directly or indirectly authorize any additional transfers. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.730 Transfer – Approval does not constitute waiver.
Approval by the City of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under this chapter or a franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. (Ord. 1692 § 2(14)(f), 8-6-96).

5.25.740 Discriminatory practices prohibited.
(a) A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers, or residents of the City on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, conditions of physical disability, religion, ethnic background, marital status, or sexual orientation.

(b) A franchisee shall not discriminate among persons or the City or take any retaliatory action against a person or the City because of that entity's exercise of any right it may have under Federal, State, or local law, nor may the franchisee require a person or the City to waive such rights as a condition of taking service.

(c) A franchisee shall not deny access or levy different rates and charges on any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

(d) Except to the extent the City may not enforce such a requirement, a franchisee is prohibited from discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may offer discounts for the elderly, the disabled, or the economically disadvantaged; and such other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under Federal law, if such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable Federal, State, and City laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. (Ord. 1692 § 2(15)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.750 Equal employment opportunity.
A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, conditions of physical disability, religion, ethnic background, marital status, or sexual orientation. A franchisee shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended. (Ord. 1692 § 2(15)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.760 Subscriber privacy.
A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 551. A franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to Federal or State law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent. (Ord. 1692 § 2(15)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.770 Compliance with laws.
Each franchisee shall comply with all applicable laws heretofore and hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of its franchise. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(a), 8-6-96).

5.25.780 Captions.
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(b), 8-6-96).

5.25.790 No recourse against the City.
Every franchise agreement shall provide that, without limiting such immunities as the City or other persons may have under applicable law, a franchisee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against the City or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or because of the enforcement of this chapter or the City's exercise of its authority pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, or other applicable law, unless the same shall be caused by criminal acts or by willful or gross negligence. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(c), 8-6-96).

5.25.800 Connections to cable system – Use of antennas.
(a) To the extent consistent with Federal law, subscribers shall have the right to attach VCRs, receivers, and other terminal equipment to a franchisee's system. Subscribers also shall have the right to use their own remote control devices and converters, and other similar equipment.

(b) A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna except at the express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber; provided, that such antenna is connected with an appropriate device and complies with applicable law. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(d), 8-6-96).

5.25.810 Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise agreement, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(e), 8-6-96).

5.25.820 Publication expenses.
The franchisee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the franchisee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of same to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1692 § 2(16)(f), 8-6-96).

Chapter 5.26
STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
Sections:

5.26.010  Purpose.

5.26.020  Rights reserved.

5.26.030  Compliance with chapter.

5.26.040  Definitions.

5.26.050  State franchise fees.

5.26.060  PEG fees.

5.26.070  Payment of fees.

5.26.080  Examining books and records related to payments.

5.26.090  Late payments.

5.26.100  Lease of City-owned network.

5.26.110  Customer service and consumer protection.

5.26.120  Penalties for violations of standards.

5.26.130  Customer service reports.

5.26.140  Construction in the public rights-of-way.

5.26.150  Permits.

5.26.160  Emergency alert systems.

5.26.170  Interconnection for PEG programming.

5.26.180  Notices.

5.26.010 Purpose.
This chapter is applicable to all video service providers who are eligible for, and have been awarded, a State video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006), to provide cable or video services in any portion of the City. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.020 Rights reserved.
The rights reserved to the City under this chapter are in addition to all other rights of the City whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by other applicable law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the City. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.030 Compliance with chapter.
Nothing contained in this chapter exempts a State franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., or obligations under any franchise previously issued by the City, insofar as those may be enforced under California Public Utilities Code Section 5800. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.040 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, Section 5800 et seq., ("DIVCA"). When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" is always mandatory.

(a) "A" definitions:

(1) "Access channel" means any channel on a cable system or video system set aside by a State franchise holder for public, educational or governmental use.

(2) "Applicant" means any person submitting any application required under Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code.

(3) "Applicable law" means all lawfully enacted and applicable Federal, State and City laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time.

(b) Reserved for future use.

(c) "C" definitions:

(1) "Cable service" means (A) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(2) "City" means the City of Santa Clara, California. Any act that may be taken by the City may be taken by the City Council or any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on the City's behalf.

(3) "City Council" means the governing body of the City of Santa Clara, California.

(4) "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Santa Clara or his or her duly authorized designees. Any act that may be taken by the City Manager may be taken by any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on behalf of the City Manager.

(5) "Construction," "operation," or "repair" and similar formulations of those terms mean the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and tree trimming. The term "operation" does not encompass or regulate the provision of services, but refers to activities affecting rights-of-way and other property subject to the jurisdiction of the City.

(d) "D" definitions:

(1) "Director of Public Works" means the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.

(2) "DIVCA" means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, Section 5800 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) "G" definitions:

(1) "Gross revenues" means all revenues (whether in the form of cash or other consideration) of a State franchise holder or its affiliates in any way derived from its operations within the City.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) "I" definitions:

(1) "Incumbent cable operator" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) "N" definitions:

(1) "Network" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA.

(o) Reserved for future use.

(p) "P" definitions:

(1) "Person" is as defined in SCCC 1.05.020. The term does not include the City.

(2) "PEG" means public, educational or governmental.

(3) "Public rights-of-way" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) "S" definitions:

(1) "State franchise" means a franchise issued by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in DIVCA, within any portion of the City.

(2) "State franchise holder" means a person who holds a State franchise.

(3) "Subscriber" means the City or any person in the City who legally receives any cable service or video service for a fee from a State franchise holder providing service to the City pursuant to its State franchise.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) "U" definitions:

(1) "User" means a person or the City utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.

(v) "V" definitions:

(1) "Video service" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.050 State franchise fees.
(a) Any State franchise holder operating within the City shall pay to the City a State franchise fee equal to five percent of the gross revenues of it or any affiliate that is subject to a franchise fee under California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

(b) The City Manager shall promptly send any State franchise holder that notifies the City that it intends to provide video service in the City (1) the franchise fee section of the franchises held by incumbent cable operators in the City; (2) a sworn statement that the fee required is being paid to the City, subject to the right of the City to examine the books and records of the incumbent in accordance with applicable law and franchises; and (3) a notice designating the person to whom the State franchise fee payments should be made. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.060 PEG fees.
Any State franchise holder operating within the City shall pay to the City a PEG fee equal to one and thirteen one-hundredths percent (1.13%) of the State franchise holder's or affiliate's gross revenues subject to the PEG use fee under California Public Utilities Code Sections 5860 and 5870(n). (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.070 Payment of fees.
The State franchise fee required pursuant to SCCC 5.26.050, and the PEG fee required pursuant to SCCC 5.26.060, shall each be paid to the City quarterly, in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The State franchise holder shall deliver to the City, by check or other means specified by the City, a payment for the State franchise fee and a separate payment for the PEG fee not later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing how the payment was calculated, containing such information as the City Manager may require consistent with DIVCA. Unless the City Manager provides otherwise, the summary statement shall identify:

(a) Revenues received from subscribers, by category, with service revenues broken out by service levels;

(b) Any charges to subscribers for which revenues were received, but on which a franchise fee was not paid;

(c) Where the fee is paid on an allocated portion of revenues received, the total revenues received; the allocation factor; and how the allocation factor was calculated. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.080 Examining books and records related to payments.
The City may examine the business records of the holder of a State franchise in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i). (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.090 Late payments.
In the event a State franchise holder fails to make payments required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the City shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.100 Lease of City-owned network.
In the event a State franchise holder leases access to a network owned by the City, the City may set a franchise fee for access to the City-owned network separate and apart from the franchise fee charged to State franchise holders pursuant to SCCC 5.26.050, which fee shall otherwise be payable in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.110 Customer service and consumer protection.
Each State franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer service and consumer protection standards to the extent consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, including, but not limited to, all existing and subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards established by State and Federal law and regulation. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.120 Penalties for violations of standards.
(a) The City shall enforce the provisions of SCCC 5.26.110.

(b) For material breaches, as defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, by a State franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, the City may impose the following penalties:

(1) For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.

(2) For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.

(3) For a third material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation.

(c) Any penalties imposed by the City shall be imposed in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900.

(d) The City Manager is authorized to provide any notices required under California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. The City Manager shall coordinate with the Division of Ratepayer Advocates to protect consumers in the City. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.130 Customer service reports.
(a) The City Manager shall establish a system for receiving complaints from users regarding complaints about customer service and consumer protection as set forth herein.

(b) The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees to cover the cost of monitoring the compliance by a State franchise holder of the customer service and consumer protection responsibilities established by this chapter. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.140 Construction in the public rights-of-way.
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of SCCC Title 12, and all City administrative rules and regulations developed pursuant to SCCC Title 12, as now existing or as hereafter amended, shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a State franchise holder in any public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.150 Permits.
(a) Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by SCCC Title 12, a State franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of SCCC Title 12. A permit application is complete when the State franchise holder has complied with all applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to all City administrative rules and regulations, and all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code, Section 21000, et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act) and preparation of plans and specifications as required by the Director of Public Works related to review of the application in accordance with applicable law.

(b) The Director of Public Works shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion as permitted by State law, either approve or deny a State franchise holder's application for any permit required under subsection (a) of this section within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete permit application from the State franchise holder.

(c) If the Director of Public Works denies a State franchise holder's application for a permit, the Director of Public Works shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial.

(d) A State franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the Director of Public Works may, within fifteen (15) calendar days, appeal the denial to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk and by the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. At its regular meeting held at least three days after the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date for the hearing of the appeal, and notice shall be given to the applicant, City Manager and also to the Director of Public Works, and by posting as provided herein. The Director of Public Works shall transmit through the City Manager to the City Council all maps, diagrams, records, papers, and files that constitute the record in the action from which the appeal was taken.

(e) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing of the appeal. The City Council in its decision may reverse, affirm, or modify the action of the Director of Public Works, or it may remand such matter to the City Manager and Director of Public Works for further study or action. Failure of the Council to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be an affirmance of the action of the Director of Public Works.

(f) Notice of any public hearing required under the terms of this title shall be given by posting a public notice in at least three conspicuous places within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property, not less than ten days prior to said hearing. Each such notice shall be headed by the word "Notice," in letters not less than one inch in height. In addition thereto, each notice shall contain the proposed establishment or change of district; or in the case of a use permit, variance or appeal, the use permit, variance or appeal applied for, a brief general description of the property involved, and the time and place at which the public hearing will be held. The City Clerk shall cause notices to be posted for hearings to be held before the City Council. The person posting said notices shall file a certificate of such posting together with a copy of said notice with the City Clerk.

(g) Any defect or error appearing in any such notice shall not divest the City Council of jurisdiction nor invalidate any proceedings.

(h) In addition to the posting requirements pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the City Clerk, at least five days prior to the hearing to be held before the City Council, shall cause to be mailed, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of such hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the County of Santa Clara, or as known to the City Clerk as owning property within a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet from the exterior boundaries of the area actually occupied or to be occupied by the use which is the subject of the hearing. Unless the context of an applicable State law provides to the contrary, the failure to mail such notice to all of said persons shall not operate to divest the City Council of jurisdiction to conduct any hearing required to be held. The City Council hereby declares that the purpose of providing that said notice be mailed is to give said property owners within said three hundred (300) feet information as to any proposed change or modification of the use of said property, and the City Council hereby declares that jurisdiction to conduct said hearing shall be obtained upon the posting of notices required by this section.

(i) The issuance of a permit under SCCC Title 12 is not a franchise, and does not grant any vested rights in any location in the public rights-of-way, or in any particular manner of placement within the rights-of-way. Without limitation, a permit to place cabinets and similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the permittee required to place facilities underground, upon reasonable notice to the permittee. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.160 Emergency alert systems.
(a) Each State franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the State franchise holder's network.

(b) To the extent consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5880, each State franchise holder shall incorporate into its network the capability to permit the City in times of emergency to override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously, as such capability was required under local franchises in effect in the City on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.170 Interconnection for PEG programming.
Where technically feasible, each State franchise holder, and each incumbent cable operator operating under a City franchise issued pursuant to Chapter 5.25 SCCC, shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h). Each State franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a State franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the City may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the State franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the State franchise holder's network as identified by the State franchise holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, each State franchise holder will make an interconnection available to each channel originator providing PEG programming to an incumbent cable operator, and will provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection will be borne by the State franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the State franchise holder and the incumbent cable operator. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

5.26.180 Notices.
(a) Each State franchise holder or applicant for a State franchise shall file with the City a copy of all applications or notices that the State franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the Public Utilities Commission.

(b) Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a State franchise holder is required to provide to the City under this section or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to the City Manager. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 3-4-08).

Chapter 5.30
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sections:

Article I. Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers

5.30.010  Law governing.

5.30.020  Definitions.

5.30.030  Permit required.

5.30.040  Application.

5.30.050  Investigation by Chief of Police.

5.30.060  Denial of permit.

5.30.070  Fees.

5.30.080  Permits nonassignable.

5.30.090  Renewal of permits.

5.30.100  Inspection by Chief of Police.

5.30.110  Accepting goods from intoxicated persons or suspected felons, etc., prohibited.

5.30.120  Compliance with zoning regulations.

5.30.130  Business tax certificate required.

Article II. Junk Dealers

5.30.140  Reserved.

5.30.150  Report of building inspector.

5.30.160  Revocation of license for noncompliance with chapter.

5.30.170  Compliance with regulations by persons licensed prior to effective date of chapter.

Article I. Pawnbrokers and
Secondhand Dealers

5.30.010 Law governing.
Subject to regulation by the State of California, all secondhand dealers must comply with the requirements set forth in the California Business and Professions Code, Division 8, Chapter 9 (Section 21500 et seq.). A pawnbroker is regulated by Division 8, Section 21000 et seq. of the Financial Code. A licensed pawnbroker is exempt from the secondhand dealer licensing requirements pursuant to Sections 21641 and 21642 of the Business and Professions Code and may engage in any secondhand dealer transaction. However, a pawnbroker conducting secondhand dealer activities must comply with all the secondhand dealer laws. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.1).

5.30.020 Definitions.
(a) "Pawnbroker" is every person engaged in the business of receiving goods, including motor vehicles, in pledge as security for a loan pursuant to Section 21000 of the Financial Code, as amended from time to time.

(b) "Secondhand dealer" shall include any person, corporation, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property pursuant to Section 21626 of the Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.2).

5.30.030 Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the city limits without first obtaining a permit issued by the Chief of Police. A permit shall be issued to each pawnbroker and secondhand dealer after their application is approved by the Chief of Police and the Department of Justice. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.3).

5.30.040 Application.
Each pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall complete an application that will be investigated by the Chief of Police. Such application must contain a financial statement reviewed and signed by a licensed certified public accountant. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.4).

5.30.050 Investigation by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the statements in the application and of the background of the applicant and forward the applicant(s) information and fingerprints to the Department of Justice for review. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.5).

5.30.060 Denial of permit.
Upon the Chief of Police's review of the application, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

(a) The investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application, concealed a material fact or otherwise committed any fraud in the application.

(b) The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor/felony involving an offense against private property interests. Such property offenses include, but are not limited to, larceny, false pretense, fraud, grand theft, embezzlement and receipt of stolen property.

(c) The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.6).

5.30.070 Fees.
The applicant shall pay a Department of Justice investigation fee for review of the applicant(s) fingerprints. The applicant shall also pay a City of Santa Clara processing fee as established by resolution. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.7).

5.30.080 Permits nonassignable.
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by the permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons; any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be deemed terminated and void. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.8).

5.30.090 Renewal of permits.
Pawnbroker and secondhand dealer permit application(s) for submittal to the Department of Justice shall be maintained and renewed every other year from the date of issuance by the City. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.9).

5.30.100 Inspection by Chief of Police.
All records kept pursuant to this chapter shall be, at all reasonable times, open to the inspection of the Chief of Police of the City, or designee. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.10).

5.30.110 Accepting goods from intoxicated persons or suspected felons, etc., prohibited.
No applicant holding a permit under this chapter, or the applicant's manager, agent or employee shall take or receive any goods, articles or things from any person who is in an intoxicated condition or from any suspected thief or associate of thieves or a suspected or known receiver of stolen property or from any persons reasonably suspected to be contained in any such categories. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.11).

5.30.120 Compliance with zoning regulations.
No person shall operate a pawnbroker and secondhand dealer business without compliance with all applicable zoning regulations. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.12).

5.30.130 Business tax certificate required.
No business tax certificate shall be issued until investigation by the Chief of Police and Department of Justice is completed and the permit is approved. The business tax certificate shall be issued upon payment of the business tax fee as required in Chapter 3.40 SCCC. (Ord. 1723 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 20-1.13).

Article II. Junk Dealers

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to records to be kept by junk dealers, see B. & P.C.A., §§ 21605 to 21608.  For State law as to failure of junk dealer to produce register for inspection by authorized persons, see Pen. C., §§ 343, 344.

5.30.140 Reserved.
5.30.150 Report of building inspector.
No license required by Chapter 3.40 SCCC shall be issued to maintain a junkyard unless and until the building inspector of the City shall have reported that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. (Ord. 608 § 1. Formerly § 20-10).

5.30.160 Revocation of license for noncompliance with chapter.
Failure to carry on, maintain or conduct the business of a junkyard according to the regulations specified in SCCC 5.30.140 after a license has been issued therefor shall be good and sufficient cause for the revocation of such license to carry on such business. (Ord. 608 § 1. Formerly § 20-11).

5.30.170 Compliance with regulations by persons licensed prior to effective date of chapter.
Any business being carried on, maintained or conducted under a license issued under Chapter 3.40 SCCC and prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have thirty (30) days from and after such effective date in which to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 608 § 1. Formerly § 20-12).

Chapter 5.35
TAXICABS AND PEDI-CABS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.35.010    Purpose, intent and effective date.

5.35.020    Definitions.

5.35.030    Taxicab stands.

Article II. Permits and Regulations

5.35.040    Taxicab permit requirements.

5.35.045    Pedi-cab permit requirements.

5.35.050    Taxicab permit application.

5.35.055    Pedi-cab permit application.

5.35.060    Application renewal.

5.35.070    Fees.

5.35.080    Grounds for denial.

5.35.090    Action by Chief of Police.

5.35.100    Permit application appeal procedure.

5.35.110    Permit not transferable.

5.35.120    Reserved.

5.35.130    Additional or substitute vehicles.

5.35.140    Reserved.

5.35.150    Fares.

5.35.160    Reserved.

5.35.170    Full use of taxicabs.

5.35.180    Duty to provide services.

5.35.185    Nondiscrimination.

5.35.190    Direct route.

5.35.200    Reserved.

5.35.210    Overcharge prohibited.

5.35.220    Testing of taxicab drivers for controlled substances and alcohol.

5.35.230    Refusal to pay and receipt.

5.35.240    Taxicab equipment and conditions required.

5.35.245    Pedi-cab equipment and conditions required.

5.35.250    Identification of taxicabs.

5.35.255    Identification of pedi-cabs.

5.35.260    Safety inspection.

5.35.270    Evidence of mechanical condition.

5.35.280    Report of accidents.

5.35.290    Owner’s records.

5.35.300    Reserved.

5.35.310    Taxicab insurance requirements.

5.35.315    Pedi-cab insurance requirements.

Article III. Taxicab Driver’s Permit

5.35.320    Application.

5.35.330    Permit card.

5.35.340    Permit fingerprints and requirements.

5.35.350    Reserved.

5.35.360    Grounds for denial.

5.35.370    Issuance of permit and renewal.

5.35.380    Information on permit.

5.35.390    Termination of employment or contract.

5.35.400    Reissuance of permit.

5.35.410    Reserved.

5.35.420    Driver’s appearance.

Article IV. Pedi-cab Operator’s Permit

5.35.430    Application.

5.35.440    Permit card.

5.35.450    Permit fingerprints and requirements.

5.35.460    Grounds for denial.

5.35.470    Issuance of permit and renewal.

5.35.480    Information on permit.

5.35.490    Termination of employment or contract.

5.35.500    Reissuance of permit.

5.35.510    Operator’s appearance.

Article V. Suspension and Revocation

5.35.520    Suspension or revocation of permit.

5.35.530    Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation.

5.35.540    Emergency suspension.

5.35.550    Notice of violation and hearing.

Article I. General Provisions

5.35.010 Purpose, intent and effective date.
This chapter is to further the public convenience and necessity of transportation services by taxicabs and pedi-cabs, to comply with the requirements of applicable State law, and is enacted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of California and the Charter of the City of Santa Clara (“City”). The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2019. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set forth herein unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

(a) “Chief of Police” shall mean the elected Chief of the Santa Clara Police Department, or his/her designee.

(b) “City Manager” means the City Manager, or his/her designee.

(c) For Hire. A vehicle is “for-hire” if any fare, fee, charge or other consideration is payable for the transportation service of the vehicle, whether paid or not.

(d) “Owner” shall mean a person, partnership, firm, association or corporation engaged in the business of taxicab transportation services or pedi-cab transportation services, as applicable. The act or omission of any owner’s officer, agent, employee or independent contractor, or of any driver whose services are engaged by owner, is for all purposes the act or omission of the owner.

(e) “Pedi-cab” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Vehicle Code Sections 467.5(a) and (b), as that section may be amended or renumbered. Pedi-cab may be referred to as a “vehicle” throughout this chapter.

(f) “Substantially located” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5, as that section may be amended or renumbered.

(g) “Taxicab” shall mean a passenger vehicle, designed for carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, used to transport persons for compensation on public streets. Taxicab may be referred to as a “vehicle” throughout this chapter. “Taxicab” excludes transportation network companies as defined and regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.030 Taxicab stands.
(a) Taxicab stands shall be maintained and occupied only as provided by laws and ordinances of the City.

(b) Taxicab drivers shall be entitled to use of the stand on a first-come, first-served basis and are not subject to paying additional costs requested from property personnel.

(c) Hotel personnel or its valet representatives shall not ask for or receive any type of compensation from the taxicab drivers in exchange for requesting taxi service.

(d) The driver shall pull onto the taxicab stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs in front pull off.

(e) Except for a customer deliberately choosing a different taxi, taxis shall pick up customers and leave the taxicab stand by the order of arrival only.

(f) A taxicab driver shall not park, stand or stop in any other place where there is a designated taxicab stand provided.

(g) Taxicab drivers shall not leave their vehicle unattended while parked in a taxicab stand.

(h) Taxicabs displaying “out-of-service” signs shall not park in a taxicab stand.

(i) The taxicab owner’s right to use a taxicab stand, as provided herein, shall be modified and/or suspended if the taxicab driver fails to obey the provisions of this chapter or any other Federal, State or local laws. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

Article II. Permits and Regulations

5.35.040 Taxicab permit requirements.
(a) No owner shall operate or permit the operation of a taxicab as a vehicle for hire on the streets of the City of Santa Clara without having first obtained a taxicab permit from the city within Santa Clara County in which the owner is substantially located, as that term is defined in Government Code Section 53075.5, or from the County of Santa Clara.

(b) If owner is substantially located in the City of Santa Clara, then owner must obtain a taxicab permit from the City of Santa Clara as set forth in this chapter.

(c) Owner must be the registered owner of at least seven taxicabs at the time of filing the permit application pursuant to SCCC 5.35.050, and must maintain at least seven taxicabs and seven permitted drivers for the duration of the permit. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.045 Pedi-cab permit requirements.
(a) No owner shall operate or permit the operation of a pedi-cab on the streets of the city without having obtained from the Chief of Police a pedi-cab permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(b) The applicant must be the registered owner of at least seven pedi-cabs at the time of filing the application, and must maintain at least seven pedi-cabs and seven permitted operators while operating in the City of Santa Clara.

(c) The vehicles described in Vehicle Code Section 467.5(c) are not permitted in the City of Santa Clara.

(d) Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed on a pedi-cab in the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.050 Taxicab permit application.
Every owner substantially located in the City of Santa Clara shall execute and file with the Chief of Police a verified application for taxicab permit containing the following information:

(a) The owner’s name, home address and business address;

(b) The owner’s trade name and distinguishing vehicle markings including color or colors if a color scheme is used;

(c) The primary business address of the proposed business, where an office or terminal containing the documents or other information required by this chapter may be inspected by the City;

(d) Satisfactory proof that the primary business address, if located within the city, is properly zoned and is in compliance with any required land use permit, for the conduct of the proposed business;

(e) The applicant’s past experience with regard to taxicab service;

(f) Whether any license, permit or certificate issued to the applicant has been denied, revoked or suspended by any public organization. The circumstances of said denial, revocation or suspension shall be fully explained;

(g) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime within five years prior to the date of the application, including the nature of the crimes;

(h) The number of vehicles proposed to be used as taxicabs;

(i) A description of the vehicles, including the make, model, serial number and license number of each vehicle;

(j) A sworn statement that each vehicle is in safe operating condition and is in compliance with the California Vehicle Code, made by an individual certified by or registered with the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or the California Bureau of Automotive Repair, who has inspected and examined such vehicles;

(k) A completed taxicab inspection form showing that each vehicle has successfully passed all required inspections including inspection by the Police Department;

(l) A sworn statement by the owner that the owner shall not operate any vehicle until the statement in subsection (j) of this section and the form in subsection (k) of this section concerning the vehicle have been filed with the Chief of Police;

(m) Evidence that owner is the registered owner of each vehicle. Owner shall declare that owner will not operate any vehicle until owner has become the registered owner of such vehicle and evidence thereof is filed with the Chief of Police;

(n) Evidence of reasonable financial responsibility, shown by providing a duplicate copy of the insurance policies required by SCCC 5.35.310;

(o) Evidence that owner has paid all applicable City taxes including the business tax certificate;

(p) Proof of substantial location in the City of Santa Clara, including submission of trip data (if applicable) for the prior year, in a form to be prescribed by the Chief of Police;

(q) Certification that each driver of vehicles operated under the permit has tested negatively for controlled substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program that complies with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3);

(r) Proof of compliance with Government Code Section 53075.5(h), as that section may be amended or renumbered, including pull-notice program participation, safety training, disabled access education and criminal history check of drivers; and

(s) Such additional information as the Chief of Police may require. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.055 Pedi-cab permit application.
Every owner shall execute and file with the Chief of Police a verified application for pedi-cab permit containing the following information:

(a) The owner’s name, home address and business address;

(b) The owner’s trade name and distinguishing vehicle markings including color or colors if a color scheme is used;

(c) The location of the proposed business;

(d) Satisfactory proof that the location of the proposed business, if in the City of Santa Clara, is properly zoned and is in compliance with any required land use permit for the conduct of the proposed business;

(e) The applicant’s past experience with regard to pedi-cab service;

(f) Whether any license, permit or certificate issued to the applicant has been denied, revoked or suspended by any public organization. The circumstances of said denial, revocation or suspension shall be fully explained;

(g) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime within five years prior to the date of the application, including the nature of the crimes;

(h) The number of pedi-cabs proposed;

(i) A sworn statement that each vehicle is in safe operating condition, made by the proprietor of a business engaged in maintenance and repair of similar vehicles, who has inspected and examined the vehicles;

(j) A completed pedi-cab inspection form showing that each pedi-cab has successfully passed inspection by the Police Department;

(k) A sworn statement by the owner that the owner shall not operate any pedi-cab until the statement in subsection (i) of this section and the form in subsection (j) of this section have been filed with the Chief of Police;

(l) Proof of insurance in the amounts set forth in SCCC 5.35.315;

(m) Evidence that owner has paid all applicable City taxes including the business tax certificate;

(n) Such additional information as the Chief of Police may require. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.060 Application renewal.
The renewal of an owner’s permit, for both taxicabs and pedi-cabs, shall be made annually with the Police Department. If there are substantial changes in the owner’s application information, the Police Department may require that the owner submit a new application for review and approval. Application renewal shall generally include:

(a) Proof of current, valid insurance coverage with limits and terms as set forth in this chapter;

(b) Proof of pull-notice program participation (if applicable);

(c) Trip data information showing substantial location in the city (if applicable);

(d) Annual vehicle inspection results; and

(e) Proof of compliance with drug and alcohol testing program requirements (if applicable). (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.070 Fees.
Owners and driver/operators shall pay all applicable fees including, but not limited to, an initial permit fee and an annual renewal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.080 Grounds for denial.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager on appeal, may deny an application for a permit on any of the following grounds:

(a) The application fails to contain any of the required information, or fulfill the criteria, set forth in this chapter;

(b) Any of the information contained in the application is false;

(c) Any vehicle proposed for operation is not safe, and the applicant has failed to remove such vehicle from service or to substitute a safe vehicle in its place within a reasonable time;

(d) The applicant has failed to comply with any term, condition or requirement in a permit previously issued;

(e) An act or omission of the applicant constitutes a ground for revocation or suspension of the permit;

(f) The applicant, within five years prior to the date of application, has been convicted of a crime, and the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the taxicab or pedi-cab business, as applicable;

(g) The applicant has had a taxicab or pedi-cab permit revoked or suspended within five years prior to the date of application; or

(h) The applicant has failed to pay when due any applicable taxes or fees imposed by the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.090 Action by Chief of Police.
(a) Within a reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Chief of Police may either grant or deny the application.

(b) The Chief of Police may impose such terms, conditions or restrictions on the permit as he or she deems necessary to provide adequate and dependable service to the public and to protect the use of public streets and facilities. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.100 Permit application appeal procedure.
The decision of the Chief of Police to deny an application for a permit under this chapter may be appealed to the City Manager as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.110 Permit not transferable.
The permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and all interests, rights and obligations pertaining thereto, are personal to the holder of such permit, and are not transferable or assignable, by operation of law or otherwise. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.120 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.130 Additional or substitute vehicles.
(a) Permission to operate vehicles in addition to or different from those approved under the initial permit may be obtained by filing an application amendment with the Chief of Police in the same manner as prescribed by this chapter for obtaining the initial permit.

(b) In granting or denying such applications for additional or different vehicles, the Chief of Police shall have the same authority as vested in the Chief of Police by this chapter in the matter of the initial applications. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.140 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.150 Fares.
Owner may set fares or charge a flat rate. Owner may use any type of device or technology approved by the Division of Measurement Standards to calculate fares, including the use of Global Positioning System metering; provided, that the device or technology complies with Section 12500.5 of the Business and Professions Code and with all regulations established pursuant to Section 12107 of the Business and Professions Code, as those sections may be amended or renumbered. Owner shall disclose fares, fees, or rates to the customer. Owner may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares, fees, or rates on its internet website, mobile telephone application, or telephone orders upon request by the customer. Owner shall notify the passenger of the applicable rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an application of a mobile telephone, device, or other internet-connected device, or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form on or inside the vehicle. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.160 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.170 Full use of taxicabs.
(a) Any person who hires a taxicab shall have the exclusive right to use the entire taxicab. There shall not be additional charges for any of the person’s companions or personal belongings.

(b) No owner or driver of a taxicab shall carry or solicit, or permit to be carried or solicited, any additional passenger unless the person first hiring the taxicab consents to the acceptance of such additional passenger. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.180 Duty to provide services.
(a) No owner or driver of any taxicab shall refuse to provide taxicab service to a person who requests to be taken to a destination within the city, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.

(b) The owner or driver may refuse to provide taxicab service when:

(1) The person requesting such service does not appear to be in a sober or orderly manner;

(2) The service is requested for an unlawful purpose; or

(3) The taxicab has already been hired. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.185 Nondiscrimination.
No owner or driver/operator shall prejudice, disadvantage, or require different rates or provide different service to a person because of race, national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex, or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.190 Direct route.
Unless otherwise directed by the passenger, the driver or operator of a taxicab or pedi-cab shall take the most direct, expeditious and safe route from the starting point to the destination point. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.200 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.210 Overcharge prohibited.
(a) No owner or driver/operator shall charge a greater fare than that disclosed to the passenger pursuant to SCCC 5.35.150.

(b) It shall constitute a ground for revocation or suspension of a permit for any owner or driver/operator to charge a greater fare than that authorized by this chapter.

(c) The owner or driver/operator who overcharges a fare shall be liable to the person who hires the taxicab or pedi-cab for the difference between the amount of fare actually charged and the amount of fare authorized by this chapter.

(d) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies, and are not intended to be exclusive. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.220 Testing of taxicab drivers for controlled substances and alcohol.
(a) Drivers shall test negative for each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, before employment. Drivers shall test negative for these controlled substances and for alcohol as a condition of grant of permit and renewal of a permit. As used in this section, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.

(b) Procedures shall be substantially as in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver shall show a valid California driver’s license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in this section. Requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other requirements, except as provided otherwise in this section, shall be implemented by owners substantially as in Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(c) A test from another jurisdiction shall be accepted by the City. Any negative test result shall be accepted for one year as meeting the requirement for periodic permit renewal testing, if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to a negative result. However, an earlier negative result shall not be accepted as meeting the pre-employment testing requirement for any subsequent employment, or any testing requirements under the program other than periodic testing.

(d) In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the test results shall be reported directly to the City, which shall notify the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the owner, who shall notify the City immediately of positive results.

(e) All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law.

(f) Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. Owners shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that an owner may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing.

(g) Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the City shall give the driver a list of the consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that the City knows offer tests in or near the city. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.230 Refusal to pay and receipt.
(a) Refusal to Pay Fares Prohibited.

(1) No person shall refuse to pay the fare imposed on the person for having received any taxicab or pedi-cab service.

(2) No person shall hire any taxicab or pedi-cab with the intent to defraud the owner or driver/operator of the value of the service.

(3) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies, and are not intended to be exclusive.

(b) Receipt for Fare. The driver/operator of any taxicab or pedi-cab shall give any passenger who so requests a receipt for the fare charged and paid. The receipt shall contain:

(1) The name of the business;

(2) The name of the driver/operator;

(3) Taxicab or pedi-cab license number;

(4) Date of transaction; and

(5) The amount of fares charged and paid. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.240 Taxicab equipment and conditions required.
(a) Each taxicab operated under a taxicab permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times have:

(1) One operable safety belt for each passenger carried;

(2) A spare tire, capable of being used on any of the wheels of the vehicle;

(3) A set of tools for changing tires;

(4) Two independently acting and entirely unconnected braking systems in proper operating order;

(5) Safety or shatterproof glass in windshield, windows and doors; and

(6) An “out of service” sign within the vehicle, with dimensions of twelve (12) inches by fourteen (14) inches, to be displayed in the right rear window during those times when the taxicab is on public streets and not available for hire by the general public.

(b) Each taxicab operated under a taxicab license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in such condition so that:

(1) All doors, windows, hood and trunk will open and close securely;

(2) The inside of the taxicab and the luggage compartment is free of litter and trash, and shall be maintained such that it does not soil, rip or otherwise damage the passenger’s clothing or effects; and

(3) The exterior of the taxicab is clean and in good repair, and does not have any missing components.

(c) All taxicabs shall be no more than nine model years old or exceed four hundred thousand (400,000) miles, upon the annual taxi inspection date. These two requirements may be waived at the discretion of the Permits Unit, if the taxicab meets all current safety inspection requirements. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.245 Pedi-cab equipment and conditions required.
(a) Each pedi-cab operated under a pedi-cab permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times be clean and safe, and have:

(1) Seatbelts for all passengers;

(2) Seat backs for all passengers;

(3) Hydraulic or mechanical disc brakes;

(4) Reflectors on each wheel and on the front and rear of the vehicle;

(5) Headlights and taillights;

(6) Turn signals visible from the front and rear of the vehicle; and

(7) Grab rails.

(b) The seating area of the pedi-cab shall be free of litter and trash, and shall be maintained such that it does not soil, rip or otherwise damage the passenger’s clothing or effects. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.250 Identification of taxicabs.
(a) Taxicabs identified and permitted by another jurisdiction may use that identification scheme while working within the city.

(b) For taxicabs not previously identified and permitted by another jurisdiction, the following identification shall be placed on both sides and the rear of each taxicab operated under this chapter, to be applied by non-water-soluble paint or similar material:

(1) A serial body number, issued by the Chief of Police for each taxicab:

(A) Shall be placed on both the front quarter panels and the left side of the rear trunk lid of each vehicle.

(B) Shall be at least four inches in height and of such color as will contrast distinctly with the color of the body of the taxicab.

(2) The owner’s trade name:

(A) Shall include the word “taxicab,” “taxi” or “cab.”

(B) Shall be in letters at least four inches in height and of such color as will contrast distinctly with the color of the body of the taxicab.

(c) The owner and the driver shall maintain the paint, color scheme if a scheme has been adopted, decals and lettering on the exterior of a taxicab in good condition for the duration of the permit period, and visible at all times.

(d) All identification required to be placed on a taxicab shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after such taxicab is removed from the owner’s taxicab service. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.255 Identification of pedi-cabs.
(a) The following identification shall be placed on both sides and the rear of each pedi-cab passenger compartment, to be applied by non-water-soluble paint or similar material, to be clearly visible at all times, and shall be at least four inches in height and of such color as will contrast distinctly with the color of the body of the taxicab:

(1) The permit number, issued by the Chief of Police for each pedi-cab;

(2) The owner’s trade name.

(b) The owner and the driver/operator shall maintain the paint, color scheme if a scheme has been adopted, decals and lettering on the exterior of a pedi-cab in good condition for the duration of the permit period.

(c) All identification required to be placed on a pedi-cab shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after such pedi-cab is removed from service. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.260 Safety inspection.
(a) All vehicles shall be safety inspected annually in the manner provided for by this chapter, the California Vehicle Code, and/or Government Code Section 53075.5, as applicable. The inspection shall be completed prior to the renewal of the permit. If the vehicle successfully completes the safety inspection, a safety permit sticker shall be issued and shall be displayed in the rear window of a taxicab or on the rear of the passenger compartment of a pedi-cab.

(b) Taxicabs that are owner-operated vehicles will receive a taxicab safety permit sticker only if the registered owner holds a valid taxi driver permit.

(c) The driver of a vehicle shall inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least once each day.

(d) The owner of a vehicle, who is aware of or should have been aware of any unsafe condition of the vehicle, shall not allow the vehicle to be used until necessary repairs are made. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.270 Evidence of mechanical condition.
(a) Upon receipt of a citizen’s complaint or police officer’s observation regarding the mechanical condition of a vehicle, or following the vehicle’s involvement in an accident, the Chief of Police may require any or all of the following:

(1) A visual inspection of the vehicle by a member of the Police Department; and/or

(2) An interview by a member of the Police Department with the owner or driver/operator of the vehicle regarding the mechanical condition of the vehicle; and/or

(3) A sworn statement that the vehicle is in safe operating condition, made in the same manner as that submitted with a permit application.

(b) If the owner or driver/operator of the vehicle refuses to submit to an inspection as required by subsection (a) of this section, the Chief of Police may issue an order prohibiting such vehicle from use in service.

(c) Upon determination that any vehicle operated under a permit is not in safe operating condition, the Chief of Police may issue an order requiring that such vehicle not be used in service until it has been repaired to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.

(d) The Chief of Police shall have the authority to impound vehicles which continue to be used for service in violation of the order. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.280 Report of accidents.
Each permitted owner and driver/operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in property damage exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), or personal injury of any kind, shall report the accident to the Chief of Police within ten days after the accident. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.290 Owner’s records.
(a) The owner shall maintain at all times complete and accurate records of:

(1) The names, addresses and dates of commencement and termination of employment or engagement under contract of drivers/operators by the owner;

(2) The description of the vehicle driven by each driver/operator, including the make, model, serial number and license number (as applicable);

(3) The hours during which each driver/operator is on duty and the number of trips taken by each driver/operator;

(4) A log of all trips made by drivers/operators including the starting and destination points and times; and

(5) All other information required by State law.

(b) The owner shall maintain such records for a minimum period of five years and shall make them available for inspection upon request by the Chief of Police.

(c) The owner, who is aware of or should have been aware that a driver/operator does not possess a valid City driver’s permit, shall not dispatch that driver/operator for hire within the city.

(d) Drivers/operators shall submit to owner a daily log sheet indicating, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Driver/operator name;

(2) Date;

(3) Vehicle number;

(4) Time started;

(5) Time finished;

(6) Time of pick-up call;

(7) Pick-up location; and

(8) Drop-off location. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.300 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.310 Taxicab insurance requirements.
(a) No taxicab permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a policy of comprehensive automobile liability insurance in a form approved by the City Attorney, executed by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of California and with an A.M. Best rating of at least A VII, whereby the owner and driver of each of the taxicabs operated under the permit are insured against liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the ownership, operation or other use thereof. The minimum liability limits upon each vehicle shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury to or death of any persons and for damages to or destruction of property in any one accident.

(b) Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that the policy will not be cancelled until notice in writing has been given to the City of Santa Clara, addressed to the Chief of Police, at least thirty (30) days immediately prior to the time such cancellation becomes effective.

(c) Such policy of insurance shall name the City of Santa Clara, its City Council, commissions, officers, employees, volunteers and agents as additional insureds using an endorsement acceptable in form to the City Attorney.

(d) Taxicab permit holders, vehicle owners and drivers shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its City Council, commissions, officers, employees, volunteers and agents from any loss, liability, claim, injury or damage arising or alleged to arise from the willful or negligent acts or omissions of the taxicab permit holder, vehicle owner or driver in connection with the provision of transportation service pursuant to the taxicab permit. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.315 Pedi-cab insurance requirements.
(a) No pedi-cab permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there are in full force and effect policies of general liability coverage and general umbrella insurance, executed by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of California and with an A.M. Best rating of at least A VII, whereby the owner and operator of each of the pedi-cabs operated under the permit are insured against liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the ownership, operation or other use thereof. The minimum liability limits shall be in the amounts set forth in Vehicle Code Section 21215, which section is made expressly applicable to pedi-cabs defined under Vehicle Code Section 467(a) and (b) in the City of Santa Clara.

(b) Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that the policy will not be cancelled until notice in writing has been given to the City of Santa Clara, addressed to the Chief of Police, at least thirty (30) days immediately prior to the time such cancellation becomes effective.

(c) Such policy of insurance shall name the City of Santa Clara, its City Council, commissions, officers, employees, volunteers and agents as additional insureds using an endorsement acceptable in form to the City Attorney.

(d) Pedi-cab permit holders, vehicle owners and driver/operators shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its City Council, commissions, officers, employees, volunteers and agents from any loss, liability, claim, injury or damage arising or alleged to arise from the willful or negligent acts or omissions of the permit holder, vehicle owner or driver/operator in connection with the provision of transportation service pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

Article III. Taxicab Driver’s Permit

5.35.320 Application.
(a) No person shall operate any taxicab in the city unless the person has a valid driver’s permit to do so as hereinafter provided.

(b) Application for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police setting forth the following information:

(1) The applicant’s name, date of birth, address, California driver’s license number, and past experience with regard to taxicab service;

(2) The names and addresses of the applicant’s employers during the preceding three years;

(3) Whether an operator’s or a chauffeur’s license issued to the applicant by any state or governmental agency has ever been revoked, and the reasons therefor;

(4) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime within five years prior to the date of the application, including the nature of the crime;

(5) Attaching a printed Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report;

(6) The name and address of the owner by whom the applicant is to be employed or engaged under contract as a taxicab driver;

(7) The endorsement by the owner, by whom the applicant is to be employed or engaged under contract as a taxicab driver, on the application stating that the applicant has acquired proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the State of California and the City, and of the streets of the city, and to safely operate a public transportation vehicle in the city;

(8) Whether the applicant has paid all applicable taxes imposed by the City, including the business tax certificate if applicant is to be engaged under contract as an independent contractor;

(9) Compliance with the controlled substances and alcohol testing requirements set forth in this chapter; and

(10) Such additional information as the Chief of Police may require. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.330 Permit card.
The taxicab driver’s photo permit shall be posted in a place conspicuous from the passenger’s compartment of the taxicab. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.340 Permit fingerprints and requirements.
(a) Applicants shall be fingerprinted by the Police Department.

(b) Prior to the issuance of a taxicab driver’s permit, the applicant must demonstrate to the Chief of Police proficient knowledge of the City’s Taxi Ordinance, the traffic laws of the State of California, and the streets of the city. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.350 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.360 Grounds for denial.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager on appeal, may deny an application for a taxicab driver’s permit filed by any person who:

(a) Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;

(b) Does not hold a valid driver’s license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles for the type of vehicle the applicant proposes to use as a taxicab in the city;

(c) Has a positive result in a controlled substance or alcohol test, as described in this chapter;

(d) Within five years prior to the date of application, has been convicted of a crime that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a taxicab driver including, but not limited to:

(1) Hit and run;

(2) An offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290;

(3) Any offense involving the use, possession, sale or transportation of controlled substances, where the commission of such offense involved the use of a motor vehicle; and

(4) Reckless driving or driving under the influence of any drug or intoxicating liquor, regardless of whether the incident resulted in bodily injury or death.

(e) Any other fact or occurrence that renders it unsafe for the applicant to perform the functions or duties of a taxicab driver;

(f) Does not demonstrate proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the State and the City, the streets of the city, or to safely operate a public transportation vehicle in the city;

(g) Has failed to furnish the information required for the application for the permit;

(h) Has made a false statement, or concealed a material fact, or otherwise committed any fraud in the application;

(i) Has had a taxicab driver’s permit revoked within three years prior to the date of application;

(j) Has failed to pay when due all applicable fees and taxes imposed by the City;

(k) The printed Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report indicates more than three chargeable vehicle accidents within the last three years or more than one such accident in the last one year; or

(l) The Chief of Police may deny the granting of any permit to drive any taxicab in the city for any other reasonable cause that, within its discretion, renders the proposed operations unsafe to the City. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.370 Issuance of permit and renewal.
(a) Within a reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall issue a taxicab driver’s permit to the applicant, if the Chief determines that there is no ground for denial of the permit.

(b) The duration of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year from the date of the application.

(c) Renewal of a taxicab driver’s permit shall require a renewal fee, proof of compliance with drug and alcohol testing program requirements, and proof of continued employment with owner. Retesting may be required of the taxicab driver. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.380 Information on permit.
Each taxicab driver’s permit shall be numbered and signed by the Chief of Police and shall contain the following information:

(a) The date of expiration of permit;

(b) The driver’s name and driver’s license number;

(c) A description of the driver, including date of birth, sex, height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair;

(d) The name of the owner by whom the driver is employed or engaged under contract;

(e) Photograph; and

(f) Other information as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.390 Termination of employment or contract.
(a) The taxicab driver’s permit shall be automatically void upon the termination of the driver’s employment or contract with the owner who endorsed the permit application.

(b) Within twenty-four (24) hours after any termination of employment or contract, the owner shall notify the Chief of Police in writing of such termination. Within twenty-four (24) hours, driver shall surrender the taxicab driver’s permit to the Chief of Police. If said permit is unavailable, the owner and driver shall state on the notification the unavailability of the permit and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.400 Reissuance of permit.
(a) The Chief of Police may approve reissuance of a taxicab driver’s permit to an applicant without requiring the applicant’s photographs and fingerprints, and the permit fee, if an application endorsed by another owner is filed within six months after the applicant’s prior employment or contract with a taxicab business as a driver was terminated.

(b) This section does not apply to an applicant whose employment or contract with a taxicab business as a driver was terminated for reasons which constituted any of the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver’s permit. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.410 Reserved.
(Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.420 Driver’s appearance.
The taxicab drivers shall wear shoes at all times while on duty. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude an owner from establishing a dress code or similar rules to regulate the appearance of all drivers. Taxicab drivers shall not sleep in their vehicles while on duty. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

Article IV. Pedi-cab Operator’s Permit

5.35.430 Application.
(a) No person shall operate any pedi-cab in the city unless the person has a valid operator’s permit to do so as hereinafter provided.

(b) Application for a pedi-cab operator’s permit shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police setting forth the following information:

(1) The applicant’s name, date of birth, address, California driver’s license number (if the operator has a current driver’s license) or other valid government-issued identification, and past experience with regard to pedi-cab service;

(2) The names and addresses of the applicant’s employers during the preceding three years;

(3) Whether an operator’s license issued to the applicant by any state or governmental agency has ever been revoked, and the reasons therefor;

(4) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime within five years prior to the date of the application, including the nature of the crime;

(5) The name and address of the owner by whom the applicant is to be employed or engaged under contract as a pedi-cab driver;

(6) The endorsement by the owner, by whom the applicant is to be employed or engaged under contract as a pedi-cab driver, on the application stating that the applicant has acquired proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the State of California and the City, and of the streets of the city, and to safely operate a pedi-cab in the city;

(7) Whether the applicant has paid all applicable taxes imposed by the City, including the business tax certificate if applicant is to be engaged under contract as an independent contractor;

(8) Attaching a printed Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report if the operator has a California driver’s license;

(9) Such additional information as the Chief of Police may require. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.440 Permit card.
The pedi-cab operator permit shall be kept with the operator at all times when the pedi-cab is in service. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.450 Permit fingerprints and requirements.
(a) Applicants shall be fingerprinted by the Police Department.

(b) Prior to the issuance of a pedi-cab operator permit, the applicant must demonstrate to the Chief of Police:

(1) Proficient knowledge of the City’s ordinance, the traffic laws of the State of California, and the streets of the city.

(2) Ability to properly and safely operate a pedi-cab may be considered in each pedi-cab operator permit evaluation. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.460 Grounds for denial.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager on appeal, may deny an application for a pedi-cab operator permit filed by any person who:

(a) Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;

(b) Does not hold a valid driver’s license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles or other valid government issued identification;

(c) Within five years prior to the date of application, has been convicted of a crime that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a pedi-cab operator including, but not limited to:

(1) Hit and run;

(2) An offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290;

(3) Any offense involving the use, possession, sale or transportation of controlled substances, where the commission of such offense involved the use of a motor vehicle or pedi-cab; and

(4) Reckless driving or driving under the influence of any drug or intoxicating liquor, regardless of whether the incident resulted in bodily injury or death;

(d) Any other fact or occurrence that renders it unsafe for the applicant to perform the functions or duties of a pedi-cab operator;

(e) Does not demonstrate proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the State and the City, the streets of the city, or to safely operate a pedi-cab in the city;

(f) Has failed to furnish the information required for the application for the permit;

(g) Has made a false statement, or concealed a material fact, or otherwise committed any fraud in the application;

(h) Has had a pedi-cab operator permit revoked within three years prior to the date of application;

(i) Has failed to pay when due all applicable taxes imposed by the City;

(j) The printed Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report, if the operator has a driver’s license, indicates more than three chargeable vehicle accidents within the last three years or more than one such accident in the last one year; or

(k) The Chief of Police may deny the granting of any permit to operate any pedi-cab in the city for any other reasonable cause that, within its discretion, renders the proposed operations unsafe to the City. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.470 Issuance of permit and renewal.
(a) Within a reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall issue a pedi-cab operator permit to the applicant, if the Chief determines that there is no ground for denial of the permit.

(b) The duration of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year from the date of the application.

(c) Renewal of a pedi-cab operator permit shall require a renewal fee and proof of continued employment with owner. Retesting may be required of the pedi-cab operator. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.480 Information on permit.
Each pedi-cab operator permit shall be numbered and signed by the Chief of Police and shall contain the following information:

(a) The date of expiration of permit;

(b) The operator’s name;

(c) A description of the operator, including date of birth, sex, height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair;

(d) The name of the owner by whom the operator is employed or engaged under contract;

(e) Photograph; and

(f) Other information as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.490 Termination of employment or contract.
(a) The pedi-cab operator permit shall be automatically revoked upon the termination of the operator’s employment or contract with the owner who endorsed the permit application.

(b) Within twenty-four (24) hours after any termination of employment or contract, the owner and operator shall jointly notify the Chief of Police in writing of such termination and surrender any pedi-cab operator permit in their respective possessions. If said permit is unavailable, the owner and operator shall state on the notification the unavailability of the permit and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.500 Reissuance of permit.
(a) The Chief of Police may approve reissuance of a pedi-cab operator permit to an applicant without requiring the applicant’s photographs and fingerprints, and the permit fee, if an application endorsed by another owner is filed within six months after the applicant’s prior employment or contract with a pedi-cab business as a driver was terminated.

(b) This section does not apply to an applicant whose employment or contract with a pedi-cab business as an operator was terminated for reasons which constituted any of the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a pedi-cab operator permit. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.510 Operator’s appearance.
The pedi-cab operator shall wear shoes at all times while on duty. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude an owner from establishing a dress code or similar rules to regulate the appearance of all operators. Operators shall not sleep in their vehicles while on duty. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

Article V. Suspension and Revocation

5.35.520 Suspension or revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager on appeal, shall have the power to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter, on any of the grounds stated in this chapter, or on any of the following grounds:

(a) The violation by the owner of any of the terms, conditions or requirements of the permit.

(b) Any act or omission of the owner or driver/operator of any fact or condition which, if it existed at the time the application for a permit was filed, would have warranted the denial of the application.

(c) Cancellation or suspension of any insurance policy or coverage required of the owner under this chapter.

(d) Failure of the owner or driver/operator to pay any judgment for personal injury or death, or property damage arising out of the conduct of business under the permit issued pursuant to this chapter, within thirty (30) days after the judgment has become final.

(e) Voluntary written request by the owner or driver/operator to suspend the taxicab license for a definite period of time.

(f) Overcharge of, or the attempt to overcharge, fares by the owner or driver/operator.

(g) Failure of the owner or driver/operator to pay when due any applicable taxes imposed by the City.

(h) Any activity that impairs the safety of passengers.

(i) Suspension, revocation or expiration of license to drive by the Department of Motor Vehicles or any other governmental agency. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.530 Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation.
Revocations and suspensions shall be administered as follows:

(a) Except as provided in SCCC 5.35.540, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended only after the owner or driver/operator has been given reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.

(b) Whenever the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit exists, he/she shall give the holder of the permit written notice stating the grounds for the suspension or revocation and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. The effective date of the suspension or revocation shall be no less than ten calendar days after the date of the notice. This notice will be by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address shown on the last application or renewal, or by personal service. The decision of the Chief of Police to revoke or suspend a permit may be appealed to the City Manager or designee. The notice shall provide the permit holder with information on the appeal process.

(c) The license holder must submit a request for an appeal hearing to the City Manager within ten calendar days after the date of the City’s notice.

(d) Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) days of the request. The City Manager, or designee, shall notify the permit holder in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall not be less than ten days after the service of the notice of hearing by postage of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(e) The suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal hearing.

(f) At the hearing, both the holder of the permit and the Chief of Police shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the appeal, as stated in the written grounds for the appeal hearing. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written decision which states whether the decision of the Chief of Police is upheld, modified, or reversed, the length of any suspension, and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the City Manager shall be served on the holder of the permit by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(g) The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

(h) Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the permittee/applicant in any hearing or other matter under this chapter.

(i) Upon a written decision of the City Manager which suspends or revokes a permit, the holder of the permit shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police immediately after service of the notice of the decision. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.540 Emergency suspension.
(a) The Chief of Police may issue a notice suspending a permit for a period not exceeding ten days without having conducted a hearing therefor, if the Chief determines that the continued use of the permit will cause immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare.

(b) Within ten days of the effective date of the notice, the City Manager shall hold a hearing for the owner or driver/operator to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked.

(c) The notice issued by the Chief of Police under subsection (a) of this section shall also contain a notice of the hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

5.35.550 Notice of violation and hearing.
Any person found to be owning or operating a taxicab or pedi-cab in the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a notice of violation by the Santa Clara Police Department, in person or by mail, to be enforced in accordance with the provisions of SCCC Title 1 (“General Provisions”) and the provisions of this chapter. Operation of a taxicab without a valid permit shall be punishable by an administrative citation in an amount not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) pursuant to Government Code Section 53075.5(i). (Ord. 1989 § 1, 10-16-18).

Chapter 5.40
MASSAGE SERVICES
AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

5.40.010    Purpose and intent.

5.40.020    Definitions.

5.40.030    Massage certification required.

5.40.040    Owner and operator – Massage establishment permit required.

5.40.050    Business tax requirement.

5.40.060    When a permit is not required.

5.40.070    Massage establishment permit application and fee.

5.40.080    Massage establishment operating requirements.

5.40.090    Massage establishment facilities regulations.

5.40.100    Inspection by officials.

5.40.110    Permits nonassignable.

5.40.120    Change of location or change in name.

5.40.130    New massage therapists – Notification.

5.40.140    Renewal of permits – Massage establishments.

5.40.150    Application of regulations to existing massage establishments and massage therapists.

5.40.160    Prohibited conduct.

5.40.170    Enforcement – Suspension or revocation of massage establishment permit.

5.40.180    Procedure for revocation or suspension of massage establishment permit.

5.40.190    Maintenance and review of massage therapy organization certificates.

5.40.010 Purpose and intent.
(a) Purpose.

(1) The City of Santa Clara is authorized to regulate massage establishments pursuant to Government Code Section 51030 et seq., Business and Professions Code Sections 460 and 4600 et seq. and Section 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution.

(2) In enacting these regulations the City of Santa Clara City Council (“City Council”) recognizes that massage is a viable professional field offering the public valuable health and therapeutic services.

(3) It is the purpose and intent of the City Council that the operation of massage establishments and persons offering massage be regulated in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare by providing minimum building, sanitation, and health standards and to ensure that persons offering massage shall possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such businesses and to perform such services offered.

(4) It is the intent of this chapter to enact regulations to insure that those offering massage services are qualified and trained and can be expected to conduct their work in a lawful and professional manner. The City Council finds that existing controls have not satisfactorily addressed or regulated serious criminal and public health problems, nor have the existing controls regulated the profession so as to sufficiently encourage compliance with State and local laws.

(b) Conflicts with other Provisions of this Code. In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other chapter(s) of this Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control, unless to do so would be inconsistent with the stated purpose of this chapter.

(c) Responsibility for Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.020 Definitions.
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter:

(a) Reserved for future use.

(b) Reserved for future use.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)” shall mean the State organized nonprofit organization created to regulate the massage industry set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600).

(2) “CAMTC certificate” shall mean a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council to a massage therapist.

(3) “Chief of Police” means the elected Chief of the Santa Clara Police Department, or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(4) “City Attorney” means the City of Santa Clara’s City Attorney, or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(5) “City Manager” means the City of Santa Clara’s City Manager, or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Days” means calendar days, unless specified differently.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “License” means a business tax certificate obtained from the municipal services/business tax division of the Finance Department to operate a massage establishment and/or provide massage service as required by this chapter.

(m) “M” definitions:

(1) “Massage” means any method of friction against, pressure on, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.

(2) “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, for consideration, massages or health treatments involving massages as regular functions.

(3) “Massage therapist” or “holistic health practitioner” means any person who administers massages, baths, or nonmedical health treatments involving massage, or any nonmedical health care therapy using massage as the principal therapeutic approach in caring for clients, to another person for any consideration whatsoever.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) “Owner” shall mean any of the following individuals: (A) the sole practitioner of a sole proprietorship operating a massage establishment; (B) any general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage establishment; (C) any person who has ten percent or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage establishment; (D) any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage establishment; (E) all owners of any other type of business entity that owns a massage establishment; (F) any person identified as an owner on the massage establishment permit.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Permit” means the City-issued permit to engage in the business activity of operating a massage establishment, which shall be obtained through the process required by this chapter. Unless specifically provided otherwise, permits are not transferable.

(2) “Permittee” means a person, as defined hereinbelow, who has obtained a massage establishment permit. Permittee shall include the owner, operator, manager, and/or responsible, managing officer/employee. The term “responsible, managing officer/employee” includes partner(s).

(3) “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) Reserved for future use.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.030 Massage certification required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city the business of providing massage, for any compensation, without being in possession of a valid CAMTC certificate. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.040 Owner and operator – Massage establishment permit required.
It is unlawful for any owner, as defined herein, to own, manage, or operate in or upon any premises within the city a massage establishment without first having obtained a massage establishment permit issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth. A permit shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended. A separate massage establishment permit is required for each location if an owner owns, manages, or operates multiple massage establishments. The City may immediately order a business that fails to have a valid massage establishment permit to cease operation. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.050 Business tax requirement.
A massage establishment owner, as defined herein, and massage therapists that are independent contractors and/or sole proprietorships shall pay the required business license tax for such business and occupation based on location. It is unlawful for massage therapists who are required to pay the business license tax under this section to give, provide, or administer to another person for any form of compensation whatsoever a massage as defined in this chapter at a massage establishment or any location from a massage establishment within the city in the absence of a valid business license pursuant to this chapter. A separate business license is required for each location if a massage therapist works at multiple massage establishments. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.060 When a permit is not required.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties:

(a) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or any physical therapists who are duly State-licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California. The exemption provided by this section shall not apply to massage therapists.

(b) Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses, and businesses operating with this class of individuals, like nail salons; except that this exemption from a City permit shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, foot, ankle and/or calf of the customers.

(c) Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or any other health facilities duly licensed by the State of California.

(d) Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

(e) Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes; and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic event such as road races, track meets, triathlons, biathlons or similar single-occurrence athletic or recreational events.

(f) Other single-event massage practice occurring within the workplace or similar business location where the massage shall be restricted to the shoulders, neck, face and/or scalp of the customer.

(g) If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than him or herself, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provisions of the SCCC. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.070 Massage establishment permit application and fee.
The following provisions shall apply to the permit application process:

(a) Any person, as defined herein, desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the Chief of Police.

(b) Each application for a massage establishment permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. The fee paid shall be to defray in part the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. This massage establishment permit registration fee shall be determined from time to time by the City Council by resolution to properly reflect cost recovery adjustments it deems appropriate. A copy of the receipt for the nonrefundable fee shall accompany the application.

(c) The massage establishment permit application and fee required under this section shall be in addition to any license, permit, or fee required under any other section of this Code or other City law or regulation.

(d) The application and fee for a massage establishment permit does not authorize a massage establishment to operate until such permit has been granted and the business tax has been paid to the municipal services/business tax division of the Finance Department.

(e) Each applicant for a permit shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury:

(1) The full, true name under which the business will be conducted.

(2) The present or proposed address where the business is to be conducted.

(3) The applicant’s full, true name, and other names used, date of birth, valid California driver’s license number (or California identification number), Social Security number (unless prohibited by law), present residence address and telephone number, gender, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes. Additionally, applicant shall provide original documentation to verify both the applicant’s identity and employment authorization (if applicable). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver’s license, California identification card, Social Security card, resident alien (“green”) card, United States passport, unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States government.

(4) The previous two residences of the applicant and the inclusive dates at each address.

(5) The applicant’s business, occupation, and employment history for seven years preceding the date of application and the inclusive dates of same. Applicant shall provide proof that within the seven years preceding submission of the application, the applicant has not:

(A) Had a massage establishment, massage therapist, or other similar permit or license denied, suspended, or revoked by the City, or any other State or local agency;

(B) Engaged in conduct or operated a massage or similar establishment in a manner that would be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit under this chapter; or

(C) Owned or managed a massage or similar establishment where persons required to be licensed were allowed to work without the required license or permit.

(6) A statement of the permit history of the applicant by identifying whether or not such person has ever held a professional or vocational license or permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license; whether or not the permit or license is still in effect; if the permit or license is no longer in effect, was it revoked or suspended, and, if so, the reason(s) therefor.

(7) A statement that within the seven years preceding submission of the application, no injunction has been issued under the Red Light Abatement Law (Penal Code Section 11225 et seq.) against the applicant or against a business establishment where the applicant was a permittee or employee, and that the applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving:

(A) Conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290;

(B) Conduct which is a violation of the provisions of California Penal Code Section 314, 315, 316, 318, or 647(a) or (b);

(C) Crimes that are designated in Government Code Section 51032; or

(D) Any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence or moral turpitude.

Convictions under the laws of other states or countries which proscribe the same or similar conduct as the afore-designated California crimes shall be considered. Convictions that have been expunged must be reported, and all injunctions for nuisances under Penal Code Section 11225 or similar laws must also be reported.

For purposes of this criminal conviction portion of the statement, if the applicant is a corporation, the statement shall apply to the stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation, the officers, and/or directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the statement shall apply to all partners, both general and limited.

(8) A complete list of all services to be provided with definitions and/or descriptions attached.

(9) The name, address, and date of birth of each massage therapist or employee who is or will be employed at the massage establishment.

(10) The original valid and current State certificate issued by CAMTC for each massage therapist who will work in the massage establishment.

(11) The name and address of any massage business or other like establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given pursuant to this section.

(12) Upon request of the Chief of Police, the applicant shall be required to furnish fingerprints for the purpose of establishing identification. The fingerprints will be taken at a place designated by the Chief of Police. Any required fingerprinting fee shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

(13) The applicant shall have his or her picture taken by the Santa Clara Police Department or otherwise supply a photograph as directed by the Department.

(14) A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises, or on adjoining premises, owned or controlled by the applicant.

(15) The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his/her property.

(16) Written authorization for the City, its agents and employees, to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and into the background of the applicant and the responsible, managing officer/employee.

(17) Proof of massage malpractice insurance in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per massage therapist licensed, or to be licensed, at the massage establishment; this requirement can be satisfied by malpractice insurance being provided in the name of the individual massage therapist.

(18) The applicant shall advise the City in writing of any change of address or change in fact(s) represented to City which may occur during the City’s processing of the application for a massage establishment permit.

(19) A copy of the floor plan approved as part of any conditional use permit required under Chapter 18.104 SCCC, drawn to scale showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including, but not limited to, closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs.

(f) The Chief of Police has up to sixty (60) days after submission of all required information to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon the completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police may grant the permit, with or without conditions, if, upon review of the requirements listed in subsections (e)(1) through (19) of this section, inclusive, all of the following are found:

(1) The required fee has been paid;

(2) The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application;

(3) The permit as requested by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; and

(4) The applicant complies with the requirements of this chapter.

(g) If, following investigation of the applicant, the Chief of Police cannot make the findings required in subsection (f) of this section, the application shall be denied by dated, written notice which sets forth the reasons for denial. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.080 Massage establishment operating requirements.
No person shall engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on any massage establishment activity or conduct unless each and all of the following requirements are met:

(a) Each person employed or acting as a massage therapist shall have a valid CAMTC certificate and shall carry on his/her person his/her valid CAMTC-issued identification card at all times while providing services. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, and/or responsible, managing officer/employee to employ or permit a person to act as a massage therapist who is not in possession of a valid CAMTC certificate or to permit him/her to provide services without carrying his/her CAMTC-issued identification card.

(b) The possession of a valid massage establishment permit does not authorize the permit holder or any other person to perform work for which a valid CAMTC certificate is required.

(c) It is unlawful for a person to own or operate a massage establishment that does not meet one of the following conditions: (1) the massage establishment is a sole proprietorship and the sole proprietor possesses a valid CAMTC certificate; or (2) the massage establishment is permitted pursuant to this chapter and only employs or uses massage therapists who possess a valid CAMTC certificate.

(d) Massage shall be provided or given only between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. No massage establishment shall be open and no customer shall be in the establishment between 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment during the hours of operation, and patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage therapist is on the premises.

(e) A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open public place within the premises, and any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English. No owner, operator, manager, and/or responsible managing officer/employee shall permit, and no massage therapist shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted.

(f) The massage establishment permit and an original valid CAMTC certificate of each and every massage therapist providing services in the establishment shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place on the premises.

(g) Every massage establishment shall keep a written record of:

(1) The date and hour of each service provided;

(2) The name of each patron and the service received; and

(3) The name of the massage therapist administering the service.

Said records shall be open to inspection to City officials, including, but not limited to, the Police Department and the City Attorney’s office, which are charged with enforcement of this chapter. These records may not be used by the permittee for any other purpose than as records of service provided, and they shall not be provided to other parties by the massage establishment or service. Said records shall be retained on the premises of the massage establishment business office for a period of not less than two years.

(h) Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one patron, unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in separate, approved receptacles.

(i) Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a commercial disinfectant, as needed, but at least once each day the premises are open. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

(j) Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilization methods.

(k) All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments. All employees shall not be dressed in attire that has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California.

(l) No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in possession of an open container of alcohol, or while consuming or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The owner, operator, manager, and/or responsible managing officer/employee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises.

(m) No alcoholic beverages shall be stored, sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license from the State and conditional use permit from the City.

(n) No massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed, including, but not limited to, on the Internet, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers that any service is available other than those services described in SCCC 5.40.020(m)(1), nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services as described in SCCC 5.40.020(m)(1).

(o) No massage may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors to dressing rooms and treatment rooms shall open inward. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures are acceptable on all inner dressing and treatment rooms in lieu of doors.

(p) A massage shall not be given unless the patron’s genitals are fully covered.

(q) No massage establishment shall be open for business without at least one massage therapist on the premises at all times who is in possession of a current, unrevoked CAMTC certificate.

(r) A massage table or chair shall be used for massage. No mattresses shall be placed on the floor. All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls at all times. This Subsection (r) shall not apply to qualified Shiatsu and Thai massage therapists.

(s) No condoms shall be kept in the establishment unless they are the personal property of persons on site, and they are for the individual’s personal use.

(t) Unlicensed massage therapists and those persons other than scheduled customers shall not loiter, congregate or remain on the premises during the massage establishment’s business hours.

(u) Proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer’s compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of income tax, unemployment insurance contributions and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer’s compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of Federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements.

(v) No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes.

(w) It is unlawful for an owner or operator to fail to notify the Chief of Police in writing of any changes in massage therapists, including proof of CAMTC certificate, or of a change in ownership interest or designated operator within thirty (30) calendar days of such change. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15; Ord. 1955 §§ 1, 2, 5-17-16).

5.40.090 Massage establishment facilities regulations.
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements:

(a) Any signs shall be in conformance with the current ordinances of the City.

(b) Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electrical Code, and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than four hundred fifty (450) lumens shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons.

(c) Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

(d) Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided and utilized.

(e) Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.

(f) Closed cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linens.

(g) Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons.

(h) A minimum of one wash basin for employees shall be provided at all times. The basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin.

(i) Pads used on any massage tables shall be covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material capable of being thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.

(j) All exterior doors (except those used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours. There shall be no buzzer, alarm, or intercom system for purposes of entering the exterior doors during business hours.

(k) Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code shall be provided prior to the issuance of any permit. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.100 Inspection by officials.
The City officials charged with investigating and enforcing compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, the City’s Police Department, Fire Department, and the City’s Building Official, or their designees, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, and plumbing regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.110 Permits nonassignable.
No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by the permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons; any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be deemed terminated and void, except for the following:

(a) If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die or cease to be a partner, one or more of the surviving/remaining partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased/departed partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit. An original partner must remain a partner for this exception. In each case the permittee shall thereafter be deemed to be the surviving/remaining partner(s); or

(b) If the permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be deemed terminated and void unless the new stockholders are identified within ten days of transfer and they meet all requirements under this chapter for stockholders. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.120 Change of location or change in name.
The following is applicable to a change of location or a change of name:

(a) A change of location of a massage establishment may be approved by the Chief of Police, with the prior approval of the Director of Planning and Inspection and the Fire Chief, or their designated representatives, provided all ordinances and regulations of the City are complied with prior to the relocation or change of name. This may include applying for and receiving land use approvals, such as for a conditional use permit or variance.

(b) No permittee shall operate or conduct any massage establishment under any name or designation not specified in the approved permit.

(c) Any application for an expansion of a building or other place of business of a massage establishment shall require compliance with this chapter; no expansion of a nonconforming location shall be permitted. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.130 New massage therapists – Notification.
Notification to the City of new massage therapists shall be as follows:

(a) The holder of the massage establishment permit shall notify the Chief of Police, in writing, of the name and address of each person employed as a massage therapist at such establishment prior to the employee engaging in massage service to the public.

(b) The requirements of this section are in addition to the other provisions of this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall relieve the permittee of the responsibility of ascertaining, prior to employment, that said person has a current and unrevoked CAMTC certificate. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.140 Renewal of permits – Massage establishments.
Renewal of permits for massage establishments issued under SCCC 5.40.070 shall be as follows:

(a) Massage establishment permits shall expire on the one-year anniversary date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.

(b) At least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the one-year permit period, holders of the respective permit(s) shall apply for renewal. If the renewal request is not timely submitted, upon expiration of the one-year period for the permit, the permit shall be deemed expired and no privilege to provide massage shall exist until a new application has been approved. The application for renewal shall include a written statement, made under penalty of perjury, identifying changes, if any, from the information submitted at the time of the original permit application. (For example, new residential addresses, new telephone numbers, and changes to pertinent criminal history shall be submitted.)

(c) Renewals shall be processed and investigated. The applicant is required to submit, under penalty of perjury, that information which has changed from the last application or renewal. Holders of massage establishment permits and/or massage therapist permits shall submit a new certificate each year as required by this section.

(d) A renewal fee shall be paid in a sum that shall be determined from time to time by the City Council by resolution to properly reflect cost recovery adjustments it deems appropriate. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.150 Application of regulations to existing massage establishments and massage therapists.
Pre-existing, legal permits for massage establishments shall be treated as follows:

(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses whether the business was established before or after the effective date of this chapter, except that massage establishments legally in business prior to said effective date shall expire on the one-year anniversary date of its permit issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Exemptions from the requirements of this chapter for duly authorized and legally existing nonconforming establishments may be done on a case by case basis.

(b) Massage therapists who have valid massage therapist permits shall have until the expiration of their current permit to apply for a CAMTC certificate under the terms of this chapter, but shall otherwise comply with the regulations set forth herein within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.160 Prohibited conduct.
Prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following prohibited conduct:

(a) It shall be unlawful for (1) any massage therapist, or other person present on the business premises, to massage the genital area of any patron or (2) for any operator of a massage establishment to allow or permit such massage.

(b) It shall be unlawful for (1) any massage therapist to be other than fully clothed at all times in nontransparent clothing that does not expose their genitals, pubic area, buttocks or chest or (2) for any operator of a massage establishment to allow or permit clothing that does not conform to this requirement.

(c) Duly licensed massage therapists may engage in off-site massage services when all of the requirements of this chapter have been met. Massage therapists may not administer massage services in a private residence unless a bona fide medical request has been made in writing prior to the massage services. A bona fide medical need will be deemed appropriate when a licensed physician or chiropractor has given the client a written prescription for the massage services to be administered at the residence of the recipient of the massage.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any holder (permittee) of a massage establishment permit and/or holder of a CAMTC certificate to engage in prohibited conduct as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 4609 or any other State or local law and in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.170 Enforcement – Suspension or revocation of massage establishment permit.
(a) Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense, regardless of intent. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or both. Any violation may also be subject to civil penalties and any other legal remedy provided in this Code or State law. Each violation described in this chapter may be charged as a separate count for each day the violation occurs.

(b) In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this Code, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as shall abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(c) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

(d) The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend a massage establishment permit if any of the following are found:

(1) The holder of the permit does not possess the qualifications for the permit as required by this chapter;

(2) The holder of the permit has been convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any lesser included offense;

(3) The holder of the permit has made a material misrepresentation on the permit application or renewal; or

(4) The holder of the permit has operated the massage establishment in a manner which violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any conditions of the permit, or any of the laws which would have been grounds for denial of the permit.

For purposes of this section, the holder of the permit (permittee) in the massage establishment permit context shall include the managing, responsible officer/employee. Furthermore, the holder of the permit shall be responsible for those acts of employees and massage therapists which are done in the course and scope of their employment. The course and scope of employment is evidenced by a course of conduct occurring on the premises of the massage establishment. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.180 Procedure for revocation or suspension of massage establishment permit.
Revocations and suspensions shall be administered as follows:

(a) Whenever the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit exists, he/she shall give the holder of the permit written notice stating the alleged grounds for the suspension or revocation and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. This notice will be by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail sent to the address shown on the last application or renewal. The decision of the Chief of Police to revoke or suspend a massage establishment permit may be appealed to the City Manager, or designee. The notice shall provide the permit holder with information on the appeal process.

(b) Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) days of the request. The City Manager, or designee, shall notify the permit holder in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall not be less than ten days after the service of the notice of hearing by postage of the notice by United States mail or by personal service.

(c) At the hearing, both the holder of the permit and the Chief of Police shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the appeal, as stated in the written grounds for the appeal hearing. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written decision which states whether the decision of the Chief of Police is upheld, modified, or reversed, the length of any suspension, and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the City Manager shall be served on the holder of the permit by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(d) The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

(e) The burden of proof is on the City in any hearing or other matter under this chapter. The City will be required to prove its case by the preponderance of evidence standard.

(f) Upon a written decision of the City Manager which suspends or revokes a permit, the holder of the permit shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police immediately after service of the notice of the decision. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

5.40.190 Maintenance and review of massage therapy organization certificates.
Every massage business establishment shall:

(a) Provide the Santa Clara Police Department with a copy or other evidence of the valid CAMTC certificate of every person who is employed or retained by the business or establishment to provide massage therapy within thirty (30) calendar days of the commencement of such person’s period of employment or service for the business.

(b) Maintain on its premises a copy or other evidence of each such CAMTC certificate for review by the Santa Clara Police Department. (Ord. 1945 § 1, 10-13-15).

Chapter 5.45
FORTUNETELLING
Sections:

5.45.010    Defined.

5.45.020    Permit required.

5.45.030    Application contents.

5.45.040    Fees.

5.45.050    Approval of the Chief of Police.

5.45.060    Bond required upon approval of permit.

5.45.070    Denial of permit.

5.45.080    Appeal from denial of permit.

5.45.010 Defined.
As used in this chapter, “fortunetelling” shall consist of foretelling any event or events which may occur in the future by means of cards, palmistry, astrology, crystal gazing, numerology, phrenology, clairvoyance, necromancy, magic or by any supernatural, mystic or occult means; or in locating or divining any treasure, mineral, lost or missing article or person by such means; or in persuading, inducing or procuring any person to transfer, convey, donate, devise, bequeath, pledge, mortgage or deposit any money or property by such means; or to describe, expound or resolve any matter pertaining to business, finance, romance, bereavement, or good or bad fortune, by means, or pretending, assuming or undertaking to do any of the above-mentioned things or to aid or assist any other person in so doing; or to make, sell or give away charms, potions, talismans or magic articles, or anything purporting to be such. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-65).

5.45.020 Permit required.
(a) No person shall practice or engage in fortunetelling or attempt to do so or hold themselves out or advertise that they practice or engage in fortunetelling, and who demands or receives a fee, without first having made application upon a form provided by the Chief of Police.

(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any ordained minister or any form of religious belief or the faith, practice or teaching of any religious body, or to the exhibition of such a fortunetelling at a theater hall or public place for the purpose of entertainment and amusement only. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-66).

5.45.030 Application contents.
The application shall contain:

(a) True name of the applicant.

(b) Address of the business location.

(c) Telephone number of the business.

(d) Residential address of the applicant.

(e) Residential telephone number of the applicant.

(f) The driver’s license and number of the applicant.

(g) Address of the business for the preceding five years prior to the date of application.

(h) Particulars in regard to any conviction of either a felony or misdemeanor in the past seven years.

(i) Any additional information as needed by the Chief of Police to complete the investigation. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-67).

5.45.040 Fees.
At the time the application is filed with the Chief of Police, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost to the City for fingerprinting and processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. The fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-68).

5.45.050 Approval of the Chief of Police.
(a) The Chief of Police shall, after the submission of all required information, investigate the statements made in the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police may approve or deny the application. The endorsement “approved” shall constitute a permit for the applicant upon payment of the business tax to the municipal service/business tax division as required by SCCC 3.40.060.

(b) In event of such refusal (denial of permit), a copy of the application with reasons shall be sent to the applicant by means of certified mail. The applicant shall have seven calendar days from receipt of the City’s certified letter to appeal the decision. In the event the certified letter is returned to the city unsigned, the appeal period shall be deemed to be fourteen (14) calendar days from postmark. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-69).

5.45.060 Bond required upon approval of permit.
An applicant under this chapter shall file and maintain on file with the City Clerk a good and sufficient bond from a surety company licensed to do business in California in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), to be approved by the City Clerk and payable to the City of Santa Clara or a non-interest bearing cash deposit of said amount to insure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft or other unfair dealings suffered by a patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. A bond is required as long as the permit is valid or the Chief of Police finds that the purpose of the bond or cash deposit has been satisfied, up to one year after cessation of the business. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-70).

5.45.070 Denial of permit.
(a) Upon the Chief of Police’s review of the application, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

(1) The investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application, concealed a material fact or otherwise committed any fraud in the application.

(2) The applicant has been convicted of a felony involving an offense against private property interests, such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application. Such property offenses include, but are not limited to, larceny, false pretense, fraud, grand theft and embezzlement.

(3) The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist.

(b) The Chief of Police’s disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant’s last known address. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-71).

5.45.080 Appeal from denial of permit.
This permit shall have the characteristics of permits as described in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. The procedures governing its issuance, revocation, suspension and the like of such permits, including appeal from refusal to endorse application “approved” shall be as prescribed in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1722 § 7, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-72).

Chapter 5.50
PEEP SHOWS
Sections:

5.50.010    Purpose and intent.

5.50.020    Definitions.

5.50.030    Zoning compliance.

5.50.040    Investigation of applicant.

5.50.050    Issuance of the business tax certificate.

5.50.060    Denial of request to operate peep show establishment.

5.50.070    Maximum occupancy load.

5.50.080    Maximum number of devices.

5.50.090    Wall, partition construction.

5.50.100    Minimum aisle width.

5.50.110    Minimum doorways.

5.50.120    Lighted exit signs.

5.50.130    Patron view of doorway.

5.50.140    Minimum lighting.

5.50.150    Free access to City Manager or designee.

5.50.160    Injunctive relief.

5.50.170    Variance.

5.50.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter that the operation of peep show establishments, as defined in this Code, should be regulated for the protection of the public from the perils of fire, hazards to health, and for the preservation of the peace of the community. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-130).

5.50.020 Definitions.
(a) “Peep show establishment” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein a peep show device is operated.

(b) “Peep show device” means slug or coin operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machine, projector, video monitor or other image and is maintained to show images to five or fewer persons at any one time, and where the images depict explicit sexual acts or the genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region of any person or persons.

(c) “Explicit sexual acts” as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and/or animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-131).

5.50.030 Zoning compliance.
A certificate of zoning compliance from the Director of Planning and Inspection that certifies that the premises of the peep show establishments meets all applicable codes and regulations must be submitted prior to application and approval. Any required application fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. If the Director of Planning and Inspection finds that a use permit is required for the peep show establishment, the applicant shall meet the requirements for Chapters 18.70 SCCC et seq. and 18.110 SCCC et seq. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-132).

5.50.040 Investigation of applicant.
Every applicant shall file for a business tax certificate with the municipal services/business tax division as required by SCCC 3.40.060 and pay the business tax listed in SCCC 3.40.400. Upon receipt of the application and payment, the Director of Finance shall provide the information submitted to the City Manager or designee who shall cause to be made an investigation of the application to determine that:

(a) The applicant did not knowingly make a material misstatement in the application; and

(b) The operation pursuant to the issuance of the business tax certificate will be in compliance with the building, fire, electrical, plumbing and health requirements as set forth in this Code; and

(c) The operation pursuant to the issuance of the business tax certificate will be in compliance with all applicable laws. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-133).

5.50.050 Issuance of the business tax certificate.
If, upon investigation, the City Manager or designee finds that the operation pursuant to the issuance will be in compliance with the requirements described in this Code, the business tax certificate shall be granted. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-134).

5.50.060 Denial of request to operate peep show establishment.
If, upon investigation, the City Manager or designee finds that the operation of the business is not in compliance with any section of this Code, the applicant shall be given the opportunity for a hearing as described in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-135).

5.50.070 Maximum occupancy load.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room where a peep show device is located exceeds one person per thirty (30) square feet. The maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located shall be conspicuously posted by the owner, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-136).

5.50.080 Maximum number of devices.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of peep show devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located. The maximum number of peep show devices permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in a peep show establishment shall be conspicuously posted by the owner, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-137).

5.50.090 Wall, partition construction.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a room, enclosure or booth in which a peep show device is located is constructed of not less than one hour fire-resistive material. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-138).

5.50.100 Minimum aisle width.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the width of the aisles in any room where a peep show device is located is less than forty-two (42) inches. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-139).

5.50.110 Minimum doorways.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless there are no fewer than two doorways for a width no less than thirty-six (36) inches which provides ingress or egress from any room in which a peep show device is located; provided, however, that one doorway shall be sufficient in the event the Fire Chief should so determine. Doorway or doorways shall be unlocked during business hours. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-140).

5.50.120 Lighted exit signs.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless over every doorway which provides egress from any room in which a peep show device is located an internally illuminated exit sign with letters at least five inches in height is maintained. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-141).

5.50.130 Patron view of doorway.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless each peep show device located in such establishment is situated so as to permit the person using the peep show device to have a constantly unobstructed view of the doorway or doorways which provide ingress to or egress from the establishment. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-142).

5.50.140 Minimum lighting.
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless a light level of no less than ten footcandles at floor level is maintained in every portion of said establishment to which the public is admitted. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-143).

5.50.150 Free access to City Manager or designee.
No person shall deny the City Manager or designee free access to a peep show establishment for the purposes of a reasonable inspection to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or tax regulations. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-144).

5.50.160 Injunctive relief.
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this Code, the operation of any peep show establishment in violation of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-145).

5.50.170 Variance.
The City Council may permit such variance or deviation from the regulations hereof as will effectuate the purpose and intent hereof. (Ord. 1722 § 8, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-146).

Chapter 5.55
PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR
AND REGULATIONS
Sections:

5.55.010    Private patrol operator – Defined.

5.55.020    Possession of current registration.

5.55.030    Presentation of registration upon demand.

5.55.040    Restrictions on uniforms and vehicles.

5.55.010 Private patrol operator – Defined.
A “private patrol operator,” or “operator of a private patrol service,” is a person who, for any consideration whatsoever:

Agrees to furnish, or furnishes, a watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person to protect persons or property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person, for any of said purposes as defined in Section 7582.1 of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1310 § 1, 3-18-75; Ord. 1911 § 1, 8-20-13. Formerly § 19-1).

5.55.020 Possession of current registration.
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a private patrol operator to engage in private patrol activities in the City without having in his/her possession evidence of current registration with the State of California pursuant to Section 7582 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1310 § 1, 3-18-75; Ord. 1911 § 2, 8-20-13. Formerly § 19-2).

5.55.030 Presentation of registration upon demand.
An employee of a private patrol operator in private patrol activities in the City shall present evidence of current registration with the State of California pursuant to Section 7582.13 of the California Business and Professions Code upon demand of any member of the Police Department or Fire Department of the City. (Ord. 1310 § 1, 3-18-75; Ord. 1911 § 3, 8-20-13. Formerly § 19-3).

5.55.040 Restrictions on uniforms and vehicles.
(a) No person shall serve as a uniformed private patrol operator in the City unless and until the uniform or insignia to be worn shall first receive the written approval of the Chief of Police that it is clearly distinguishable from the uniforms worn by local regular law enforcement officers.

(b) No vehicle shall be used by an operator of a private patrol service unless and until the operator shall first receive the written approval of the Chief of Police that the vehicle is clearly distinguishable from the vehicles used by local regular law enforcement officers. (Ord. 1310 § 1, 3-18-75. Formerly § 19-4).

Chapter 5.60
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
Sections:

5.60.010  Permit – Required.

5.60.020  Permit – Duration.

5.60.030  Permit – Assignability or transferability, etc.

5.60.040  Filing of application for permit.

5.60.050  Application form.

5.60.060  Verification of application.

5.60.070  Referral notices and reports.

5.60.080  Notice of hearing on application for permit.

5.60.090  Denial of application upon appearance of certain facts.

5.60.100  Suspension, revocation of permit.

5.60.110  General regulations.

Cross references – Regulations relative to loudspeakers or sound amplifiers, SCCC 9.05.060. Regulations relative to public entertainment generally, Chapter 5.61 SCCC.

5.60.010 Permit – Required.
No person shall conduct, permit, or assist in conducting or permitting any entertainment for which a license is required pursuant to Chapter 3.40 SCCC, to be shown, staged, exhibited or produced in any premises to which the public is admitted without first applying for and receiving a permit therefor in writing from the City Council. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-1).

5.60.020 Permit – Duration.
All permits shall be issued for the term of the Class II entertainment license required by Chapter 3.40 SCCC but not to exceed one year in duration, and only after being approved by the City Council and approved and countersigned by the Chief of Police, or such other City officer or officers as directed by the City Council. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-2).

5.60.030 Permit – Assignability or transferability, etc.
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be sold, assigned or transferred without the consent of the City Council, nor shall such be attempted, and any violation of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of such permit, and the assignee of such permit shall have no right to conduct any entertainment pursuant to any such assigned permit. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-3).

5.60.040 Filing of application for permit.
(a) Every person desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the Director of Finance upon a form provided by said Director of Finance, and shall pay an inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) to the Director of Finance, no part of which shall be refundable.

(b) The license fees for entertainment, as prescribed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC, and any amendments thereto shall be in addition to the foregoing investigation fee, and if applicable, shall be paid before a permit is issued. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-4).

5.60.050 Application form.
Except as otherwise provided herein an application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall specify:

(a) The address of the location for which the license is required, together with the business name of such location.

(b) The name and proposed business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation; and the applicant shall also set forth the date and place of incorporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.

(c) Whether or not the applicant or any officer or director or member of applicant, as the case may be, has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations. In addition to the foregoing, any corporate applicant whose securities have been conditioned by the Commissioner of Corporations pursuant to Section 25141 of the Corporations Code of California, will state whether or not any stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of such corporation has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the name of the person so convicted, the place and court in which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of said conviction.

(d) The names and addresses of the persons who have authority or control over the place for which the license is requested, and a brief statement of the nature and extent of such authority or control.

(e) The name and address of each of the owners of the premises upon which the licensed activity is to be conducted, if the applicant is leasing such premises from the owner.

(f) Such information pertinent to the operation of the proposed activity, including information as to management, authority, control, financial agreements, and lease arrangements, as the Chief of Police may require of an applicant in addition to the other requirements of this section. The foregoing examples are in explanation and not in limitation of the information which the Chief of Police may require.

(g) The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the name and address of a person authorized to accept service of process, if not otherwise set forth herein.

(h) Whether the application is for a new license or for the renewal of an existing license. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-5).

5.60.060 Verification of application.
Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified as provided in the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-6).

5.60.070 Referral notices and reports.
(a) The Director of Finance shall file the original of the application for any entertainment permit with the City Council and transmit a copy of every application for any entertainment permit to the City Manager, and to such other departments as may be from time to time designated by the City Council.

(b) Every officer and department to which an application is referred may require such additional information pertinent to the activity of an applicant as he deems necessary and shall advise, in writing, the City Council of all material facts which such officer or department considers necessary or advisable for assisting the City Council in determining whether a permit should be granted or denied, or otherwise conditioned or modified. Such officer or department may also give a recommendation in writing to the City Council for the issuance, modification, or denial of any permit. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-7).

5.60.080 Notice of hearing on application for permit.
When application is filed for a permit under this chapter, the City Council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be posted by the City Clerk a notice of such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in which or on which the proposed entertainment is to be conducted. Such notice shall set forth the specific type of entertainment which the applicant intends to conduct. Furthermore, the City Council shall cause the City Clerk to give notice by mail to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed business. The applicant shall bear all expenses involved in printing, mailing and posting such notice. Any property owner or interested person may file written objections or appear in person at the hearing. Any defect or error appearing in any such notice or failure to mail such notice to all of said persons shall not divest the City Council of jurisdiction to conduct the hearing required to be held. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-8).

5.60.090 Denial of application upon appearance of certain facts.
At the hearing on the application for an entertainment permit, the City Council may consider the reports of any City departments or officers submitted to it, and hear any interested party on the application. The following conclusions of fact, if made to appear during the hearing, shall be cause to deny the application:

(a) The applicant is not of good moral character; for example, he/she has sustained a conviction on a matter pertaining to the entertainment business within the previous five years to the date of application; or the premises in respect to which the permit is to be issued do not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinances of the City.

(b) That the conducting of such entertainment in the premises for which a permit is sought will be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the people of the City. In passing upon this phase of the matter, the City Council shall take into consideration the location of the premises for which a permit is sought with reference to proximity of schools, residences and other structures, the occupants and users of which may be disturbed or injuriously affected by the conducting of such entertainment upon such premises or by the persons in attendance at such entertainment.

(c) That the applicant has had a permit under the provisions of this chapter revoked.

(d) That the premises for which such permit is sought for the proposed conducting of such entertainment therein violates any building, zoning, health, safety or police ordinance of the City or any law in the State or of the United States. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-9).

5.60.100 Suspension, revocation of permit.
In the event that any person holding a permit to carry on an entertainment shall in the judgment of the City Council violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply with any ordinance or State law applicable to his/her business, the City Council may suspend or revoke the permit issued for the conducting of such entertainment. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-10).

5.60.110 General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all permits issued pursuant to this chapter:

(a) Posting Permit. Permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which such permits are issued and shall remain posted at all times.

(b) Minor. No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter, be, or remain in or on any premises in which entertainment of the type to be licensed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC is presented. A permittee shall not permit such a person to enter, be, or remain in or on any such premises.

(c) Visibility from the Street. There shall be no entertainment of the type to be licensed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC which is visible at any time from the street, sidewalk, or highway.

(d) Regulation of Signs. No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any entertainment of the type to be licensed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC, and exceed in area seven hundred twenty (720) square inches shall be maintained, erected, or placed upon, on, or adjacent to the outside of any building and in connection with any premises to which a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No sign or signs which in whole or in part depict the human form or any portion or portions thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, shall be maintained, erected, used, or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises therein to which a permit has been issued pursuant to SCCC 5.60.010. No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any entertainment of the type to be licensed by Chapter 3.40 SCCC, using the word "girl" or words of like or similar import, except the words, "topless entertainment" shall be maintained, erected, used, or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises therein to which a permit is issued pursuant to SCCC 5.60.010. All signs must comply with the "sign ordinance" of the City.

(e) Entrance Sign. Every establishment to which a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of SCCC 5.60.010 shall place at or near the entrance of the establishment a sign not more than four hundred thirty-two (432) square inches and not less than two hundred twenty-five (225) square inches upon which is written in one-inch block letters: "Warning. This establishment offers "topless" entertainment. If you would be offended do not enter." Such sign shall be illuminated and shall be clearly visible to any person entering the establishment. All signs must comply with Chapter 18.80 SCCC, Sign Regulations.

(f) Registration of Female Entertainers. No female shall conduct or participate in any entertainment of the type to be licensed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC unless and until such female has registered in person with the Chief of Police and completed the registration form provided by the Chief of Police. Any person registering under this subsection shall specify:

(1) Her name and resident address;

(2) Her social security number and driver's license number, if any;

(3) Whether she has been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic offenses, including the place and date of conviction, the charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed;

(4) A recent photograph and a complete set of fingerprints.

(g) Registration Required Before Employment. No person shall employ any female to participate in or conduct any entertainment of the type to be licensed in Chapter 3.40 SCCC unless and until such female has registered with the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of this section and until written notification has been received from the Chief of Police that such female has duly registered. The Chief of Police's notices of registration shall be maintained by the employer at the place of business and be available for inspection at all times.

(h) Notice of Registration Prohibited. The Chief of Police shall not send any notification of registration as required by subsection (g) of this section, where the subject of such registration has been convicted of a crime requiring registration under Section 290 of the Penal Code, or of any violation of Sections 311, 315, 316 or 318 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 1182 § 3, 2-13-68. Formerly § 22-11).

Chapter 5.61
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT GENERALLY
Sections:

5.61.010    Definitions.

5.61.020    Entertainment permit required.

5.61.030    Permit exceptions.

5.61.040    Permit fees.

5.61.050    Application contents.

5.61.060    Notice of change.

5.61.070    Duration of permit/renewal.

5.61.080    Transfer of permit prohibited.

5.61.090    Investigation and action on application.

5.61.100    Approval of permit.

5.61.110    Denial of permit.

5.61.120    Appeal from denial of permit.

5.61.130    Suspension and revocation of permit.

5.61.140    Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation.

5.61.150    Emergency suspension of permit.

5.61.160    Rules and regulations.

5.61.170    Inspection.

5.61.180    Display of permit.

5.61.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases hereafter set forth shall have the meanings given them in this section.

(a) “Entertainment” means:

(1) Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, dance, or song and dance act, poetry recitation, fashion or style show conducted or participated in by any professional entertainer or non-professional person in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted; or

(2) Any form of live music, live vocal, karaoke machine or instrumental sound, performed by one or more persons or disk jockey, and whether or not such person or persons are compensated for such music, and whether or not occurring in a main room or a private booth; or

(3) A machine, or electronic device, providing musical accompaniment and lyrics to songs whereby individuals sing along to the music with the help of a microphone attached to the machine which amplifies the singer’s voice, or lyrics are generated by the machine to the singer on an electronic monitor.

(b) “Place of entertainment” means a place whether public or private, open to members of the public, with or without charge, in which entertainment is offered or performed.

(c) “Chief of Police” and/or “City Manager” includes the grant of authority to their respective designee to exercise the discretion provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.020 Entertainment permit required.
No person shall conduct or allow the conduct of any act of entertainment in any place of entertainment as the owner or operator of such place, without first obtaining a permit, in the manner set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.030 Permit exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to entertainment conducted in connection with a regularly established theme park, recreation park, circus, fair ground or entertainment conducted upon City, Redevelopment Agency, Housing Authority or Stadium Authority owned or operated property. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00; Ord. 1883 § 1, 4-19-11).

5.61.040 Permit fees.
The applicant for an entertainment permit shall submit with the application a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. This fee is in addition to any business tax required pursuant to Chapter 3.40 SCCC. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.050 Application contents.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, an application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall specify:

(1) The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation, association, a closely held corporation, or any other type of business organization. If the applicant is a closely held corporation, the nature of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residential addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and the name and address of the agent for service of process;

(2) The name under which the business is to be conducted;

(3) The telephone number and complete address of the business and/or any post office box or other location where business correspondence is received;

(4) The name, address, telephone and pager number of the manager of the business;

(5) The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is requested;

(6) A statement in detail of the kind of entertainment which is to be conducted on the premises;

(7) The hours of operation;

(8) A description of security measures available if guests become unruly;

(9) A dated statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information provided by the applicant is true and correct; and

(10) The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each officer and each director, if the applicant is a closely held corporation; and concerning each partner, including limited partners, having an ownership interest in the business of more than ten percent, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person in charge of the operation of the business:

(A) Name, complete current residential address and residential telephone numbers;

(B) If the person has resided at the current residential address for less than three years, the previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant for the last three years;

(C) Birth date, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and gender;

(D) Photograph in a form acceptable to the Chief of Police;

(E) The business history experience, including but not limited to, whether or not the person in previously operating in this or another city, county or state under a permit or license has had a permit or license denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation;

(F) Except for misdemeanor traffic violations or infractions, all criminal convictions and the jurisdiction in which the conviction occurred, and the circumstances thereof;

(G) One set of fingerprints in a form acceptable to the Chief of Police.

(b) An application shall not be deemed complete until all the information required in subsection (a) of this section has been provided to the Chief of Police and required fees and any applicable business tax required pursuant to Chapter 3.40 SCCC has been paid. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.060 Notice of change.
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by SCCC 5.61.050, the applicant or permittee shall give written notification of such change to the Police Department within twenty (20) calendar days after such change occurs. Notices affecting legal rights of the applicant or permittee will be sent pursuant to the information submitted to the City. Consequently it is imperative the City be given current, accurate information by the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.070 Duration of permit/renewal.
(a) The permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance; provided, however, such permits may be renewed for additional periods of one year. After the date of expiration, any permit activities conducted with an expired permit shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b) No permit may be renewed unless:

(1) An application for renewal of the permit, together with the permit fee, is filed within thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit; and

(2) The permittee meets all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.080 Transfer of permit prohibited.
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be sold, assigned or transferred. Any violation of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of such permit, and the assignee of such permit shall have no right to conduct any entertainment pursuant to any such assigned permit. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.090 Investigation and action on application.
(a) Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the permit fees, the Chief of Police, shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application, according to the terms of this chapter, to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an entertainment permit.

(b) Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the completed application, the Chief of Police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

(1) The Chief of Police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

(2) If the application is granted, the Chief of Police shall attach to the application an entertainment permit.

(3) If the applicant is denied pursuant to SCCC 5.61.110, or another section of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

(4) The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.100 Approval of permit.
After investigation, the Chief of Police shall approve the application for the entertainment permit, or renewal of such permit, if it is found:

(a) A completed written application has been filed; and

(b) The required fees have been paid; and

(c) As a result of the investigation, the applicant has met all the applicable provisions of this chapter, and the entertainment rules and regulations established by resolution; and

(d) That the operation by the applicant will be conducted in a building, structure and location which complies with and meets all of the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the State of California, ordinances, and resolutions of the City of Santa Clara applicable to such business operations. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.110 Denial of permit.
An application for a permit may be denied by the Chief of Police, upon any of the following grounds:

(a) Conviction of a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business, profession or trade for which the permit was issued;

(b) Conviction of a felony within the previous five years;

(c) Conviction for commission of acts involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit the applicant or another, or substantially injure another;

(d) Commission of acts which would constitute a felony, or which would constitute a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business, profession or trade for which the permit was issued;

(e) Knowingly making a false statement of fact or omitting a fact required to be revealed in an application for the permit, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made;

(f) The premises in which the permitted activity will occur or the proposed use for which the permit is sought is in violation of any building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provision of this Code or of County, State or Federal law which substantially affects the public health, welfare and safety;

(g) The applicant, or permittee has owned or leased premises that have been the subject of an administrative, civil or criminal nuisance abatement action or administrative determination finding the premises to be a nuisance within the past five years;

(h) Employing or otherwise contracting for the services of a manager whose ownership/management application or permit has been denied or revoked either by the City or another public jurisdiction within the past five years;

(i) A prior permit application has been denied or suspended by the City, or any State, County or local agency, on one or more of the above grounds, within one year prior to the date of the current application, unless the applicant has shown a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation/suspension;

(j) A permit issued by the City, or any State, County or local agency, has been revoked or suspended within the previous five years prior to the date of the current application;

(k) Violation of the terms and conditions of the permit, or other requirements of this chapter, or the entertainment rules and regulations established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.120 Appeal from denial of permit.
The decision of the Chief of Police to deny the application for an entertainment permit may be appealed to the City Manager as set forth in SCCC 5.61.140. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.130 Suspension and revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager on appeal, shall have the power to suspend or revoke an entertainment permit issued under this chapter, on any of the grounds stated in this chapter, or on any of the following grounds:

(a) The violation by the permittee of any of the terms, conditions or requirements of the entertainment permit, any other terms of this chapter, or the entertainment rules and regulations established by resolution.

(b) Any act or omission of the permit holder which, if it existed at the time the application for an entertainment permit was filed, would have warranted the denial of the application.

(c) That the building, structure, equipment or location of the proposed place of entertainment does not comply with, or fails to meet, all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements, or standards of all the laws of the State of California, or ordinances and resolutions of the City of Santa Clara applicable to such business operation.

(d) That the owners, operators or managers of the proposed place of entertainment have not taken reasonable crime prevention measures, or been able to control, crime and criminal conduct associated with the business, whether on the premises or immediately outside the premises. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.140 Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation.
Revocations and suspensions shall be administered as follows:

(a) Except as provided in SCCC 5.61.150 (Emergency suspension of permit), an entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended only after the permittee has been given reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.

(b) Whenever the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit exists, he/she shall give the holder of the entertainment permit written notice stating the alleged grounds for the suspension or revocation and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. This notice will be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the last application or renewal, or by personal service. If the return receipt is not returned within one week after the City mails the notice, service will be deemed completed seven calendar days after notice is mailed by the City. The decision of the Chief of Police to revoke or suspend an entertainment permit may be appealed to the City Manager or designee. The notice shall provide the permit holder with information on the appeal process.

(c) The permit holder must submit a written request for an appeal hearing to the City Manager within ten calendar days of receipt of written notice, or within seventeen (17) calendar days if constructive service occurs without return of the return receipt.

(d) Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) calendar days of receipt of the request. The City Manager shall notify the permit holder in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The City shall not set the hearing less than ten calendar days after the service of the notice of hearing. Notice to the permittee shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(e) The suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal.

(f) At the hearing, the holder of the entertainment permit and the Chief of Police, or other City representative, shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the appeal, as stated in the written grounds for the appeal hearing. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written decision which states whether the decision of the Chief of Police is upheld, modified, or reversed; the length of any suspension; and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the City Manager shall be served on the holder of the permit by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(g) The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

(h) The burden of proof is on the City in any suspension or revocation hearing. The City will be required to prove its case by the preponderance of evidence standard.

(i) Upon a written decision of the City Manager which suspends or revokes an entertainment permit, the holder of the entertainment permit shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police immediately after service of the notice of the decision. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.150 Emergency suspension of permit.
The Chief of Police may issue an order suspending an entertainment permit for a period not exceeding ten calendar days without having conducted a hearing therefor, if the Chief determines that the continued use of the permit will cause immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare.

(a) Within ten calendar days of the effective date of the order, the Chief of Police shall hold a hearing for the permittee to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked.

(b) The order issued by the Chief of Police under this section shall also contain a notice of the hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.160 Rules and regulations.
The permit holder must comply with all the rules and regulations for an entertainment permit as established by resolution of the City Council. Failure to comply with the rules and regulations may subject the permittee to penalties pursuant to Chapter 5.100 SCCC. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.170 Inspection.
The investigating and enforcing officials of the City of Santa Clara, including the Chief of Police, building and land use officials, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time, during regular business hours, for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, conditions of approval of the permit and/or land use, and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

5.61.180 Display of permit.
Every person holding a permit issued under this chapter shall keep the permit posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises in open and clear view. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2-15-00).

Chapter 5.65
CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, TENT SHOWS, PROMOTIONAL SHOWS, AND SIMILAR BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Sections:

5.65.010  Definitions.

5.65.020  Permit – Required – Application and information required.

5.65.030  Investigation – Denial.

5.65.040  Personal liability insurance requirements.

5.65.050  Business tax certificate required.

5.65.010 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) "Carnival" means any group of attractions, games, rides, such as ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, or other riding devices, booths, concessions or exhibitions.

(b) "Circus" means an exhibition or entertainment at which feats such as horsemanship, acrobatic feats and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, and which exhibition or entertainment is carried on by a person having no regular established place of business in the city for exhibition thereof.

(c) "Promotional show" means an exhibition, concession or attraction conducted on behalf of a business, commercial enterprise or group of businesses or commercial enterprises located in a shopping center area or other area close to or near the places where such commercial enterprises or businesses are conducted, for the purpose of attracting persons to such businesses or area, and at which ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, whips or other ride devices or upon which concessions or other attractions are conducted. (Ord. 1724 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 22-15.1).

5.65.020 Permit – Required – Application and information required.
No person shall operate any circus, carnival, sideshow, merry-go-round, amusement ride, ferris wheel or other similar devices without having first applied to and received a permit from the City Council to operate such business and without paying the business tax therefor. Any such application shall state in full the names of the owners of such business, the type of operation proposed to be conducted and the location and site where such is proposed to be operated or conducted. (Ord. 1724 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 22-15.2).

5.65.030 Investigation – Denial.
The City Council may make or cause to be made an investigation of the proposed location or site where such businesses enumerated in SCCC 5.65.020 will be conducted and of the person proposing to operate such business and of the type or kind of operation proposed. If the City Council shall determine that the type or operation of such business shall cause any annoyance or disturbance to persons residing in or conducting businesses in the vicinity or neighborhood of such site or location, that such site or location is an improper site or location therefor, that the proposed operation of such business will not be for the best interests of the neighborhood of such location the Council may deny the permit required in SCCC 5.60.020. (Ord. 1724 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 22-15.3).

5.65.040 Personal liability insurance requirements.
Before a permit is issued to operate or conduct any business enumerated under this chapter the operator shall furnish the City Clerk with a certificate of insurance issued by a responsible insurance company which verifies that such operator has purchased a comprehensive general liability insurance policy which includes limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence covering any person injured by the operation of such business against loss or damage arising from any personal injury or property damage. Operator shall maintain such insurance covered for the duration of the term of the permit. (Ord. 1724 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 22-15.4).

5.65.050 Business tax certificate required.
After permit approval, every person engaged in the business of operating a carnival, circus, promotional show or similar business enterprise shall apply for and pay the business tax as required in SCCC 3.40.330. (Ord. 1724 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 22-15.5).

Chapter 5.70
CARD ROOMS
Code reviser's note: City Code prohibition of card rooms was reaffirmed by an advisory referendum vote at the November 3, 1992, election. At the election, the citizens voted to direct the City Council to repeal a pending City ordinance, which, if adopted, would have permitted card room(s).

Prior legislation: Ord. 603 § 1; Ord. 1153 § 1, 11-15-66; Ord. 1333 § 1, 7-27-76; Ord. 1525 § 1, 7-9-85; Ord. 1636 § 1, 6-23-92; former code §§ 22-18 and 22-19.

Stat. Ref.: Gambling, Pen. C. § 330.

Chapter 5.75
BINGO
Sections:

5.75.010  Purpose and intent.

5.75.020  Defined.

5.75.030  Chapter not exclusive.

5.75.040  Authority to regulate bingo.

5.75.050  License required.

5.75.060  Eligible organizations.

5.75.070  Application for license required – Appeals from denial.

5.75.080  Exclusive operation by members of the licensee organization.

5.75.090  Definition of member or licensee organization.

5.75.100  Access to criminal history information.

5.75.110  Financial interest in licensee organization only.

5.75.120  Licenses not transferable.

5.75.130  Bingo games to be conducted on licensee organization's property.

5.75.140  Suppliers and distributors.

5.75.150  Profits to be kept in a separate fund or account – Records.

5.75.160  Posting of operation rules.

5.75.170  Limitation on source of payouts for bingo games to revenue from bingo operations – Limitations on games, free prizes, and free food.

5.75.180  License fee – Enforcement fees.

5.75.190  Licensee organization's submittal of financial records.

5.75.200  Days and hours of operation – Inactive license.

5.75.210  Maximum amount of prizes – Paid receipt required for payout.

5.75.220  Bingo games open to the public –Capacity limits.

5.75.230  Participant must be present.

5.75.240  Minors not to participate.

5.75.250  No alcoholic beverages to be served or intoxicated persons to work or participate.

5.75.260  No credit to be extended to players.

5.75.270  Suspension and revocation of bingo permit.

5.75.280  Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation.

5.75.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter was originally adopted, and is hereby amended, pursuant to the authority granted by Section 19(c) of Article IV of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code. The decision whether or not to permit bingo is a discretionary decision specifically granted to cities and counties by said provisions of the California Constitution and Penal Code. Although all bingo activities are to be conducted in compliance with Penal Code Section 326.5, contained within the local entity's discretionary authority to permit (or to prohibit) bingo is the authority of the local entity to determine the manner in which bingo may be operated within its jurisdictional boundaries.

It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the playing of the game of chance generally known as "bingo" subject to and pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5 and this chapter. Definitions, powers, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this chapter are intended to comply with and implement applicable California Constitution and Penal Code provisions. In the event of violations of the Penal Code and/or this chapter, the City reserves the right to use the injunctive remedy authority granted by Penal Code Section 326.5(d). To the extent that any provision of this chapter is substantially the same as that contained in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, and violation thereof is deemed to be a violation of the Penal Code (and punishable thereunder), such provision of this chapter shall be deemed explanatory only.

Bingo operations serve as an important revenue source for eligible organizations, as defined in Penal Code Section 326.5(a). In turn, these eligible organizations provide a community benefit with their bingo revenue because the receipts from bingo games are mandated by State law to be used only for charitable purposes. Accordingly, it is in the best interest of the City with respect to public safety and convenience to regulate the bingo operations by providing certain standards for the conduct of such games and providing licensing and financial accountability procedures as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.1).

5.75.020 Defined.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(o), "bingo" or "bingo game(s)" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card that conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. Although "cards" colloquially refers to a cardboard card with twenty-five (25) small plastic windows that slide, it is permissible for a "card" to be a sheet of paper with multiple card faces pre-printed on it. Commonly, each individual sheet has six ("six-on") or nine ("nine-on") bingo card faces pre-printed on it.

Electronic bingo aids are also permissible. "Electronic bingo aid" means any mechanical, electronic, electromechanical or computerized aid (including related hardware and software) that is interfaced with or connected to equipment used to conduct a game of bingo and which allows a player to store, display, and mark a bingo face card five spaces wide by five spaces long, the center space free, and the other spaces containing pre-printed numbers occurring between one and seventy-five (75), inclusive. The electronic bingo aids must be used in conjunction with bingo cards and may be used to assist a bingo player in participating in bingo games if all of the following conditions are complied with:

(a) The particular type of electronic bingo aid proposed to be used has been demonstrated to, inspected by, and approved by the City's Police Department.

(b) Repealed by Ord. 1783 § 3, 9-16-03.

(c) A maximum of two electronic bingo aids may be used by any bingo player during a bingo session. A player may be provided with one electronic bingo aid with a maximum of one hundred forty-four (144) cards; or two electronic aids with a maximum of seventy-two (72) cards each.

(d) The electronic bingo aids shall be distributed for play on a totally random basis. The bingo player is prohibited from selecting the electronic bingo aid. The electronic bingo aid is not to be removed from the premises except for repair. A record will be maintained of all electronic bingo aids removed from the premises, the business entity and site address to which they were taken, and the return date.

(e) Prior to being given physical possession of the electronic bingo aid, the bingo player must pay for the appropriate number of games to be programmed into the electronic bingo aid and receive a receipt indicating the amount paid and the number of games activated in the electronic bingo aid. In addition, the bingo player must maintain in his/her possession cards or sheets of paper corresponding exactly to the bingo number pattern for each card face entered into the electronic bingo aid. The electronic bingo aid may produce the sheets of paper containing the bingo number pattern for each cardface for the games to be played.

(f) Electronic bingo aids are permitted as means of assisting the bingo player to mark, process by computer or otherwise register, record or process numbers selected at random on any bingo card. They shall not be a complete substitute for bingo cards.

(g) The electronic bingo aid or game/device system must have capability so that the Police Department has on-demand system access through the use of an authorized user code and password in order to perform its audit and regulatory duties.

(h) To prevent tampering, manufacturers of electronic bingo aids incorporating erasable programmable read-only memory modules ("EPROM") and EPROM receptacle or similar logic storage and/or retrieval components must seal these modules and their associated circuitry to secure against unauthorized removal, additions, changes or other alterations.

(i) Manufacturers of electronic bingo aids must manufacture each electronic bingo aid to insure that it works with an accounting system that records and retains for a period of not less than three years, the serial number of each bingo card sold (it must be clear whether the card sheet is six-on, etc.), the price of each card sold, and the total amount of the electronic bingo aid proceeds from each session. This information must be secure and shall not be accessible for alteration. The electronic bingo aid system must be able to verify winning cards and to print them for posting. The electronic bingo aid's capabilities and information must not be lost through power failure or other disruption during the session.

(j) If the Police Department detects or discovers any problem with the electronic bingo aid that affects the integrity of the bingo game, the Police Department may direct the manufacturer, distributor, or conductor to cease the sale, lease, or use of the electronic bingo aid, as applicable, in the city. The Police Department may require the manufacturer to correct the problem or recall the electronic bingo aid immediately upon notification by the Police Department to the manufacturer. If the manufacturer, distributor, or conductor detects or discovers any defect, malfunction, or problem with the electronic bingo aid, the manufacturer, distributor, or conductor, as applicable, shall immediately remove the electronic bingo aid from use or play and immediately notify the Police Department of such action.

Subject to the appeal procedures provided herein, violation of these rules shall result in the loss of the right to use electronic bingo aids or the revocation of the bingo license.

The game of bingo shall also include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and pre-printed (commonly referred to as "cherry bells" or "pull tabs" and referred to here as "pre-printed cards") in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning pre-printed cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game, and all such pre-printed cards shall bear the legend, ‘For sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.' The pre-printed cards shall be sold only during the hours of operation of the licensee organization, and it is the responsibility of the game operators to ensure that pre-printed cards remain on the premises at all times. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. 1783 §§ 2, 3, 9-16-03; Ord. 1806 § 1, 8-22-06. Formerly § 22-31.2).

5.75.030 Chapter not exclusive.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of bingo games within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to other provisions of this Code, other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by this City, the State, or any legal entity or agency having jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5, as amended, or any successor California code governing bingo. In addition, the Police Department will issue a Bingo Handbook which will set forth the administrative regulations governing bingo operations. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.3).

5.75.040 Authority to regulate bingo.
Neither Chapter 9 (entitled "Lotteries" commencing with Section 319) nor Chapter 10 (entitled "Gaming" commencing with Section 330) of Title 9 (commencing with Section 261) of the California Penal Code applies to any bingo game conducted in this city pursuant to this chapter. This chapter is enacted under authority granted by Section 19(c) of Article IV of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code. This chapter provides for licensing the conduct of bingo games operated by those organizations that meet the criteria established in California Penal Code Section 326.5. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.4).

5.75.050 License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a bingo game without first obtaining a license from the City pursuant to this chapter, and paying the prescribed license fee. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.5).

5.75.060 Eligible organizations.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(a), no person, as defined in SCCC 1.05.020, shall be eligible for a bingo permit unless such person is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens' organization or an organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by any one of the following: Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(l) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; and provided further, that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. For convenience of reference, organizations exempt because they qualify as a 23701(d) organization are sometimes referred to herein as "charitable organization(s)." All other exempt organizations (which include, for purposes of this chapter, mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations) are sometimes referred to herein as "nonprofit organization(s)." Those organizations categorized as charitable organizations have less stringent restrictions imposed on the use of their bingo receipts than the restrictions imposed on nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.6).

5.75.070 Application for license required – Appeals from denial.
A written application for a license is required and shall be signed by the principal officer of the applicant under penalty of perjury and filed with the Chief of Police, or designee. The application shall contain:

(a) The name of organization; names, social security number, birth date, driver's license (if current), phone number (business and home), addresses, and signatures of all the officers of the organization;

(b) Proposed days and hours of operation of bingo games;

(c) Copies of certificates or letters evidencing exempt status under the applicable section(s) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code from the Franchise Tax Board, as appropriate;

(d) Address of premises where bingo games will be conducted;

(e) Statement of ownership or a lease agreement relating to the proposed premises where the bingo game will be conducted;

(f) Purpose(s) for which premises are used by the organization;

(g) Statement of consent authorizing the Chief of Police, or a designee, to inspect the financial records required to be maintained by this chapter and/or any bank accounts containing profits derived from bingo games and the expenditures of said profits;

(h) Name(s), social security number, birth date, driver's license (if current), phone number (business and home), and addresses of the person(s) responsible for the operation of the bingo games, their capacity within the organization, and their responsibilities with respect to the bingo operations;

(i) Name(s), social security number, birth date, driver's license (if current), phone number (business and home), and addresses of the person(s) operating or assisting in the operation of the bingo game;

(j) A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5 and the provisions of this chapter, as either may be amended from time to time; and

(k) A financial statement of the organization, signed by a licensed certified public accountant, for the one-year period immediately preceding the application.

The Chief of Police, or designee, may refuse to issue a bingo license if, after consideration of the application and any other papers, records, and investigations he deems relevant, it is determined that the operation of a bingo game would be in violation of the California Penal Code, this chapter, or any City zoning or building law or regulation.

In the event of a denial of a license permit, the appeal procedures provided in this chapter shall be applicable.

At all times that bingo games are played pursuant to the license granted hereunder, the organization so licensed shall maintain an affidavit under penalty of perjury which shall contain the current update of the information originally set forth in the application for the license. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.7).

5.75.080 Exclusive operation by members of the licensee organization.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(h), the bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee organization shall operate such bingo game or participate in the promotion, advertising, supervision, or any other phase of the game. Penal Code Section 326.5(h) permits employment of security personnel who are not members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.8).

5.75.090 Definition of member or licensee organization.
Each licensee organization shall have written policies incorporated in its constitution, articles, by-laws, or other regulations setting forth the manner in which a person may become a bona fide member of the organization. The written policy shall be submitted to the City Police Department. Absent any such written policies, it shall be presumed that the organization has no members who may operate or staff bingo games within the meaning of Section 326.5(h) of the Penal Code. Each licensee organization shall keep a full and accurate list of its members. The City's Police Department, or any other authorized representative of the City, is entitled to examine and investigate such list at any reasonable time, and the licensee organization shall cooperate in making such records available. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.9).

5.75.100 Access to criminal history information.
The City's Police Department shall have the authority to obtain criminal history information for each person operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game for purposes of determining those who have been convicted within the last five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude, and to present such information at any bingo permit hearing. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.10).

5.75.110 Financial interest in licensee organization only.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(i), no individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the licensee organization, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.11).

5.75.120 Licenses not transferable.
Any license granted under this chapter shall not be transferable either as to the licensee organization or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the license invalid. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(f), a license applicant or an existing licensee organization desiring to expand or change location shall comply with the City approval process including, but not limited to, the bingo license and/or land use approval. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.12).

5.75.130 Bingo games to be conducted on licensee organization's property.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(f), an organization authorized to conduct bingo games shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.13).

5.75.140 Suppliers and distributors.
Before January 10th of each year, the licensee organization shall submit to the Police Department a list of the names and addresses of any and all suppliers or distributors of bingo supplies and equipment to the licensee organization during the preceding calendar year. The suppliers shall provide the information requested by the Police Department. This information shall include, but not be limited to, game descriptions, types of bingo supplies (cards, paper sheets, pre-printed cards, daubers, etc.), quantities delivered, their sales price, and serial numbers, when available.

No supplier shall receive a percentage of profits from bingo proceeds or any other phase of bingo. No supplier shall absorb the loss derived from the conduct of bingo. No supplier shall adjust bingo supply prices for a specific licensee organization based on profits, losses, or tax-exempt status. No supplier shall dictate or restrict a bingo licensee organization from choosing a particular vendor for the purchase of bingo supplies.

The licensee organization shall pay in full the invoice amount for bingo supplies not more than five business days after the due date on the invoice. Failure to comply will result in commencement of suspension or revocation proceedings pursuant to SCCC 5.75.270. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.14).

5.75.150 Profits to be kept in a separate fund or account – Records.
Pursuant to Penal Code Sections 326.5(j) and (k), all revenue derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee organization shall keep and preserve for a period of three years, full and accurate records, including, but not limited to, total receipts, income, disbursements, prizes, and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo games that is authorized by each separate license issued pursuant to this chapter.

Such records, including related bank accounts, shall be open for inspection at any time by the Chief of Police, or designee, or Federal or State official(s) in the performance of his/her official duties. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.15).

5.75.160 Posting of operation rules.
Each bingo game operation shall post in a conspicuous place at the entrance of the facility the rules for operation of its bingo games. The written rules will contain at least the following information:

It is unlawful for a licensee organization to knowingly authorize, permit, or do any of the following:

(a) Provide or award total prizes for each separate bingo game that exceeds two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both;

(b) Limit attendance or participation in such games to members of the licensee organization or otherwise deny attendance or participation to any members of the general public who comply with the rules of the game and conduct themselves in an orderly and law abiding manner;

(c) Participate in a bingo game, if the participant is obviously under the influence of alcohol;

(d) Participate in bingo games, unless personally present at the location of the games at the time the games are being conducted;

(e) Make payouts without a participant evidencing a paid receipt corresponding to the number of games actually being played.

(Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.16).

5.75.170 Limitation on source of payouts for bingo games to revenue from bingo operations – Limitations on games, free prizes, and free food.
Revenue from bingo operations shall be the sole source of payouts to bingo winners. If an organization has revenue sources separate from bingo revenue, those other revenue sources shall not be commingled into payouts or prizes to participants in the bingo games.

There shall be no free games, free door prizes, and/or free gifts. Provision of free drinks such as coffee, tea or hot cocoa is permissible. Carbonated drinks are not included in the free category. Free food for special occasions to all patrons may be permitted up to four times per year. Prior to the event, a written permit for the bingo session(s) must be obtained from the Chief of Police, or designee. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.17).

5.75.180 License fee – Enforcement fees.
(a) A fifty dollar ($50.00) license fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of the bingo application. If the license is denied, one-half of the fee shall be refunded to the organization.

(b) For the initial application processing, a non-refundable fee will be charged for the background investigation conducted pursuant to SCCC 5.75.070 by the Police Department in conjunction with the license application. Said fee will be set and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(c) Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.59(l)(2), a fee for law enforcement and public safety costs incurred by the City will be imposed by resolution. Said fees shall directly relate to the City expenses incurred with respect to bingo activities. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.18).

5.75.190 Licensee organization's submittal of financial records.
The licensee organization shall submit annually to the City the forms it submits to various government agencies to maintain the status that makes it eligible to operate a bingo game. These forms may include, but not be limited to, CT-2 (California Attorney General), Form 199 (California Franchise Tax Board), Form 990 (Internal Revenue Service), or equivalent forms. The licensee organization shall notify the City in writing of its fiscal year. The forms are to be submitted within three months of the close of the licensee organization's fiscal year. There shall be a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each and every day the financial records are late. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.19).

5.75.200 Days and hours of operation – Inactive license.
In order to prevent an overabundance of bingo operations in the city, the number of bingo sessions shall be limited to twenty-six (26) sessions per calendar week – Sunday through Saturday. A bingo session is operation of bingo games by a bingo operator on a given calendar day. Hours of operation of a bingo session shall be permitted only between noon and midnight of the same day.

Licensee organization shall comply with the terms of approval with respect to the days and hours for bingo operation at the specific location. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, organizations (new or currently licensed) that have not received approval (use permit and/or approval from the Police Department) to operate more than two sessions per week shall be limited to no more than two sessions per week. However, pursuant to the provision of SCCC 18.60.020 (pertaining to special permits) of the Zoning Ordinance, special permits for occasional extra bingo sessions may be granted.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara, if a license has been granted to an eligible organization, but it does not commence operations within ninety (90) calendar days of the date specified by the City for commencement of operations, the license shall be automatically extinguished and of no further effect.

If the licensee organization commences bingo operations, but there is a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive calendar days when bingo games are not conducted at the approved location by the licensee organization, the organization's bingo license shall be automatically extinguished and of no further effect. Additionally, after July 1, 2001, the period for automatic extinguishment will be reduced to forty-five (45) consecutive calendar days. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. 1750 § 4, 3-14-00; Ord. 1806 § 2, 8-22-06. Formerly § 22-31.20).

5.75.210 Maximum amount of prizes – Paid receipt required for payout.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(n), the total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty ($250.00) in cash or in kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. Before a payout is made in any amount, the player must provide a paid cash register (or computer generated) receipt corresponding to the number of cards being played. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.21).

5.75.220 Bingo games open to the public –Capacity limits.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(g), all bingo games licensed under this chapter shall be open to the public and not just to members of the licensee organization.

Notwithstanding that the bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the approved occupancy capacity of room(s) in the facility in which the bingo games are conducted. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.22).

5.75.230 Participant must be present.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(m), no person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game licensed under this chapter unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.23).

5.75.240 Minors not to participate.
For purposes of this chapter, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be allowed to participate or be a worker in any bingo games licensed under this chapter. However, if the entire premises in which the bingo games are conducted is smoke-free, persons the age of eighteen (18) years and older may participate in the bingo games and work on the premises. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.24).

5.75.250 No alcoholic beverages to be served or intoxicated persons to work or participate.
No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed (by bingo workers or bingo participants) on the bingo premises during the hours of operation of a bingo game. No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to work at or participate in a bingo game licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.25).

5.75.260 No credit to be extended to players.
No licensee organization shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or as a loan, including, but not limited to, IOUs and checks to be held, or allow a patron to play on credit. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99. Formerly § 22-31.26).

5.75.270 Suspension and revocation of bingo permit.
The Chief of Police, or the City Manager or their respective designees on appeal, shall have the power to suspend or revoke a bingo permit issued under this chapter on any of the following grounds:

(a) The violation by the permittee of any of the terms, conditions or requirements of:

(1) The State law;

(2) This chapter;

(3) The bingo permit; or

(4) The Bingo Handbook of the Police Department.

(b) Any act or omission of the permit holder which, if it existed at the time the application for a bingo permit was filed, would have warranted the denial of the application.

(c) That the building, structure, equipment or location of the place of bingo operation does not comply with, or fails to meet, all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements, or standards of all the laws of the State of California, or ordinances and resolutions of the City applicable to such business operations. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. 1750 § 2, 3-14-00. Formerly § 22-31.27).

5.75.280 Notice and hearing on suspension and revocation.
Suspensions and revocations shall be administered as follows:

(a) Except as provided hereinbelow in subsection (j) of this section (emergency suspension of permits), a bingo permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended only after the permittee has been given reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard.

(b) Whenever the Chief of Police, or designee, has cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit exists, he/she shall give the holder of the bingo permit written notice stating the alleged grounds for the suspension or revocation and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. This notice will be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the last application or renewal, or by personal service. If the return receipt is not returned within one week after the City mails the notice, service will be deemed completed seven calendar days after notice is mailed by the City. The decision of the Chief of Police, or designee, to suspend or revoke a bingo permit may be appealed to the City Manager, or designee. The notice shall provide the permit holder with information on the appeal process.

(c) The permit holder must submit a written request for an appeal hearing to the City Manager within ten calendar days of receipt of written notice of the City's intent to suspend or revoke the bingo license permit.

(d) Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) calendar days of receipt of the request for the appeal hearing. The City Manager shall notify the permit holder in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The City shall not set the hearing less than ten calendar days after the service of the notice of hearing. Notice to the permittee shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(e) Except as provided hereinbelow in subsection (j) of this section (emergency suspension of permits), the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal.

(f) At the hearing, representatives of the holder of the bingo permit and the Chief of Police, or other City representative, shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the proposed suspension or revocation. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager, or designee, shall issue a written decision which will state (1) whether or not the decision of the Chief of Police is upheld, modified, or reversed; (2) the effective date of the suspension or revocation; and (3) the length of time of any suspension. The decision of the City Manager shall be served on the holder of the permit by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.

(g) The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

(h) The burden of proof is on the City in any suspension or revocation hearing. The City will be required to prove its case by the preponderance of evidence standard.

(i) Upon a written decision of the City Manager which suspends or revokes a bingo permit, the holder of the bingo permit shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police immediately after service of the notice of the decision.

(j) The Chief of Police, or designee, may issue an order suspending a bingo permit for a period not exceeding ten calendar days without having conducted a hearing therefor, if the Chief determines that the continued use of the permit will cause immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare.

(1) Within ten calendar days of the effective date of the order, the Chief of Police shall hold a hearing for the permittee to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked.

(2) The order issued by the Chief of Police under this section shall also contain a notice of the hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 1658 § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. 1729 § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. 1750 § 3, 3-14-00. Formerly § 22-31.28).

Chapter 5.80
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAMES
Sections:

5.80.010  Defined.

5.80.020  Permit required – Generally.

5.80.030  Permit – Application – Information required – Denial and appeal.

5.80.040  License required of each separate machine – Generally.

5.80.050  License – Information required –Manner of attaching to machines, etc.

5.80.060  License – Cancellation and reissuance for substitute machines, etc. – Transferability.

5.80.070  License – Fee.

5.80.080  Powers of City Council – Rules and regulations, etc.

5.80.090  Transferability of permits and licenses issued under chapter generally.

5.80.100  Applicability of State law.

5.80.010 Defined.
The phrase "automatic amusement game" as used in this chapter shall include any mechanical or electronic apparatus available for play upon payment of a cash or other valuable consideration with which a game of skill may be played. Such phrase shall also include any apparatus by means of which any article may be sold, vended, transferred or delivered to the player of such apparatus by the playing of any game of skill with such apparatus. Such phrase shall also include any apparatus consisting of a boxed field with which a game of skill may be played by the use of marbles or balls which may be projected into the field by a plunger or otherwise, in the playing of which the score of the player depends upon which of certain designated places in the field the ball or marble comes to rest and which is available for play upon payment of a cash or other valuable consideration. (Ord. 479 § 1. Formerly § 22-32).

5.80.020 Permit required – Generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit to be kept or maintained in any building or place controlled by him any automatic amusement game for the purpose of permitting the same to be played or operated, without first obtaining a permit from the City Council to do so. (Ord. 479 § 2. Formerly § 22-33).

5.80.030 Permit – Application – Information required – Denial and appeal.
Written application for permits required by SCCC 5.80.020 shall be filed with the license collector upon forms provided by him and shall contain, among other things, the name and address of the applicant, his/her business status, the location and ownership of the premises on which the permit and machine will be used and such other information as the City Manager may require. The applicant shall be referred to the Police Department and other appropriate departments of the City for investigation into criminal background, the suitability of the premises and as to whether or not the granting of such application will be injurious to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the people of the City. If the City Manager shall determine that the applicant is an unfit person or that the granting of such application will be so injurious or that the use of such premises is not suitable for such permit, the City Manager shall deny the issuance of such permit. In the event of any such denial, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.115 SCCC, General Characteristics of License or Permit – Suspension Procedure. (Ord. 479 § 3; Ord. 748 § 1. Formerly § 22-34).

5.80.040 License required of each separate machine – Generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit to be kept or maintained, in any building or place in the City owned, managed, supervised or controlled by such person, any automatic amusement game for the purpose of permitting the same to be played or operated, without first obtaining a license from the City to do so, covering each separate machine. No such license shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has a valid permit in effect, secured under the provisions of this chapter and covering the specific location in question. (Ord. 479 § 4; Ord. 514 § 1. Formerly § 22-35).

5.80.050 License – Information required –Manner of attaching to machines, etc.
Each license issued pursuant to SCCC 5.80.040 shall contain a sufficient description of the machine to identify it and shall bear the number of the permit upon which it is based, together with the serial number, if any, of the machine for which it is issued and each such license shall be securely and firmly attached to the machine for which it is issued by sticker or other appropriate means. (Ord. 479 § 4; Ord. 514 § 1. Formerly § 22-36).

5.80.060 License – Cancellation and reissuance for substitute machines, etc. – Transferability.
The holder of a valid permit issued under this chapter may, upon obtaining permission from the Chief of Police to do so, exchange or substitute a machine for another machine and the Chief of Police shall thereupon cancel the license issued for the substitute machine, which such reissued license shall be valid for the remainder of the period or term for which the original license was issued. No license issued under this chapter for any particular machine shall be transferable or transferred to any other machine except as provided in this section and no person shall attach any such license to any other machine than the one for which it was issued. (Ord. 479 § 4; Ord. 514 § 1. Formerly § 22-37).

5.80.070 License – Fee.
The annual fee for each such license for each machine issued under the terms of this chapter shall be sixty dollars ($60.00), payable annually in advance as other licenses of the City are paid. (Ord. 479 § 4; Ord. 514 § 1; Ord. 1639 § 4, 7-21-92. Formerly § 22-38).

5.80.080 Powers of City Council – Rules and regulations, etc.
The City Council shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the granting of permits and licenses required in this chapter, for the substitution of a license from one machine to another and for the maintenance, keeping and operation of any apparatus contemplated within the terms of this chapter. The City Council shall have the power to amend or alter any such rule or regulation and to revoke the permit or license of any person who shall refuse or neglect to comply with any term, provision or section of this chapter or of any such rule or regulation or any license ordinance of the City or law of the State. (Ord. 479 § 4; Ord. 514 § 1. Formerly § 22-39).

5.80.090 Transferability of permits and licenses issued under chapter generally.
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable and any attempted transfer shall render the permit and license in question invalid. (Ord. 479 § 5. Formerly § 22-40).

5.80.100 Applicability of State law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the operation, keeping, maintaining or use of any gambling device or any apparatus or device, the use, possession, operation or control of which is prohibited by the laws of the State. (Ord. 479 § 7. Formerly § 22-41).

Chapter 5.85
PUBLIC DANCE HALLS
AND PUBLIC DANCES
Sections:

5.85.010  Definitions.

5.85.020  Permit – Required.

5.85.030  Permit – Application – Information required.

5.85.040  Permit – Investigation fees.

5.85.050  Permit – Investigation, etc. – Denial upon appearance of certain facts, etc.

5.85.060  Permit – Considerations of City Council when dance is to be held in tavern or saloon, etc.

5.85.070  Permit – Moral standards of applicant – Sanitary and safety conditions of premises, etc.

5.85.080  Permit – Assignability or transferability, etc.

5.85.090  Transporting intoxicating liquor into public dance hall prohibited in certain cases.

5.85.100  Rules and regulations – Authority of Chief of Police – Posting in conspicuous place.

5.85.110  Exclusion of persons under influence of intoxicating liquor from public dance hall.

5.85.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) "Public dance" shall mean and include any dance to which the general public is admitted upon the payment of any fee, charge or admission whatever or for which tickets, invitations or other admission devices are sold or offered for sale to the general public or which is given or conducted in connection with the sale of food in restaurants, cafes or hotel dining rooms to which the general public is admitted or given or conducted in connection with the sale of beverages or intoxicating liquors in taverns, bars or saloons to which the general public is admitted or given or conducted with provisions for other amusement or entertainment for profit.

(b) "Public dance hall" shall mean and include any hall, room or place in which a public dance is held. (Ord. 510 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 847 § 1. Formerly § 22-42).

5.85.020 Permit – Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or conduct a public dance in the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Council to do so. (Ord. 510 § 3; Ord. 847 § 2. Formerly § 22-43).

5.85.030 Permit – Application – Information required.
Written applications for permits required under SCCC 5.85.020 shall be made to the City Council and shall set forth the following facts:

(a) The name and residence of the applicant, and if the applicant is a firm, the names and residences of the partners thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residences of the directors thereof and if the applicant is an association, the names and residences of the officers thereof.

(b) The particular place for which the dance permit is desired.

(c) The number and dates of the dances to be held under the permit.

(d) A statement that the applicant is the sole party, either directly or indirectly, interested in the dance for which a permit is sought and that no other person is interested therein or will be interested therein during the continuance of the permit. (Ord. 510 § 4; Ord. 847 § 3. Formerly § 22-44).

5.85.040 Permit – Investigation fees.
(a) Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), no part of which will be refundable.

(b) The license fees for public dances, as prescribed by Chapter 3.40 SCCC, and any amendments thereto shall be in addition to the foregoing investigation fee, and, if applicable, shall be paid before a permit is issued. (Ord. 1069 § 1. Formerly § 22-44.1).

5.85.050 Permit – Investigation, etc. – Denial upon appearance of certain facts, etc.
The City Council shall refer applications submitted pursuant to SCCC 5.85.040 to the Chief of Police and to the building inspector who shall investigate facts connected with the application and the premises for which the permit is sought and shall report the results of their investigation together with any recommendations either may have concerning the issuance of a permit, and as to whether or not the premises for which such permit is sought comply with this chapter and applicable ordinances of the City. The City Council shall consider the recommendations so made and may deny the application if any of the following conclusions or facts appear:

(a) The premises in respect to which the permit is to be issued do not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance of the City.

(b) That the conducting of a public dance in the premises for which a permit is sought will be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the people of the City. In passing upon this phase of the matter, the City Council shall take into consideration the location of the premises for which a permit is sought with reference to proximity of schools, residences and other structures, the occupants and users of which may be disturbed or injuriously affected by the conducting of a dance upon such premises or by the persons in attendance at such dance.

(c) That the applicant proposes to conduct such dance in connection with a tavern where intoxicating liquors are sold.

(d) That the applicant has had a permit under the provisions of this chapter revoked.

(e) That the premises for which such permit is sought for the proposed conducting of a public dance therein violates any building, zoning, health, safety or police ordinance of the City or any law in the State or of the United States. (Ord. 510 § 5; Ord. 847 § 4. Formerly § 22-45).

5.85.060 Permit – Considerations of City Council when dance is to be held in tavern or saloon, etc.
In considering an application for a permit to conduct a dance in any premises of a tavern, saloon or other place where intoxicating liquors are sold pursuant to an "on-sale" liquor license, the City Council may take into consideration the proximity of such tavern or saloon to a university, coming within the provisions of Section 172a of the Penal Code of the State, and the City Council may also consider any of the matters set forth in SCCC 5.85.050. The City Council may, in its discretion, deny or grant any permit applied for in such application after such consideration. (Ord. 847 § 7. Formerly § 22-46).

5.85.070 Permit – Moral standards of applicant – Sanitary and safety conditions of premises, etc.
Before the City Council shall grant any permit under this chapter, it shall be satisfied as to the sanitary condition of the premises, compliance with zoning ordinances, and that the conduct of such a dance would not create a police problem. (Ord. 847 § 5. Formerly § 22-47).

5.85.080 Permit – Assignability or transferability, etc.
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be sold, assigned or transferred without the consent of the City Council and any violation of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of such permit and the assignee of such permit shall have no right to conduct any dance pursuant to any such assigned license. (Ord. 510 § 8; Ord. 847 § 6. Formerly § 22-48).

5.85.090 Transporting intoxicating liquor into public dance hall prohibited in certain cases.
No person shall carry or transport any intoxicating liquor into or upon any public dance hall except that in cases where beer is permitted to be sold on the premises where such dancing is being conducted, such beer so contemplated to be sold may be carried or transported thereon for the purpose of sale. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dances which are given or conducted in connection with the sale of food in restaurants, cafes or hotel dining rooms. (Ord. 510 § 7. Formerly § 22-49).

Cross reference – As to drinking intoxicating liquors in public generally, see SCCC 9.05.040.

5.85.100 Rules and regulations – Authority of Chief of Police – Posting in conspicuous place.
The Chief of Police shall have authority to make and enforce rules regulating the conduct of public dances, the hours during which such dances may be held, the issuance of return admission checks, the lighting arrangements of places in which such dances are held and the character of the premises in which such dances are held. Such rules shall be subject to approval by the City Council.

Violation of any of such rules shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of permits and licenses issued under this chapter.

Such rules and the amendments thereto shall be effective upon the approval by the City Council and if approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, then upon the effective date of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the permittee holding a dance permit to keep a copy of such rules and regulations posted conspicuously in the place where the dance is to be held. (Ord. 510 § 9. Formerly § 22-50).

5.85.110 Exclusion of persons under influence of intoxicating liquor from public dance hall.
It shall be the duty of every person giving or conducting a public dance or their agents, servants or employees immediately, upon the request of a police officer, to exclude from the public dance hall in which such dance is conducted any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or who is guilty of loud, boisterous or improper conduct. (Ord. 510 § 10. Formerly § 22-51).

Cross reference – As to drunkenness in public places generally, see SCCC 9.05.040.

Chapter 5.90
PUBLIC BENCHES
Sections:

Article I. Franchise Procedures

5.90.010  Definitions.

5.90.020  Franchise necessary.

5.90.030  Franchise – Application.

5.90.040  Notice of hearing – Publication – Time.

5.90.050  City Council's discretion.

5.90.060  Hearings.

5.90.070  Effective time.

5.90.080  Sidewalk bench franchises – Revocable.

Article II. Duties and Liabilities

5.90.090  Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.

5.90.100  Duty of grantee – Construction, installation, maintenance, etc.

5.90.110  Removal or relocation.

5.90.120  Regulations generally – Advertising.

5.90.130  Payment for repairs to public property.

5.90.140  Indemnification of City.

5.90.150  Filing of franchise transfer.

5.90.160  Records – Payment.

5.90.170  Right to inspection of books.

5.90.180  Liability – Unfaithful performance.

5.90.190  Forfeiture of franchise.

5.90.200  Necessity for legal proceedings – Payment of legal fees.

Article I. Franchise Procedures

5.90.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) "Bench" shall mean any seat located upon public property along any public way for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

(b) "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of Santa Clara or his/her authorized representative.

(c) "Street" shall mean any public thoroughfare or way including sidewalks, parkways and any other public property bordering upon any public way. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-18).

5.90.020 Franchise necessary.
No person shall install, erect or maintain any bench on public property of City except as authorized herein and without first obtaining a franchise therefor from the City Council. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-19).

5.90.030 Franchise – Application.
An applicant for a franchise shall file with the City Council an application stating:

(a) The name of the applicant.

(b) The purpose for which the franchise is desired.

(c) The term for which the franchise is desired.

(d) The amount or amounts applicant, if granted the franchise, proposes to pay to the City during the life of the franchise and any other terms and conditions that the applicant may desire so long as they are supplemental to and not inconsistent with those set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-20).

5.90.040 Notice of hearing – Publication – Time.
(a) Upon receipt of the application, the City Council may pass a resolution stating the character of the franchise, setting forth the notice of the date, hour and place when and where all persons having any objection to the granting thereof may appear before the City Council and be heard thereon, and directing the City Clerk to publish a notice thereof at least once within fifteen (15) days after the passage of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

(b) The time fixed for the hearing shall be not less than twenty (20) nor more than sixty (60) days after the date of passage of the resolution. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-21).

5.90.050 City Council's discretion.
Nothing in this chapter shall make it mandatory for the Council to authorize publication of said notice. The Council may consider applicant's ability to carry out his/her proposal, its financial and business standing, experience and any other pertinent factors. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-22).

5.90.060 Hearings.
At the time set for the hearing, the City Council shall hear the application and the protests. The City Council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall decide if the permit shall be granted. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. The permit shall be granted by resolution upon terms, conditions and restrictions as set forth in the application as the City Council deems are in the public interest, and upon such other terms, conditions and restrictions as the City Council deems are in the public interest and are not inconsistent with this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-23).

5.90.070 Effective time.
Any franchise granted under this chapter shall not become effective until the grantee files a written acceptance thereof with the City Clerk. It shall be for a term prescribed by the City Council unless sooner revoked. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-24).

5.90.080 Sidewalk bench franchises – Revocable.
Every sidewalk bench franchise granted under this chapter confers upon the grantee the right to erect, install, and maintain certain benches for the use of the public to be placed on public sidewalks at such places as the City Manager shall designate within the city in such a manner as not to unduly interfere in any way with the use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. Any permit granted under this chapter shall be revocable by the City without cause upon thirty (30) days' notice of such revocation.

Such rights shall not include the right to occupy any park, playground or other municipal property (exclusive of public thoroughfares), unless a special permit therefor shall be granted by the City Council. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-25).

Article II. Duties and Liabilities

5.90.090 Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.
The applicant for a franchise shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the application and processing thereof. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the applicant with a written statement of the expenses. The City Council may by resolution require the deposit of a sufficient sum to cover such expense in advance of processing the application. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-26).

5.90.100 Duty of grantee – Construction, installation, maintenance, etc.
Sidewalk benches shall be erected, installed and maintained in such a manner as to conform with the specifications required by the City Manager and the construction, installation, and erection thereof shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-27).

5.90.110 Removal or relocation.
The grantee shall remove or relocate without expense to the City any facilities installed, used, or maintained under the permit when made necessary by any lawful public need of governmental character and upon order of the City Manager. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-28).

5.90.120 Regulations generally – Advertising.
No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed upon any bench except upon the front and rear surfaces of the backrest. No liquor, tavern, beer or political advertising or advertising which in the opinion of the City Manager is detrimental to the public welfare or morals shall be placed upon any such bench. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-29).

5.90.130 Payment for repairs to public property.
The grantee shall pay to the City on demand the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any of the operations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-30).

5.90.140 Indemnification of City.
The grantee shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers and employees from all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operation under the franchise including any liability which might arise by reason of the installation, erection or maintenance, or lack thereof, of any bench. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-31).

5.90.150 Filing of franchise transfer.
The grantee shall file with the City Council no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed sale, transfer, assignment, or lease, of the franchise or any part thereof, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the proposed transaction certified to by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. No franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be sold, transferred, assigned, leased without the consent of the City Council, and any attempt to sell, transfer, assign or lease without such consent is a nullity. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-32).

5.90.160 Records – Payment.
(a) The fee grantee shall pay hereunder is in addition to any business license fee and shall be the fee as prescribed by the City Council at the time of granting the franchise, which fee shall not, in any event, be less than two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per year for each and every bench which grantee may have in the City pursuant to the franchise at any time during the year. Grantee shall pay such sums to the City annually and in advance. Grantee shall submit a verified report to the City Manager annually, showing the number of benches on location and the number of benches installed during each annual period. Said annual fee shall be paid according to the number of benches in place, whether or not there be advertising thereon.

(b) In the event of termination of a franchise agreement by City without cause, grantee shall be reimbursed for pro rata share of advanced fee representing any unexpired period of time for which advance payment was made. The franchise shall thereupon terminate and the City shall in no way be responsible for any other sum from grantee of franchise. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68; Ord. 1219 § 1, 9-2-69. Formerly § 25-32.2).

5.90.170 Right to inspection of books.
The City shall have free access to and the right at any time to inspect and audit any books and records of the grantee involving or relating to calculations and transactions related to the franchise. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-32.3).

5.90.180 Liability – Unfaithful performance.
The grantee of a franchise under this chapter shall be liable to City for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of the grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform any provision of the franchise and any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-32.4).

5.90.190 Forfeiture of franchise.
If the grantee of any franchise granted under this chapter fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions or conditions prescribed in this chapter or of the grant of the franchise, and does not, within ten days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning, does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the City, by its City Council, may declare the franchise forfeited. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-32.5).

5.90.200 Necessity for legal proceedings – Payment of legal fees.
If legal proceedings are necessary to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter against any grantee of a franchise, said grantee shall be liable for the value of attorneys' services, services of other personnel, and other expenses of City which are necessary to gain compliance herewith. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 11-19-68. Formerly § 25-32.6).

Chapter 5.95
PROCEDURE – SUSPENSION, REVOCATION*
Sections:

5.95.010  Suspension – Revocation.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 1182; former code §§ 22-60, 22-61 and 22-62.

5.95.010 Suspension – Revocation.
The procedures provided in Chapter 2.115 SCCC, General Characteristics of License or Permit – Suspension Procedure, will be utilized for suspensions and revocations of permits issued pursuant to Chapters 5.60 through 5.85 SCCC. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Chapter 5.100
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

5.100.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 5.

5.100.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 5.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 5 [entitled "Business Licenses and Regulations"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the city, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 5 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.05    General Provisions

6.10    Impoundment of Animals

6.15    Keeping of Certain Animals

6.20    Abatement of Animal Pests

6.25    Reserved

6.28    Beekeeping

6.30    Dogs and Cats

6.35    Animal Establishments

6.40    Dangerous and Exotic Animals

6.45    Sale of Animals

6.50    Enforcement of Title

Chapter 6.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

6.05.010    Definitions.

6.05.020    Animals running at large.

6.05.030    Conditions related only to seizures of dogs running at large.

6.05.040    Animal bites, quarantine, violation and examinations.

6.05.050    Diseased animals.

6.05.060    Dead animals.

6.05.070    Abandoned animals.

6.05.075    Animals on City property.

6.05.080    Poisoning and abusing dogs, cats or other domestic animals.

6.05.090    Public nuisance.

6.05.100    Authority of animal control officer.

6.05.110    Animals and vehicles.

6.05.120    Interference with police dogs.

6.05.130    Feeding of animals on posted public property prohibited.

6.05.140    Animal maintenance and duties of owners.

6.05.150    Shelter requirements.

6.05.160    Water requirements.

6.05.170    Feeding requirements.

6.05.180    Confinement requirements.

6.05.190    Adequate exercise.

6.05.200    Chain collar prohibited.

6.05.210    Ventilation and light requirements.

6.05.220    Veterinary treatment.

6.05.230    Unnecessary suffering.

6.05.240    Animal traps.

6.05.250    Slaughtering.

6.05.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

(a) “A” definitions:

(1) “Abandoned animal” means an animal that is left without proper and necessary care for the animal’s well-being for twenty-four (24) hours or an unreasonable period of time. “Abandoned animal” shall also mean any animal, lawfully impounded by the City, for which the owner has not paid fees, rates or charges relating to the detention of the animal.

(2) “Administrator” means the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agent(s), designees and representatives.

(3) “Animal” includes, but is not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fishes, fowl, rabbits, reptiles and nonhuman mammals, etc.

(4) “Animal control officer” means any person authorized by the Administrator to enforce the provisions of this title, or any person authorized by the County Health Officer in the enforcement of rabies control laws and in the enforcement of State laws.

(5) “Animal menagerie” means any place where dangerous animals are kept or maintained for any purpose, including places where dangerous animals are boarded, exhibited, trained or kept for hire.

(6) “Animal shelter” means the SVACA animal shelter, the Humane Society animal shelter, or any other facility designated by SVACA for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found in violation of this chapter, or surrendered to the City by their owners, and shall be a facility devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of all animals.

(7) “Animal rescuer” means any person or organization that provides temporary housing and care for domestic animals with the purpose of placing those animals with a new and permanent owner in a new home and that provides evidence satisfactory to the Administrator of a history of active placement or an affiliation with a recognized group with a history of active placement.

(8) “At large” means:

(A) General. The presence of any animal when it is off the premises of its owner and not restrained by a six-foot leash under the control of a person physically capable of retaining control of the animal, or when the animal is on the premises of its owner and not restrained by a six-foot leash, fence or other adequate enclosure sufficient to prevent ingress and egress of the animal or not under the control and/or the immediate presence of its owner;

(B) Animal in Heat. For the purposes of this provision, “at large” shall also mean outside a house, vehicle or other enclosure adequate to prevent male dogs gaining access to the female dog.

(b) Reserved for future use.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “Cat” means a domestic cat (Felis catus).

(2) “City Council” means the City Council for the City of Santa Clara.

(3) “City Manager” means the City Manager for the City of Santa Clara or his/her designee.

(4) “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police for the City of Santa Clara.

(5) “Commercial kennel” means any person or facility, engaged in, or used for, the commercial breeding of dogs or cats, or both, for sale, individually or in litter lots, or in the boarding, training, sale or hire of dogs and/or cats for compensation, except that animal hospitals maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the State of California as part of the practice of veterinary medicine, animal shelters or private kennels shall not be considered commercial kennels. Any person having more than one fertile female shall be presumed to have a commercial kennel.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Dangerous animal” means any wild or exotic mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition, and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, constitutes a danger to human life, other animals, or property.

(2) “Dangerous dog” means any dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, that:

(A) Without provocation, has bitten a person or a domestic animal while on public or private property;

(B) Without provocation, chases or approaches people or domestic animals on the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a threatening manner or apparent attitude of attack;

(C) Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition for unprovoked attack, causing injury and threatening the safety of people or domestic animals;

(D) Has been specifically trained to guard persons and/or property;

(E) Has inflicted severe injury on a person or domestic animal on public or private property;

(F) Any dog declared potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious in another jurisdiction.

(3) “Dog” means a domestic dog (Canis familiaris).

(4) “Domestic animal” includes dogs, cats and birds, rabbits and fowl commonly kept as pets.

(5) “Domestic bird” includes, but is not limited to, budgies, canaries, cardinals, cockatiels, cockatoos, finches, lories, lorikeets, lovebirds, macaws, parakeets, parrots, sparrows, toucans and weavers.

(e) “E” definitions:

(1) “Euthanasia” means the humane destruction of an animal pursuant to the requirements of SCCC 6.30.110(e).

(2) “Exotic” means any animal not normally kept as a domestic or household pet, fowl, or livestock, including but not limited to lions, tigers and monkeys.

(f) “F” definitions:

(1) “Fowl” means any larger domestic bird such as a domesticated chicken, duck, goose, guinea fowl, peafowl, peacock, turkey, dove, pigeon, game bird or similar bird intended for human consumption or for the production of eggs for human consumption.

(g) “G” definitions:

(1) “Grooming parlor” means any commercial place where animals are trimmed, bathed or groomed.

(h) “H” definitions:

(1) “Harbored” means the feeding or sheltering of an animal for three or more consecutive days.

(2) “Health Officer” means the Director of Public Health or any person authorized to act on his/her behalf.

(3) “Hearing Officer” means the Administrator or the Administrator’s designee.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “Lot” means a single parcel of land for which a legal description is filed of record or the boundaries of which are shown on a subdivision map or record of survey filed in the Office of the Santa Clara County Recorder.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) “Owner” means a natural person over the age of eighteen (18) who owns, possesses, harbors, controls or has custody of an animal. All adults residing at the same property address shall be rebuttably presumed to be the owner of any animal owned, possessed, harbored or controlled on the property. An owner does not include a person having custody of a client’s animal as a part of a commercial kennel operation.

(2) “Ownership” means any person keeping, harboring, controlling, having custody of, or possessing one or more animals for a period of not less than five days. This excludes a person having custody of clients’ animals as a part of a commercial kennel operation.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Person” means any individual, domestic or foreign corporation, partnership, association of any kind, trust, fraternal society or cooperative.

(2) “Pet” means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.

(3) “Pet shop” means a person or facility that obtains animals for sale, exchange, barter or hire to the general public as a principal or agent, or on consignment.

(4) “Physical control” means any animal confined or restrained by a leash or lead by a person of size and responsibility to adequately keep control of the animal or within the real property limits of its owner.

(5) “Premises” means any lot or parcel of land owned, leased or rented by a person.

(6) “Private kennel” means a person who maintains within or adjoining his or her private residence three dogs over four months of age, and/or three cats over four months of age, but no more than a combined total of six dogs and cats; such animals to be for that person’s recreational use or for exhibition in conformation shows, field or obedience trials and where the sale of offspring is not the primary function of the kennel. The maintenance of more than two male dogs or cats used for breeding purposes for which compensation is received, or the parturition and rearing of more than two litters of dogs or cats in any one calendar year from the total number of females owned or maintained by that person on the premises, shall establish a refutable presumption that such animals are owned or maintained for the purposes of commercial breeding; and the owner of the premises shall be subject to the permit requirements of a commercial kennel.

(7) “Provocation” means:

(A) An act intended or which would be reasonably understood to harass, menace, threaten or cause serious injury to a dog;

(B) An act intended or which would be reasonably understood to cause bodily injury to the dog’s owner, owner’s family, owner’s property or domestic animals, in the presence of the dog; or

(C) The entry into a private, fully enclosed area of the owner’s real property by an adult with the intent of committing a crime or injuring a person.

(8) “Public place” includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, carnivals, shopping malls, flea markets and areas in front of commercial establishments.

(q) “Q” definitions:

(1) “Quarantine” means the isolation of any animal within a substantial enclosure to avoid its contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Sanitize” means to make physically clean, remove and destroy to a practical minimum agents injurious to health.

(2) “Severe injury” means any physical injury to a person that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations, or requires sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.

(3) “Slaughter” means to kill an animal for food or butcher.

(4) “Small animals” means hares, rabbits, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, doves, pigeons, game birds, or other fowl.

(5) “SVACA” means the Silicon Valley Animal Control Authority.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) “V” definitions:

(1) “Vaccination” means a protective inoculation against rabies with an anti-rabies vaccine recognized and approved by the Santa Clara County Health Department.

(2) “Veterinary hospital” means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.020 Animals running at large.
No person owning or having control of any animal shall permit the animal to stray or run at large upon any public street or other public place, or upon any private place or property or common area of any planned development, cluster, townhouse or condominium project, without the consent of the property owner or person in control of the property. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.030 Conditions related only to seizures of dogs running at large.
An animal control officer shall not seize or impound a dog for running at large in violation of SCCC 6.30.010 when the dog has not strayed from and is upon private property owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to control the dog has a right of possession.

A dog that has strayed from but then returned to the private property of its owner or the person who has a right to control the dog shall not be seized or impounded merely for violation of SCCC 6.30.010, but in such a case, a citation for such violation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation, the owner or the person who has a right to control the dog is not available at the premises, the dog may be impounded, but the officer shall post a notice of such impoundment on the front door of the living unit or other conspicuous place on the property of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. This notice shall state the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the dog.

This shall not otherwise affect the authority of an animal control officer to seize or impound a dog or issue citations as a result of the violation of other sections of this chapter. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.040 Animal bites, quarantine, violation and examinations.
Any person having knowledge that any animal is known to have or is suspected of having bitten any person shall immediately report that fact to an animal control officer or Health Officer with full information regarding the incident.

Upon receipt of such a report, an animal control officer will seize and quarantine the animal for a period of fourteen (14) days or such other period as may be prescribed by the State Department of Health. The animal control officer or Health Officer may order the owner to quarantine the animal on the owner’s premises.

Any person who fails, refuses or neglects to quarantine any animal as ordered by the animal control officer, or who refuses to allow the animal control officer to inspect any private premises where the animal is kept, is guilty of a misdemeanor. No animal shall be removed or released during the quarantine period without written permission of the animal control officer.

The Administrator may charge a fee, as set forth in a resolution adopted by the City Council, to recoup the costs of quarantining animals and inspections for quarantine of animals. Any fee charged shall be paid by the owner of the animal. This fee shall be in addition to the actual costs of the Health Officer in housing, feeding and otherwise caring for a quarantined animal.

The specimens from any animal that dies or is destroyed while under quarantine shall be submitted to the laboratory of the County Health Department for rabies examination. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.050 Diseased animals.
(a) No person owning or having charge of any animal known to be infected with any disease transmittable to humans shall permit such animal to be or remain within the County other than at an approved veterinary hospital unless the Health Officer approves an alternative means of confinement.

(b) The animal control officer shall seize any animal he or she reasonably believes to be infected with disease transmittable to humans. The animal control officer shall keep such animal in a safe place for a period sufficient to observe, examine and determine whether it is diseased or vicious so as to be a menace to public health or safety.

(c) Diseased or vicious animals which are a danger to public health or safety shall be impounded and may be destroyed. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.060 Dead animals.
Upon the death of any animal, the owner shall provide for the burial, incineration or other disposition of the body of the animal. If the owner of any dead animal is unable to provide for burial or other disposition, the owner may request the animal control officer to dispose of the body of the animal.

Upon learning that the body of a dead animal has not been disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner, the animal control officer will remove the animal’s body immediately; provided, however, that the animal control officer shall not be required to remove and dispose of bodies of dead animals on State highways or on State property. Before disposing of the body of a dead animal, the animal control officer will give notice to the owner of the animal, if known, within seventy-two (72) hours of the time that the dead animal is removed.

The Administrator will collect a fee sufficient to recover costs associated with removal and disposal of dead animals which shall be paid by the owner, if known; but no fee shall be charged to the owner of a dead dog or cat if that person is sixty-five (65) years or older. The fee shall be set in a resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.070 Abandoned animals.
It is unlawful to abandon any animal in the city of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.075 Animals on City property.
No person having the control or care of any animal shall permit such animal to enter or remain on City property and/or in City-owned or City-managed buildings other than a building used for the purpose of care, detention, space control or treatment of animals, or areas designated as “dog parks” or “off-leash areas,” or a building used for training classes, shows or exhibitions. This section does not apply to persons who have a visual or auditory disability and who use dogs for guidance or to accommodate a disability, to service dogs in formal training programs, or dogs used in law enforcement by a governmental agency, or persons expressly authorized by the City Manager, upon finding that the animal will not be disruptive to the operations of the City, or a hazard to persons or property. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.080 Poisoning and abusing dogs, cats or other domestic animals.
In addition to California Penal Code Section 596, it is unlawful for any person to willfully administer poison to any dog, cat or other domestic animal, or to willfully place, expose or leave poisonous or harmful substances of any kind in any place with intent to injure or kill any dog, cat or other domestic animal. Further, it is unlawful for any person to maliciously kill, maim, wound, mutilate, torment, torture or physically abuse any animal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.090 Public nuisance.
(a) No person owning or having control of any animal shall permit the animal to do any of the following:

(1) Defecate or urinate on private property (other than that of the owner or person having control of the animal);

(2) Defecate on public property without immediately removing the excrement to a proper receptacle;

(3) Obstruct or interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use of property by chasing vehicles, molesting passersby, barking, howling, baying or making any other noise;

(4) Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where the animal is kept that would cause odors, attract flies or vermin, or otherwise be injurious to public health and safety, or be indecent, or offensive to the senses, or be such an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by other persons;

(5) Trespass on school grounds, excluding service dogs and service dogs in formal training programs;

(6) Without provocation, attack other humans or animals;

(7) Damage private or public property;

(8) Repeatedly run at large;

(9) Run at large while in the stage of heat.

(b) The animal control officer may seize and impound any animal causing or creating a public nuisance.

(c) A violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

(d) Any private person may maintain an action under California Civil Code Section 3493 for enforcement of this section declaring certain acts a public nuisance, if such acts are specifically injurious to that person. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.100 Authority of animal control officer.
Each animal control officer shall have and is hereby vested with the authority of a peace officer. Each animal control officer may, in the performance of his/her duties, enter upon any property to ascertain if any of the provisions of this chapter or any State laws relating to disease, care, treatment, impounding, or cruelty to animals are being violated. Each animal control officer may make arrests for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any State laws in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.110 Animals and vehicles.
(a) No person shall transport or carry any animals in or on a motor vehicle on any public highway, street or roadway located within the city limits unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or otherwise safely attached or secured to the vehicle by means of a container, cage or other device which will prevent the animal from falling from, jumping from or being thrown from the vehicle while the vehicle is in motion.

(b) No person shall leave any animal in an unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures that may adversely affect the health or well-being of the animal.

(c) An animal control officer, police officer or safety officer is authorized to use reasonable force to remove an animal from a vehicle when it appears that the animal’s health, safety or welfare is or will be endangered. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.120 Interference with police dogs.
No person shall injure, torture, tease, kick, strike, mutilate, disable, kill or otherwise interfere with any police dog within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City while the police dog(s) is in the custody of a police officer and/or is being used in the performance of official duties. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.130 Feeding of animals on posted public property prohibited.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to feed, cause to be fed, offer food to any animal (which specifically includes birds), or to scatter food, seed or other forms of matter edible to animals (collectively referred to as “feed” or “feeding”) on any public property (which includes, but is not limited to, public buildings, streets, street rights-of-way, sidewalks, driveways, parks, school grounds, public facilities or any other public property), or portion thereof, in the city which has been posted with a sign(s) warning that it is illegal to feed animals on the posted public property.

(b) When warning sign(s) are posted on public property prohibiting the feeding of animals on the public property (or portion thereof), the warning sign(s) are to read substantially as follows in letters that are at least one inch in height:

WARNING

The feeding of animals [i.e., in the park, within fifty (50) yards of the pond, on the school grounds, etc.] is prohibited pursuant to SCCC 6.05.130.

The warning sign(s) are to be situated in conspicuous locations on the posted property (or portion thereof), taking into account the physical configuration of the public property (or portion thereof).

(c) This section does not apply to City or other public agency-authorized events or programs. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.140 Animal maintenance and duties of owners.
(a) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other regulations contained in this Code or in any other ordinance of the City regarding the keeping and maintenance of animals.

(b) The owner of every animal shall have the duty to keep and maintain such animal in a healthy and sanitary condition, and shall have the duty to supply such animal with food, water and suitable shelter. All animal enclosures and shelters shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and free from all noxious odors or substances. The keeping of any animal in such a manner as to create unhealthy or unsanitary conditions is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.150 Shelter requirements.
(a) Any animal maintained outdoors shall have adequate shade and shelter so that the animal can protect itself from the direct rays of the sun when the sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort, so the animal can remain dry during rain and stay warm during cold weather.

(b) The shelter for any animal shall be:

(1) Accessible to the animal at all times and constructed and maintained so that the animal has convenient access to food and water;

(2) Situated to prevent exposing the animal to unreasonably loud noise, or teasing, abuse or injury by another animal or person;

(3) Constructed with at least five sides including a roof and floor. The floor shall be raised off the ground; be free of cracks, depressions and rough areas where insects, vermin or eggs for internal parasites may lodge; and protect the animal’s legs and feet from injury;

(4) Of adequate size inside and outside the shelter to allow the animal to stand up, sit, turn around freely or lie down in a normal position, defecate or urinate away from its confinement, and safely interact with any other animal;

(5) Adequately lighted to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of natural or artificial light uniformly diffused throughout the shelter, and sufficient illumination for routine inspections and care of the animal;

(6) Supplied with clean and dry bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements to maintain the shelter at a temperature that is not harmful to the health of the animal;

(7) Cleaned and maintained in a manner designed to ensure sanitary conditions and to control for insects, ectoparasites and other pests. Carcasses, debris, food waste and excreta shall be removed from the shelter as often as necessary to minimize unreasonably obnoxious odor, allergen, pests and the risk of disease;

(8) Be constructed and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.160 Water requirements.
No person shall keep, use or maintain any animal on any premises unless the animal has access to clean and fresh water at all times. If the water is kept in a container, this container shall be designed sufficiently to prevent tipping and spilling of the water contained therein. Watering containers shall be kept clean, kept out of sun and must be emptied and refilled with fresh water at least once a day. If the water is provided by an automatic or demand device, the water supply connected to the device must function twenty-four (24) hours a day. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.170 Feeding requirements.
No person shall keep, use or maintain any animal on any premises unless the animal is provided sufficient food daily to maintain proper body weight and good health. The animal shall be provided food, which shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable and sufficient in quantity and nutritional value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.180 Confinement requirements.
(a) All animals shall be able to stand to their full height, stretch out, turn around, lie down, and make normal postural adjustments comfortably. Minimum space for dogs in pens (not including shelter space) shall be as follows:

Number of dogs

Small (to 25 lbs)

Medium (25 – 50 lbs)

Large (over 50 lbs)

1

3 x 7 (21 sq. ft.)

6 x 10 (60 sq. ft.)

8 x 10 (80 sq. ft.)

2

4 x 8 (32 sq. ft.)

8 x 10 (80 sq. ft.)

8 x 12 (96 sq. ft.)

3

5 x 9 (45 sq. ft.)

8 x 12 (96 sq. ft.)

10 x 14 (140 sq. ft.)

4

8 x 10 (80 sq. ft.)

10 x 12 (120 sq. ft.)

12 x 16 (192 sq. ft.)

(b) No dog shall be tethered, fastened, chained, tied or restrained to a shelter, tree, fence or any other stationary object, except in accordance with Penal Code Section 597, as may be amended.

(c) If a dog is confined in compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the owner may:

(1) Attach a dog to a running line, pulley or trolley system, except no dog may be tethered to a running line, pulley or trolley system by means of a choke collar or pinch collar;

(2) Tether, fasten, chain, tie or otherwise restrain a dog pursuant to the requirements of a camping or recreational area;

(3) Tether, fasten, chain or tie a dog no longer than is necessary for the person to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained for a reasonable period;

(4) Tether, fasten, chain or tie a dog while engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by the State of California if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a person from restraining a dog while participating in activities or using accommodations that are reasonably associated with the licensed activity;

(5) Tether, fasten, chain or tie a dog while actively engaged in conduct that is directly related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock, or directly related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.190 Adequate exercise.
All animals must be provided with adequate exercise. “Adequate exercise” means the opportunity for the animal to move sufficiently to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, size and condition of the animal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.200 Chain collar prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a chain as a collar for any animal except during training sessions under the direct supervision of the owner or handler. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.210 Ventilation and light requirements.
All animal holding areas shall be constructed to allow a free flow of fresh air. All animals shall have at least ten hours of light per day, except as directed by hibernation, veterinarian advice or professionally accepted practices for the safety and well-being of the animal. Lighting of primary enclosures shall be designed to protect animals from excessive illumination. The duration of illumination shall be appropriate for the species involved. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.220 Veterinary treatment.
All animals shall receive veterinary treatment from a veterinarian licensed by the State of California when such treatment is necessary to alleviate the animal’s suffering or prevent the transmission of disease. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.230 Unnecessary suffering.
No animal shall be subjected to unnecessary suffering or cruelty. Unnecessary suffering or cruelty may be caused by deficiencies in the categories listed above. Unnecessary suffering is also caused by situations which expose an animal to prolonged fear, injury and pain, physical abuse or lack of proper sanitation. The absence of interaction with humans or other animals also causes an animal unnecessary suffering if it results in health and/or temperament problems. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.240 Animal traps.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use any of the following animal traps within the city limits:

(1) Leg-hold steel-jawed traps;

(2) Steel-jawed traps;

(3) Leg-hold traps; and

(4) Saw-toothed or spiked-jaw traps.

(b) If any person is using an animal trap that is not prohibited under subsection (a) of this section, that person shall:

(1) Check the trap, at a minimum, every twelve (12) hours;

(2) Maintain the trap in proper working condition;

(3) Remove, release or transfer the animal from the trap within twelve (12) hours after the animal enters the trap;

(4) Cover or move the trap and the animal so that it is not directly exposed to the elements including, but not limited to, sun, rain, cold or other conditions that may be detrimental to the animal’s health; and

(5) If the animal is to be euthanized, euthanize and dispose of the animal in accordance with the law.

(c) Any person that uses a trap as part of a trap, spay or neuter and release program for cats is exempt from complying with subsection (b)(3) of this section if:

(1) Confinement for more than twelve (12) hours is for the purpose of spaying or neutering the cats and the cats are released as soon as medically practical; and

(2) The cats receive adequate water, food and shelter pursuant to SCCC 6.05.150 through 6.05.170. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.05.250 Slaughtering.
(a) It is unlawful for any person, by any means, to slaughter any animal within the city.

(b) This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such animal by the discharge of firearm by a sworn peace officer if the animal is dangerous or is so badly injured that humanity requires its removal from further suffering and no other disposition is practical.

(c) This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such animal by a licensed veterinarian, pursuant to SCCC 6.30.110(e). (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.10
IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
Sections:

6.10.010    Fees for impounding and keeping.

6.10.020    Redemption of impounded animals.

6.10.030    Notification of impoundment.

6.10.040    Disposition of impounded animals.

6.10.050    Care of impounded animals.

6.10.060    Summary seizure and post-seizure notification.

6.10.070    Hearing prior to animal deprivation.

6.10.080    Post-seizure appeal hearing.

6.10.090    Failure to appeal impoundment.

6.10.100    Mandatory sterilization for multiple impounds.

6.10.010 Fees for impounding and keeping.
(a) An impoundment fee shall be charged to the owner of an animal impounded to defray the costs of impoundment, in an amount fixed by resolution of the City Council.

(b) In addition, a fee for keeping an impounded animal shall be charged in an amount sufficient to defray the actual costs of keeping and caring for the animal, as determined by the Administrator. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.020 Redemption of impounded animals.
The Administrator or animal control officer may permit an owner or other person entitled to custody of an impounded animal to redeem the animal. No animal may be redeemed without payment of the fees for impounding and keeping the animal, and without compliance with the licensing provision of this title. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.030 Notification of impoundment.
The animal control officer will give notice of impoundment to the owner of every animal impounded, if known, by either posting a written notice of the impound in a conspicuous place at the owner’s residence, or personally delivering the notice to the owner on the day of the impound. The notice shall advise the owner that the animal may be forfeited unless the owner contacts the Administrator within five business days. The notice shall set forth a telephone number to contact the Administrator. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.040 Disposition of impounded animals.
(a) No animal may be disposed of until seventy-two (72) hours have elapsed from the time of impoundment, exclusive of the day of impoundment and the days that the impounding facility is closed to the public.

(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an animal which has been determined by a veterinarian licensed by the State of California or by other authorized personnel to be diseased or injured to the extent that emergency veterinary care will not alleviate suffering will be destroyed in accordance with all State and County humane laws as soon as possible. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.050 Care of impounded animals.
The animal control officer shall ensure that all impounded animals receive suitable and adequate food, water and shelter. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.060 Summary seizure and post-seizure notification.
(a) Notwithstanding SCCC 6.05.030, an animal control officer may seize and impound an animal for violation of any provision of this title or State law prior to a hearing in any of the following situations where the owner is not present and where the officer reasonably believes it is necessary:

(1) To protect public health, safety and property;

(2) To protect an animal that is injured, sick or starving and must be cared for; and

(3) To protect an animal from injury which has strayed onto public property or public right-of-way.

(b) Even when the owner of any animal is present, an animal control officer may seize or impound any animal that the officer reasonably believes to be infected with disease transmittable to humans or to be dangerous so as to be a threat to public health, safety or property. Such seizure or impoundment may be made even though the animal is at the time of seizure confined by the person owning or having charge of the animal if the animal control officer reasonably believes that such seizure and impoundment is necessary to protect the public health or safety.

(c) If the owner or person with the right to control the animal wishes to challenge the seizure or impoundment, he or she shall notify the Administrator in writing, within five business days after the seizure or impoundment.

(d) The Administrator will promptly set the time and place for the hearing and will send notice of the hearing by first class United States mail to the party requesting the hearing no later than five business days before the hearing.

(e) The hearing will be conducted as set forth in SCCC 6.10.080. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.070 Hearing prior to animal deprivation.
(a) Except as provided in SCCC 6.05.030 and 6.10.060, the Administrator or animal control officer may not seize or impound any animal without the consent of the owner or person entitled to custody of the animal unless an appeal hearing is held as set forth in SCCC 6.10.080.

(b) If the owner or person who has a right to control an animal refuses to consent to an impoundment of his/her animal, the animal control officer may issue a notice commanding the person to appear before the Administrator at a set time. Failure of a person to appear at the hearing is an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by imprisonment in the court jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both fine and imprisonment, and, in addition, the animal control officer may immediately seize and impound the animal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.080 Post-seizure appeal hearing.
(a) At the hearing, petitioner and the animal control officer may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted as determined by the Hearing Officer. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be supported by the weight of the evidence and shall be final.

(b) After submission of all the evidence, and not more than fifteen (15) days after the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall notify the petitioner in writing of his/her decision. The Hearing Officer may order the animal released without conditions, may designate the animal dangerous and order release with conditions, may order the animal destroyed or may make other orders as the Hearing Officer determines appropriately fulfills the needs of the animal and the safety of the public based on the weight of the evidence and consistent with this title. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. Any release conditions imposed by the Hearing Officer, which may include but shall not be limited to spaying and neutering, shall be solely in the interest of protecting public health, safety and property. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.090 Failure to appeal impoundment.
Any person who fails to appeal any seizure or impoundment by the animal control officer under this chapter within five business days from impoundment shall forfeit all rights of ownership and control of the animal. Final disposition of the animal shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable law. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.10.100 Mandatory sterilization for multiple impounds.
Any unsterilized dog or cat impounded twice or more from the same owner within the lifetime of the animal shall be sterilized at the owner’s expense prior to redemption. At the option of the owner, a private veterinarian may perform the required spaying or neutering. The impounding agency may require that transportation to a private veterinarian be performed by the impounding agency. The owner may request a hearing as set forth in SCCC 6.10.060. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.15
KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS
Sections:

6.15.010    Keeping of certain animals and fowl – Generally.

6.15.020    Nearness to dwelling.

6.15.025    Roosters.

6.15.030    Cows, horses, etc.

6.15.040    Keeping of horses – Restrictions.

6.15.050    Cleaning and maintenance of corrals, barns and stables, etc.

6.15.060    Sanitary conditions.

6.15.070    Quantity of animals.

6.15.010 Keeping of certain animals and fowl – Generally.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any equine animal, any bovine animal, any sheep, hog or goat, any live hare, rabbit, chicken, duck, turkey, goose, pigeon or other fowl except as provided in this chapter.

(b) Any person maintaining any such animal or fowl within the city shall keep the premises upon which such is kept fenced, or if such animal is staked, so as to keep the animal or fowl from leaving the premises upon which such is kept, and shall not permit such animal or fowl to run at large upon the street or upon the property of any other person. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.020 Nearness to dwelling.
(a) No person shall keep any live hare, rabbit, chicken, turkey, goose, duck, pigeon, game bird or other fowl or exotic animal within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling unit other than the dwelling unit of the owner of such animal or fowl, without a permit.

(b) The permit mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall be issued by the housing coordinator, and only when he finds that each such animal may be maintained at such location without injury to its health and the health and safety of any person. If the housing coordinator does not so find and is not satisfied that the animal may be so maintained without injury to its health and the health and safety of any person, no such permit shall be issued. The failure of the applicant to present concurrently with an application for such permit, written approval of an adult person from each dwelling unit any part of which is within fifty (50) feet in any direction of the proposed location of any such animal where the dwelling unit provides housing for an adult, may in itself provide sufficient cause to deny issuance of the permit.

(c) The permit shall be issued by the housing coordinator only after he/she is assured to his/her satisfaction that each such animal will be maintained at such location in compliance with the following conditions:

(1) Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury.

(2) Sanitary condition of all animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall comply with SCCC 6.15.050.

(3) Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of animals and to provide appropriate protection from the elements.

(4) All animal buildings, cages and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein.

(5) Each animal shall be maintained in a good healthy condition in a manner not causing injury to the health of any animal or the health and safety of any person.

(d) Said permit shall set forth whatever conditions the housing coordinator may deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(e) Each permit is subject to suspension and revocation whenever an animal is maintained in such a manner that any of the conditions of subsection (c) of this section is violated and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.115 SCCC.

(f) In case of denial, suspension or revocation of each such permit, the application for the permit and the permit holder shall be advised of rights to appeal provided in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.025 Roosters.
No rooster over four months old shall be kept on any premises within the city, unless the premises involved are operating on a commercial basis in conformance with existing zoning regulations and State statutes governing their operations. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.030 Cows, horses, etc.
No person shall keep any bovine or equine animal or any hog, sheep or goat within one hundred (100) feet of any dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner of such animal, or within fifty (50) feet of the dwelling of such owner. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.040 Keeping of horses – Restrictions.
No horse shall be kept or maintained within the city except in an enclosure the outer limits of which shall be at least forty (40) feet from any inhabited or habitable dwelling. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.050 Cleaning and maintenance of corrals, barns and stables, etc.
Every owner, lessee or tenant of any corral, barn, stable, stall or apartment in which any horse, cow or other animal is or shall be kept or of any place in which manure or any liquid discharge of any such horse, cow or other animal shall collect or accumulate, shall cause such manure or liquid to be removed and shall, at least once in every fifteen (15) days, cause such corral, barn, stable, stall or apartment to be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected and shall at all times keep the same in a clean and wholesome condition. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.060 Sanitary conditions.
No person shall, at any time, maintain any lot or other premises, or any portion thereof in the city, upon which any animal is kept, in an unsanitary condition. No person shall maintain any such lot or other premises, or portion thereof, upon which any animal is kept, in such condition as to cause the same to be infested with flies or insects or increase any noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.15.070 Quantity of animals.
(a) Not more than six animals, in all, including hares, rabbits, guinea pigs, feline, bovine, sheep, hogs, goat, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, game birds, or other fowl or any combination thereof shall be kept on any premises within the city, unless the premises involved are operating on a commercial basis in conformance with existing zoning regulations and State statutes governing their operations.

(b) The City Manager may allow more than six animals, but no more than twenty-five (25) animals, upon finding that the animals will be maintained in a healthy and sanitary condition, and will not be foreseeably injurious to the health, or indecent or offensive to the senses so as to unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of neighboring properties. In making this determination, the City Manager shall consider:

(1) The lot size of the premises on which the animals will be kept;

(2) Whether or not the animals will be located or housed in a manner that will eliminate views, noise or odors to the adjoining properties;

(3) The animals can be cared for in a manner that produces no noticeable noise or odor beyond the premises on which they will be kept;

(4) The animals are restricted to a portion of the premises that is not proximate to any adjoining residences;

(5) Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury;

(6) Sanitary condition of all animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall comply with SCCC 6.05.140;

(7) Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of animals and to provide appropriate protection from the elements;

(8) All animal buildings, cages and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein;

(9) Each animal shall be maintained in a good healthy condition in a manner not causing injury to the health of any animals or the health and safety of any person; and

(10) Said permit shall set forth whatever conditions the City Manager may deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(c) At least ten days before making a decision on whether or not to allow more than six animals, the City Manager shall mail a notice by first class United States mail addressed to the addresses of all residential parcels located within fifty (50) feet of the boundaries of the premises where the animals would be kept. The notice shall describe the nature of the exception being requested and the street address of the property where the animals would be kept. The notice shall further advise the recipients that they must contact the City Manager within ten days from the date the notice was mailed with any concerns they may have about the requested exception in writing or by telephone at an address and telephone number provided in the notice.

(d) At the end of the ten-day period, and no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for more than six animals, the City Manager shall render his or her decision, which shall be final.

(e) Any exception granted pursuant to this section may be revoked by the City Manager upon finding that the additional animals are not being maintained in a healthy or sanitary condition, or are creating a condition that constitutes a public nuisance. At least ten days prior to revoking any approval for more than six animals, the City Manager shall notify the owner of the animals, by first class United States mail, of his/her intention to consider revocation of the approval, and the basis for that revocation. The notice shall also set forth an address and telephone number at which the owner can contact the City Manager, and shall advise the owner that if the owner opposes the revocation, the owner must contact the City Manager within ten days from the date the letter was mailed. The City Manager’s decision on the revocation shall be final. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.20
ABATEMENT OF ANIMAL PESTS
Sections:

6.20.010    Definitions.

6.20.020    Infestation with animal pests, insects, etc.

6.20.030    Dangerous or insanitary buildings, etc. – Abatement.

6.20.040    Complaint and hearing on dangerous or insanitary condition.

6.20.050    Abatement proceedings.

6.20.060    Expense of abatement.

6.20.070    Assessment against property – Recordation of lien.

6.20.080    Lien to draw interest – Statute of limitations.

6.20.090    Alternative method of collection.

6.20.100    Collected with City taxes.

6.20.010 Definitions.
The word “Building Official” shall mean the Director of Planning and Inspection or his/her regularly authorized deputy. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.020 Infestation with animal pests, insects, etc.
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any real property or premises in the city to suffer or permit said real property or premises, or any part thereof, to be maintained in a condition so infected or infested with animal pests, rodents, bugs, beetles or insects that there is caused thereby a danger of infection or infestation of, or an actual infection or infestation of, any inhabited and/or habitable dwellings with animal pests, rodents, bugs, beetles or insects. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.030 Dangerous or insanitary buildings, etc. – Abatement.
Every dangerous or insanitary condition which may exist upon any premises in the city may be abated by the Building Official and/or Health Officer in the manner provided herein. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.040 Complaint and hearing on dangerous or insanitary condition.
The Building Official and/or Health Officer may file with the City Manager a written complaint, setting forth facts showing that a dangerous or insanitary condition exists upon any premises in the city. Upon receipt of such complaint, the City Manager shall present the same to the City Council, and the City Council shall forthwith by resolution or motion fix a time and place for a public hearing on such complaint.

The Building Official and/or Health Officer shall cause a copy of such resolution and complaint to be served upon the person in possession of such premises, or upon the owner thereof, not less than five days prior to the time fixed for such hearing. Such service may be made by delivery of a copy of such resolution and complaint to the owner or occupant personally, or by enclosing the same in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the occupant at such premises, or to the owner at his/her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City and depositing the same in the United States mail. Service shall be deemed completed at the time of the deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.050 Abatement proceedings.
Upon the date at the place and hour fixed for the hearing on such complaint, the City Council shall hear such evidence as may be presented by any interested party. Such hearing may be continued from time to time by the City Council. Upon completion of such hearing, the City Council shall either dismiss the complaint or shall direct that the dangerous or insanitary conditions be abated. The decisions of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. The Building Official and/or Health Officer shall forthwith give written notice, in the manner provided in SCCC 6.20.040, to the owner or occupant of said premises to abate such condition forthwith. If such abatement is not commenced within five days thereafter, and diligently prosecuted to completion, the Building Official and/or Health Officer shall cause the same to be abated.

The City Council shall order to be paid, and the Auditor shall audit, and the Treasurer shall pay all sums which may be necessarily expended by the Building Official and/or Health Officer in abating such condition. The City Council shall further order the manner in which said sums are to be collected in event said sums are not paid within five days of giving notice prescribed in SCCC 6.20.060 for requesting payment.

In lieu of employing a contractor or other person to abate such condition, the Building Official and/or Health Officer may call upon the Street Department or other departments of the City to abate such condition. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.060 Expense of abatement.
The expense incurred by the Building Official and/or Health Officer or any department of the City in the abatement of any dangerous or insanitary condition shall be assessed against the real property upon which the same was located. The Building Official and/or Health Officer shall give the owner or occupant of such premises a written notice in the manner provided in SCCC 6.20.040, showing the itemized cost of such abatement, and requesting payment thereof within five days after such notice. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.070 Assessment against property – Recordation of lien.
If the amount of such expense as shown in such statement is not paid to the Building Official and/or Health Officer within five days after such notice, the Building Official and/or Health Officer may record in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, State of California, a certificate substantially in the following form, to wit:

NOTICE TO LIEN

Pursuant to authority vested in me by resolution No. ________ of the City Council of the City of Santa Clara, passed on the ________ day of ________, 20___, and the provisions of Ordinance No. ________, I did on the ________ day of ________, 20___, cause a dangerous (insanitary) condition located upon the hereinafter described real property to be abated at the expense of the owner thereof, in the amount of $________, and that said amount has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the City of Santa Clara does hereby claim a lien upon the hereinafter described real property in said amount; the same shall be a lien upon the said real property until said sum with interest thereon at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date of the recordation of this lien in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, State of California, has been paid in full. The real property hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

(Insert description of property)

Dated this ____ day of ________, 20___

_________________________________
Building Official and/or Health Official
City of Santa Clara

And the same shall be a lien against the property described therein until the amount thereof, plus accrued interest, has been paid in full. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.080 Lien to draw interest – Statute of limitations.
The amount of such lien shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of the recordation of such lien in the Office of the County Recorder, and the statute of limitations shall not run against the right of the City of Santa Clara to enforce the payment of such lien. If any such lien is not paid, the City may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.090 Alternative method of collection.
As an alternative method of collection of the amount of lien, the City Council, after ordering to be paid all sums necessarily expended in abating such condition, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the assessor and the tax collector of the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of those officers to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or parcel of land. If the City taxes are collected by the County officials, the notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the County assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.20.100 Collected with City taxes.
Thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levying, collection and enforcement of the City taxes and County taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.25
(Reserved)
Chapter 6.28
BEEKEEPING
Sections:

6.28.010    Notice required when moving apiaries.

6.28.020    Natural hives – Notice.

6.28.030    Keeping and maintenance of apiaries.

6.28.040    Identification of premises.

6.28.050    Notice, correction of violation, penalties.

6.28.010 Notice required when moving apiaries.
No apiary shall be moved into the city or within the confines of the city without notice in writing being given to the City Manager within five days from the date movement is begun, stating:

(a) The number of colonies of bees to be moved into or within the city;

(b) The location of the property in the city to which bees are to be moved, and the name and address of the owner of the property or person in possession thereof;

(c) The distance of the proposed location of the apiary from the nearest public road intersection. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. 1958 § 1, 8-23-16).

6.28.020 Natural hives – Notice.
Property owners or occupants thereof in the city shall give immediate notice to the City Manager of the establishment by bees of natural hives, so that the same shall be removed in accordance with approved methods and to avoid harm to persons and property. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. 1958 § 1, 8-23-16).

6.28.030 Keeping and maintenance of apiaries.
No person shall keep or maintain any hive of bees in the city except under the following conditions:

(a) No more than two hives may be maintained on any lot or parcel, unless the City Manager, in his or her sole discretion, consents in writing to a higher amount.

(b) No hive shall be kept on any lands without the written consent of the owner or person in possession thereof.

(c) The owner’s name, address, and location of all such hives must be registered with the office of the Santa Clara County Agriculture Commission.

(d) No hive may be kept or maintained within ten feet of any side property line on the lot or parcel upon which such hives are situated, or within twenty (20) feet of any dwelling unit other than that occupied by the person maintaining the hive or hives, unless the owner or persons in possession of the adjacent property have given written permission to the location of such apiary at a closer distance.

(e) No hive may be kept or maintained within any required front or side setbacks.

(f) No hive may be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any public road.

(g) A constant water supply adequate to the needs of all hives located on the premises must be maintained on those premises.

(h) All hives must be oriented so that their entrances face a house or building on the premises and must be surrounded by a solid fence not less than six feet in height, located no farther than thirty (30) feet from such hives. Said fence may be open on that side facing a house or building on the premises. This condition may be met by locating such hives upon or affixed to a building or structure so that their entrances are more than ten feet from the ground and face a house or building on the premises, or on a rooftop on a second or higher story of any building or structure and the hives are more than five feet from the nearest side of the building or structure and at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest adjacent building or structure. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. 1958 § 1, 8-23-16).

6.28.040 Identification of premises.
Every person maintaining any apiary on premises other than their own residence shall identify the apiary by affixing and maintaining signs thereto showing the name of owner or person in possession of the apiary, the owner’s or person’s address and telephone number or a statement that the owner or person has no phone. These signs shall be prominently placed and maintained on each entrance side of the apiary and immediately adjoining the same and lettered in black at least one inch in height on a white or light background. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. 1958 § 1, 8-23-16. Formerly 6.28.050).

6.28.050 Notice, correction of violation, penalties.
Any person transporting or maintaining an apiary who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be given verbal or written notice by the City Manager (or designee) or any law enforcement officer. A written notice shall also be posted on the location for forty-eight (48) hours, and it is unlawful for the owner or person in possession of such apiary to fail to correct the violations within that period. Failure to comply will result in the issuance of a citation for violating this chapter. Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this title, however, shall not authorize the keeping of bees in areas where they are not otherwise allowed by law. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11; Ord. 1958 § 1, 8-23-16. Formerly 6.28.060).

Chapter 6.30
DOGS AND CATS
Sections:

6.30.010    Restraint of dogs.

6.30.020    Maximum number of dogs, cats or litters.

6.30.030    Vaccination of dogs and cats.

6.30.040    License required.

6.30.050    License fees.

6.30.060    Issuance of license.

6.30.070    Metal tags.

6.30.080    License period.

6.30.090    Record of licenses.

6.30.100    Presentation of license on request.

6.30.110    Veterinarian responsibilities.

6.30.120    Dogs in posted off-leash areas.

6.30.130    Barking dogs.

6.30.140    Hearing regarding classification as dangerous.

6.30.150    Restrictions of dogs designated as “dangerous.”

6.30.160    Registration of dangerous dogs.

6.30.010 Restraint of dogs.
The owner of any dog shall keep and maintain such dog under their own physical restraint by use of a leash not to exceed six feet in length, or shall keep such dog sufficiently confined behind a fence of reasonable height. This section shall not apply to the following:

(a) Guide dogs for the blind or deaf while performing their duties or service dogs in formal training programs;

(b) Dogs participating in field or obedience trials or exhibitions;

(c) Dogs assisting their owner/handler in legal hunting or in the herding of livestock;

(d) Dogs assisting a security guard or assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement activities;

(e) Dogs being trained for any of the above purposes on private land with permission of the landowner, so long as such dogs are under direct control of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provision of law. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.020 Maximum number of dogs, cats or litters.
(a) No person shall keep or maintain more than a total of three adult dogs and/or cats (any combination) over four months of age, at any street address.

(b) No person shall keep or maintain more than one unspayed female dog or one unspayed female cat, at any street address.

(c) A female dog or cat shall be rebuttably presumed to be unspayed, unless the owner provides evidence of spaying. Written certification from a licensed veterinarian that an animal cannot be spayed for health reasons or is incapable of breeding shall be deemed a satisfactory substitution for a certificate showing an animal is spayed.

(d) No person shall allow the parturition and rearing of more than one litter (dogs or cats) in any one calendar year from females owned by him/her or maintained on his/her premises.

(e) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide veterinarian licensed by the State of California for the practice of veterinary medicine, or a pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, animal shelter or animal menagerie that holds a valid permit from the Administrator. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.030 Vaccination of dogs and cats.
Every owner of a dog or cat over four months of age shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Public Health. Revaccination shall be made at such intervals of time as may be prescribed by the State Department of Public Health. Compliance with the provision of this section shall be a condition to the issuance or renewal of dog and cat licenses. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.040 License required.
(a) No person shall maintain or board any cat or dog four months of age or older that has not been licensed pursuant to the provisions of this title, except:

(b) A license shall not be required for an animal owned or under the control of a nonresident of the City that is to be kept in the City for less than thirty (30) days in any twelve (12) month period.

(c) A license shall not be required for cats or dogs temporarily brought into the City for entry into an event, show or exhibition scheduled not more than ten days thereafter. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.050 License fees.
(a) Dog and cat license fees, including reduced fees for spayed females or neutered males, for each dog or cat within the City shall be those fixed by resolution of the City Council. Dog and cat license fees shall not be refundable in whole or in part.

(b) The City Manager may require the submission of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that a dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, or cannot be spayed or neutered for health reasons and is incapable of breeding, or is incapable of breeding, prior to issuance of a license at a lesser fee.

(c) An additional fee, in an amount determined by the City Council, shall be paid for a license purchased more than sixty (60) days after expiration of a previously issued license or sixty (60) days after notice to the owner to obtain a license.

(d) Licenses and tags for dogs used principally for the purpose of guiding persons who are blind or deaf, and for dogs used in law enforcement by any governmental agencies shall be issued upon request without charge.

(e) The City Manager may waive the license fee for only one spayed or neutered dog or cat kept in a household where the owner of the dog or cat is over the age of sixty-five (65) years, provided such owner presents or qualifies for a State Medi-Cal card. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.060 Issuance of license.
Upon payment of the license fee and the presentation of a valid certificate of vaccination by a duly licensed doctor of veterinary medicine, the Administrator shall issue a license stating the name and residence of the person to whom the license is issued, the amount paid, the date of issuance and expiration thereof, the date of expiration of the vaccination, and a description of the dog or cat for which such license is issued, together with the number of the metallic tag accompanying the same. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.070 Metal tags.
(a) With each dog or cat license, the Administrator shall issue a metal tag bearing an identifying number and the words and letters “DOG/CAT LICENSE SILICON VALLEY ANIMAL CONTROL.” Each dog or cat shall wear the metal tag issued for it at all times except when being shown at a dog or cat show, exhibition or event. In the event it is necessary to issue a duplicate tag, a fee, set by the City Council, shall be charged to the owner.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a metal tag issued pursuant to this section to any dog or cat other than the dog or cat for which it was issued. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.080 License period.
(a) The term of any dog or cat license issued hereunder shall commence on the date of the issuance of the license and shall terminate twelve (12), twenty-four (24), or thirty-six (36) months from the date of issue, depending on the expiration of the dog or cat’s rabies vaccination.

(b) Dog or cat licenses may be renewed upon expiration, upon proof of a new rabies vaccination. When a license is renewed after the expiration date, the new license period shall begin on the expiration date of the previous period. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.090 Record of licenses.
The Administrator shall keep a record of all licenses issued, together with a description of the dog or cat for which such license is issued. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.100 Presentation of license on request.
Upon request of any authorized animal control employee or any peace officer, the owner or person having control of a dog or cat shall present the license. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.110 Veterinarian responsibilities.
(a) Every veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs to be vaccinated in the City any dog with an anti-rabies vaccine shall use a form provided by the City to certify that such animal has been vaccinated.

(b) Every veterinarian shall provide to the animal owner a copy of the anti-rabies vaccination form for use in obtaining a license for the animal.

(c) Every veterinarian shall submit to the Administrator a copy of the County-approved anti-rabies vaccination form, within ten days of the beginning of each month, for any dog which he or she vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine during the previous month.

(d) Every veterinarian operating a business within the city shall conspicuously display a sign to notify dog owners that their animals must be licensed.

(e) The humane destruction of an animal must be accomplished by a person who has completed a training curriculum of at least eight hours, provided by a veterinarian, a registered veterinary technician, or an individual who has been certified by the California Animal Control Directors Association and the State Humane Association of California to train persons in the humane use of sodium pentobarbital. The curriculum shall include humane animal restraint techniques, sodium pentobarbital injection methods and procedures, verification of death training, safety training and stress management for personnel, and record keeping and regulation compliance for sodium pentobarbital. At least five hours of the curriculum shall consist of hands-on training. The trained person may only use sodium pentobarbital to perform the humane destruction, per California Code of Regulations, Title 16, Section 2039. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.120 Dogs in posted off-leash areas.
The exemption from the requirements for the restraint of dogs as set forth in SCCC 6.30.010 shall apply only if all of the following conditions are met:

(a) No dog shall be in a posted off-leash area except when in the charge, care, custody, or control of a person at least thirteen (13) years old.

(b) No animals other than dogs shall be in any posted off-leash area. Dogs are only permitted in the posted off-leash area during posted hours of operation.

(c) No person shall have more than two dogs in a posted off-leash area at any one time.

(d) Any dog in a posted off-leash area must be at least four months of age, vaccinated for rabies, and currently licensed by the City’s animal services division or other jurisdiction. All persons entering the posted off-leash area are responsible for ensuring that their dog is not sick, in heat, injured, less than four months of age, or displaying aggressive behavior toward other dogs or humans in the posted off-leash area.

(e) Any person having charge, care, custody or control of a dog in a posted off-leash area shall:

(1) Carry at all times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal of dog feces;

(2) Promptly remove and properly dispose of any waste deposited by the dog;

(3) Quiet or remove the dog if it disrupts or disturbs the reasonable and comfortable use of the area;

(4) Have in his/her possession a leash for such dog that shall be worn by the dog, and physically held by the owner, at all times the dog is not in the posted off-leash area; and

(5) Comply with all other applicable State and local laws, including without limitation those that govern the health, safety and maintenance of dogs.

Compliance with this section shall not relieve any person of liability for damages arising out of his/her use of a posted off-leash area. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.130 Barking dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or maintain any dog in the City which disturbs the peace and quiet of one or more persons in the immediate neighborhood by loud barking or making unusual noises. “Loud barking” means barking, howling or baying by day or night at frequent and/or extended periods of time so as to be a nuisance to one or more persons occupying a house or houses in an immediate neighborhood and preventing such person or persons from the comfortable enjoyment of their homes. “Loud barking” does not mean barking where a dog is in the act of protecting or resisting trespassers upon its premises. The burden of proof of such an act of protection or resistance to trespassers by a dog is upon the person owning, harboring, controlling, maintaining, possessing or having charge of the dog. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.140 Hearing regarding classification as dangerous.
(a) Any dog which exhibits any behavior described in SCCC 6.05.010(d)(2) may be determined to be a dangerous dog. The status shall be established after a hearing as hereinafter provided. Proceedings may be instituted by:

(1) Observation by the animal control officer;

(2) A complaint sworn by a person or persons who observed the behavior complained of.

(b) Hearings for classification as dangerous shall be conducted as follows:

(1) The owner shall be given written notice, by first class mail with return receipt requested or personal service, of the date, time and place of the hearing at least five business days in advance of the hearing date, as well as the facts which are the basis of the complaint. The owner shall be notified of the restrictions which will apply to the animal if it is classified as a dangerous animal. Written notice of date, time, place and reason for the hearing shall also be mailed by first class United States mail to all residential parcels located within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the owner’s property at least five business days in advance of the hearing date.

(2) The owner may waive his/her right to a hearing by filing a written waiver with SVACA, whereupon SVACA shall make the findings and apply the sanctions provided in this title.

(3) If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing shall nevertheless proceed, and an appropriate order shall be issued.

(4) The hearing shall be conducted before a Hearing Officer. The appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be by the Administrator. Any person designated to serve as a Hearing Officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law.

(5) The Hearing Officer may continue hearings, based on good cause, as established by one of the parties to the hearing or if the Hearing Officer independently determines that due process has not been adequately afforded.

(6) The Hearing Officer shall consider all relevant evidence presented at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The Hearing Officer shall also consider circumstances of mitigation, as well as the owner’s and animal’s history. If the hearing is held as a result of a sworn complaint, at least one of the complainants shall appear and testify at the hearing or the complaint shall be dismissed.

(7) After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first class return receipt mail. The Hearing Officer shall make a written determination within fifteen (15) calendar days after the hearing is concluded, unless the animal has been seized, in which case the determination shall be made within seven calendar days of the hearing.

(8) The Hearing Officer may also prohibit the owner from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for up to three years, if it is determined, after a dangerous dog hearing, that ownership or possession of a dog by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. Thereafter, such person must demonstrate to the Administrator that he or she is capable of directly restraining the dog he or she seeks to own, possess, control or have custody of.

(9) If the owner or keeper of the animal contests the dangerous dog determination, he/she may, within five business days of receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the superior court. The owner or keeper of the animal shall serve notice of the appeal to the City either personally or by first class mail, return receipt requested.

(10) The determination of the court hearing the appeal shall be final and conclusive upon all parties.

(11) The owner shall comply with all conditions imposed by the animal control officer pending the hearing.

(12) The City Council may establish a filing fee by resolution for requests for hearings under this section. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.150 Restrictions of dogs designated as “dangerous.”
(a) The owner or person with the right to control a dangerous dog shall be required to:

(1) Keep the dog under his/her own physical restraint by:

(A) Means of a nonretractable leash not to exceed three feet in length;

(B) Capable of restraining four times the weight of the dog;

(C) Attached to an escape-proof commercial-quality walking harness that fastens securely across the shoulders and mid-chest, encompassing the rib area and upper abdomen of the dog;

(D) No neck collar of any type or material will be sufficient;

(E) The dog shall not be leashed or tethered at any time to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or buildings, except when the dog is inside a securely enclosed, escape-proof locked kennel or pen;

(F) The dog shall be securely muzzled with a device constructed to allow normal respiration but impossible for the dog to remove without human assistance; and

(G) The dog shall be under the direct physical control of a person who is at least eighteen (18) years old and who is physically capable of restraining the dog.

(2) The City Manager may require the use of specially marked or colored leash and collar or harness for identification of dangerous dogs.

(3) The dog shall be spayed or neutered.

(4) The dog shall have a microchip implant for identification purposes.

(5) The owner of such animal shall immediately keep such animal in a securely enclosed, escape-proof, locked kennel or pen, the location and placement of which shall be determined by the Hearing Officer. Such kennel, pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached. The kennel or pen must be constructed in a manner and of such materials so that it cannot be broken down by any action of the confined dog. All structures used for confinement of dangerous dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock of sufficient strength to ensure confinement of the dog. Such structures must be erected upon a secure bottom or floor constructed of concrete or other material of sufficient depth to prevent the dog from digging free. Sides of the structure shall be imbedded not less than two feet into the ground behind a solid fence not less than six feet in height. The supporting posts of the structure shall be set in concrete or other material not less than two feet into the ground and no further than six feet apart. The sides and ends of the structure shall be constructed of solid boards or chain-link material not less than six feet in height and securely fastened to the top and bottom of the structure. The structure shall not be constructed or maintained in any front or required side yard and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. The dog(s) confined therein shall be afforded adequate protection from the elements and kept in a humane manner.

(6) The dog must be confined by means of a house, apartment, building or similar structure wherein the windows and doors are secured to prevent the dog from exiting without the assistance of the owner or person having a right to control such dog.

(7) Any owner or person having a right to control the dog shall seek pre-approval from the City Manager for a dog obedience class and attend the dog obedience class with the dog that exhibited behavior that led to this designation.

(8) The owner must post a sign advising of the presence of a dangerous dog at the entrance to every place wherein any such dog is confined. The sign must be capable of being understood by a child with the normal reading skills of a second grader.

(9) No person shall transport a dangerous dog except in a locked animal carrier equivalent in construction quality to those used by commercial air carriers.

(10) No person shall leave a dangerous dog unconfined or unattended in or about any motor vehicle.

It is understood that the provision of subsection (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to the owner or person with the right to control a dangerous dog living in an apartment or condominium.

(b) This section shall not apply to the following:

(1) Guide dogs for people with visual or auditory disabilities or who otherwise use a dog to accommodate a disability or service dogs in formal training programs;

(2) Dogs participating in field or obedience trials or conformation exhibitions;

(3) Dogs assisting their owner/handler in legal hunting activities or in the herding of livestock;

(4) Dogs assisting a security guard or assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement activities; and

(5) Dogs being trained for any of the above-described purposes on private property with the permission of the landowner, so long as these dogs are under the direct control of individuals who assure that they do not violate any other provision of law. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.30.160 Registration of dangerous dogs.
(a) Every owner of a dangerous dog over four months of age shall be required to register the dog with the City Manager. Such registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. A registration fee, and a fee to be charged for multiple inspections of required confinement facilities for such dogs, shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council.

(b) Every owner of a dangerous dog over four months of age shall be required to obtain a public liability insurance policy from an insurer licensed to practice in the State of California, a single-incident amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or provide another surety that would provide for similar financial compensation to anyone whose person or property is injured by the dog, in a form and amount satisfactory to the City Manager. Such owner shall give written notice to the City Manager of any cancellation or material change in such policy or surety at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of such cancellation or material change.

(c) The owner or keeper shall notify SVACA within twenty-four (24) hours if a dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or has died.

(d) The owner or person having a right to control the dog may not move the place of residence of the dog within the city, sell, trade, give away or otherwise transfer ownership and/or the right to control the dog to a person residing within the city, unless the City Manager has approved the dangerous dog registration for the new location or approved the new person assuming ownership and/or right to control the dog.

(e) If the dog owner or person having a right to control the dog decides to sell, trade, give away or otherwise transfer ownership and/or the right to control the dog to a location outside of the city and/or to another person residing outside the city, the person transferring ownership or control shall:

(1) Notify SVACA at least five business days prior to the physical transfer of the dog; and

(2) Provide SVACA with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or new person having a right to control the dog.

(f) An animal control officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and any such officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions hereof.

(g) Owners of dangerous dogs unable to meet the requirements directed by the City Manager shall be required to surrender the dogs to the City Manager for humane destruction or other disposition, at the discretion of the City Manager, unless the City Manager determines that the dog no longer presents any threat to persons or property in the city. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.35
ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

6.35.010    Permit required.

6.35.020    Application for permit.

6.35.025    No kennel within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residence.

6.35.030    Conditions relating to animal facilities.

6.35.040    Expiration and renewal of permit.

6.35.050    Inspection.

6.35.060    Denial or revocation of permit.

6.35.070    Appeal from denial or revocation of permit.

6.35.080    No new permit after denial or revocation.

6.35.090    Permit not transferable.

6.35.100    Animal rescuer registration.

6.35.110    Maintenance of animal rescuer registration.

6.35.120    Adoption of animals.

6.35.010 Permit required.
No person shall conduct, operate or keep any pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment without first obtaining an appropriate permit from the Administrator. The annual permit fee for the above animal facilities shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.020 Application for permit.
(a) An application for a permit to operate and keep a pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter, horse establishment or dangerous animal shall be in writing on a form approved by the Administrator. The applicant shall furnish a list of the types of animals to be maintained or used for any purpose, together with the approximate number of animals of each type.

(b) The Administrator may establish regulations and standards relating to:

(1) The maximum number and species of animals to be kept or maintained on the premises;

(2) The construction, sanitation and maintenance of facilities; and

(3) Any other regulations and standards in conformity with and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter.

Compliance with such rules and regulations shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any permit provided pursuant to this chapter.

(c) Permittee shall maintain a record of the names and addresses of persons from whom animals are received and to whom the animals are sold, traded or given. This shall be available to the Administrator upon request. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.025 No kennel within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residence.
Unless permitted by other provisions of this title, no license to operate any commercial or private kennel, animal shelter or animal establishment within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any dwelling, house, apartment, hotel or other building used for human habitation shall be issued or renewed. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.030 Conditions relating to animal facilities.
Every person who owns, conducts, manages or operates any commercial kennel, private kennel, pet shop, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment shall comply with each of the following conditions:

(a) Housing.

(1) Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals or the escape of animals so contained therein.

(2) Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors; heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals.

(3) All animal rooms, cages, kennels, runs, stalls and corrals shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodation and protection from the weather for the animals kept therein.

(4) All animal facilities shall be constructed and operated in a manner that reasonably protects public health and safety and safety of the animals.

(b) Sanitation.

(1) All animal facilities shall be maintained and operated at all times in a clean and sanitary condition, and in a manner that avoids causing odors or attraction of flies and vermin, and excessive noise.

(c) Care of Animals.

(1) All animals shall be supplied with a quantity of wholesome food suitable for the species and age of the respective animals, as often as the feeding habits of such animals require, sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition. All animals shall have available to them sufficient potable water. Food and water shall be served in separate, clean receptacles.

(2) No animal, except animal(s) in a pasture provided with adequate feed and water, shall be without attention for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. The name, address and telephone number of a person responsible for the animal shall be posted in a conspicuous place, visible from outside the facility or at the main gate of a pasture where animals are kept, unless the owner or attendant of the animal(s) is immediately available on the premises.

(3) All sick, diseased or injured animals shall be isolated from healthy animals at all times and shall be given proper medical treatment. The Administrator may order the operator of the facility to immediately seek licensed veterinary treatment for any animal.

(4) All animals shall be treated in a humane manner.

(d) Compliance.

(1) The Administrator shall have the authority to enter the animal facility when he/she has reason to believe that the provisions of the permit, this title or applicable State laws are being violated. The failure of the operator to consent to the entry shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of the permit.

(2) Failure of an applicant or a permit holder to comply with any of the provisions of the permit, this title or applicable State law, shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any permit, either original or renewal, or for revocation of a permit. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.040 Expiration and renewal of permit.
(a) Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit.

(b) Upon failure to make application for the renewal of a permit within thirty (30) days of the expiration of a permit, the applicant shall pay an additional ten dollar ($10.00) penalty for late renewal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.050 Inspection.
As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a permit under this chapter, the Administrator shall have the authority to inspect at any reasonable time the animal facility. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.060 Denial or revocation of permit.
The Administrator may deny or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the following situations:

(a) Whenever determined by inspection that any animal facility fails to meet any of the conditions of the permit, this chapter or applicable State law.

(b) Whenever there is reason to believe that the applicant or permit holder has willfully withheld or falsified any information required for a permit.

(c) If the applicant or permit holder has been convicted by a court of law of more than two violations of this title in a twelve (12) month period, of State laws relating to animals or public nuisance caused by animals, or has been convicted of cruelty to animals in this or any other state within the previous five years. For the purposes of this section, bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.070 Appeal from denial or revocation of permit.
The procedure provided for appeals in Chapter 2.115 SCCC shall apply. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.080 No new permit after denial or revocation.
If a permit has been denied or revoked, the Administrator will not accept a new permit application from the same person for the same activity at the same location less than six months after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant shows, and the Administrator finds, by inspection and/or investigation, that the grounds upon which the first application was denied or the permit revoked no longer exist. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.090 Permit not transferable.
Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.100 Animal rescuer registration.
(a) Any person or organization that maintains more than the number of adult animals allowed under SCCC 6.30.020 shall register with SVACA as an animal rescuer. In order to register as an animal rescuer, the applicant must provide SVACA with the following information:

(1) Verifiable proof of membership in or status as a State of California not-for-profit corporation that meets the requirements of Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) and is in good standing with the State of California;

(2) Verifiable proof that animal adoption and placement of rescued animals with a new and permanent owner in a new home is one of its primary organizational goals and proof of a history of placement of animals with new and permanent owners in new homes;

(3) The location and contact information of the rescue work to be performed and the identity of the person(s) responsible for the care of the animals at that location;

(4) Payment of the registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council;

(5) Agreement from the applicant to abide by the requirements set forth in SCCC 6.35.030; and

(6) Agreement from the applicant to any other conditions reasonably necessary for the proper care and maintenance of the animals. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.110 Maintenance of animal rescuer registration.
(a) In order to maintain a valid animal rescuer registration, the animal rescuer shall comply with each of the following requirements:

(1) Rescue work such as the temporary housing and care of domestic animals shall be performed in conformity with all standards of animal care and housing set forth by State and local law;

(2) Rescue work shall not create a public nuisance;

(3) The animal rescuer shall cooperate with the animal services division during investigations of complaints and inspections of animal areas; and

(4) The animal rescuer shall limit the number of animals maintained at the registered location if the Administrator deems limitations are necessary because of space, finance, effect on surrounding area, history or any other criteria relevant to the animal rescuer’s ability to maintain the animals.

(b) The Administrator may revoke the animal rescuer registration if the holder of the registration fails at any time to satisfy one or more of the requirements specified in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.35.120 Adoption of animals.
(a) Any person adopting an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat from any Humane Society animal shelter, public animal shelter or Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals shelter in the County of Santa Clara shall have such animal spayed or neutered on or before a date specified in the adoption agreement unless a licensed veterinarian states in writing that the date specified in the adoption agreement is inappropriate for the animal in question. On submission of such written statement to the person at such shelter responsible for ensuring compliance with this section, the adoption agreement will be modified accordingly.

(b) As a condition for adoption, the person adopting an animal may be required to deposit with the shelter an amount sufficient to cover the cost of spaying or neutering such animal by a veterinarian or spaying or altering clinic designated by the person adopting the animal. The deposit shall be forwarded to the veterinarian or clinic upon receipt by the pound or shelter of a notice from the veterinarian or clinic that the cat or dog has been spayed or neutered. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.40
DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS
Sections:

6.40.010    Permit for dangerous animals.

6.40.020    Permit denial.

6.40.030    Permit period and fee.

6.40.010 Permit for dangerous animals.
(a) No person shall keep, have, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire a dangerous or exotic animal without first obtaining a permit from the Administrator. The application for a permit, permit conditions, inspection, denial, revocation and appeal shall be the same as set forth in SCCC 6.35.020, 6.35.030 and 6.35.050 through 6.35.090.

(b) No permit shall be required of any zoo, university, college, governmental research agency, duly incorporated Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), humane society or animal control agency under the direction of the City, or other bona fide scientific institution, as determined by the Administrator, engaging in scientific or public health research. For the purposes of this title, a zoo shall be considered any organization that exhibits animals to the general public at regular specified hours, equaling at least thirty (30) hours a week for thirty-six (36) weeks a year, and whose animals, whether maintained for exhibit purposes or not, are not for sale to private individuals.

(c) The owner of a dangerous or exotic animal shall post at the entrances to the property where the animal is kept with a legible sign at least twelve (12) inches square, warning persons of a dangerous animal. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.40.020 Permit denial.
(a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Administrator may deny or revoke a permit to keep or maintain any dangerous or exotic animal when, in his or her opinion:

(1) Any such animal may not be kept or maintained without endangering the safety of any person(s) or property; or

(2) The keeping of the animal would constitute a public nuisance; or

(3) The animal would be subject to suffering, neglect, cruelty or abuse.

(b) The Administrator, in his/her discretion, may require any such animal to be properly caged, tethered or restrained in zoo-type facilities that meet or are in addition to, or more restrictive than, State guidelines issued under the provisions of Section 671.3 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations and Federal standards issued under Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the keeping of dangerous or exotic animals where zoning provisions or State law would prohibit such keeping. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.40.030 Permit period and fee.
The fee for a permit to keep or maintain one or more dangerous or exotic animals shall be set by the City Council and shall be valid for a twelve (12) month term. The permit shall expire and be renewable as set forth in SCCC 6.35.040. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.45
SALE OF ANIMALS
Sections:

6.45.010    Sale of cats or dogs.

6.45.020    Immunization.

6.45.030    Return of dog or cat.

6.45.040    Location of sale.

6.45.010 Sale of cats or dogs.
(a) No person or establishment other than a licensed or County-operated animal shelter shall sell, exchange or barter any cat or dog less than eight weeks of age. Proof of age of the dog or cat may be required by the Administrator. Proof of age may include but not be limited to a certification by a licensed veterinarian attesting to the animal’s age.

(b) Any person who provides or offers any dog or cat to the public, whether or not for compensation, shall provide to the prospective owner, free of charge, information related to pet care and ownership, including information on County laws pertaining to animal control and spay/neuter programs available in the County. This information shall be prepared and made available either free of charge or at cost by the Administrator.

(c) Any person offering a dog for sale, barter, exchange or adoption, whether or not for compensation, shall disclose to any prospective owner, information regarding the City licensing requirements applicable to such animal.

(d) No person shall give away any dog or cat as a prize or as an inducement to enter any contest, lottery, drawing, game or competition.

(e) No person shall give away any dog or cat as an inducement to enter a place of business or to enter into a business arrangement. This prohibition shall not apply to any licensed veterinarian who offers dogs or cats for sale or adoption.

(f) No person shall sell, barter, exchange or offer for adoption, whether or not for compensation, any dog or cat to any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, without the written permission of the minor’s parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.45.020 Immunization.
All cats or dogs over eight weeks of age, before they are sold, must be immunized against common disease; in the case of dogs against distemper and parvovirus; in the case of cats against panleukopenia, rhinotracheitis, calicivirus and chlamydia. The seller of a dog or cat shall provide to the buyer at the time of sale a signed statement from the seller attesting to the date of vaccination and the seller’s knowledge of the animal’s health. Such statement shall also include the animal’s immunization history, and the record of any known disease, sickness or internal or external parasites that the animal is afflicted with at the time of transfer of ownership, including treatment and medication. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.45.030 Return of dog or cat.
(a) Any person purchasing a dog or cat from a person or establishment required to be licensed or registered pursuant to this chapter may, within five days of such purchase, cause such animal to be examined by a veterinarian licensed by the State of California and if such examination reveals clinical signs of a contagious or infectious disease or serious congenital defects, not otherwise disclosed to the purchaser as required by SCCC 6.45.020, the purchaser may, within one day of the examination, return such animal to the seller. When returned, such animal must be accompanied with a certificate signed by the examining veterinarian stating examination findings. Upon return of such animal for the reasons stated in this section, the seller shall reimburse the purchaser for the cost of the animal.

(b) If the seller refuses to reimburse the purchaser for the cost of the animal upon purchaser’s offer to return it, the purchaser may file court proceedings against the seller. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

6.45.040 Location of sale.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale, offer for sale, exchange, barter or give away any animal except in the following places:

(1) Pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter, or horse establishment, which have a valid permit under SCCC 6.35.010; and

(2) Private residence.

(b) This prohibition shall not apply to:

(1) Any animal rescue or humane organization or agency recognized by SVACA; or

(2) Any cat breeder selling cats at a nationally sanctioned cat show; or

(3) Any dog breeder selling dogs at a nationally sanctioned dog show. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Chapter 6.50
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

6.50.010    Enforcement of this title – Payment of funds to account.

6.50.010 Enforcement of this title – Payment of funds to account.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this title are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this title as a criminal, civil and/or administrative action.

(b) Enforcement Authority. The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this title by issuance of citations. Peace officers and persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this title. The designated employee positions are the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives and the animal control officers of SVACA.

(c) Funds collected pursuant to civil or administrative enforcement of this title shall be paid to the City’s animal control revenue account. (Ord. 1879 § 1, 3-29-11).

Title 7
(RESERVED)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.05    Alarm Systems

8.10    Food and Food Establishments

8.15    Weeds

8.20    Mosquito Abatement

8.25    Accumulation, Transportation and Disposal of Solid Waste

8.30    Public Nuisances

8.35    Smoking and Tobacco Regulations

8.37    Smoking Lounges

8.40    False Alarm Regulation

8.45    Enforcement of Title

8.50    Portable Automotive Spray-Finishing Operations Utilizing Flammable and Combustible Liquids

8.55    Graffiti

8.60    Unmanned Aircraft Systems

Chapter 8.05
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.05.010  Exemption.

8.05.020  Prohibition.

8.05.030  Application requirements.

8.05.040  Restriction – Monitoring panels, annunciators, or receiving equipment.

8.05.050  Installation and maintenance costs.

8.05.060  Removal of unauthorized equipment.

8.05.070  Hold harmless.

Cross reference – See also Chapter 8.40 SCCC, False Alarm Regulation.

8.05.010 Exemption.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "person" shall not include the agencies, departments, officers or assigned agents of the City. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-1).

8.05.020 Prohibition.
No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects any public primary telephone trunk line of the City and then reproduces any tone, signal or prerecorded message to report any burglary, fire or other emergency, except as duly authorized by the City in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-2).

8.05.030 Application requirements.
Any person in the business of selling or leasing alarm systems designed to terminate in any location in any City building shall submit an application in writing to the City Manager or his/her designated representative. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to, specific provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures. The City Manager or his/her designated representative shall approve such application if he/she finds that:

(a) Prerecorded alarm messages shall terminate on a private secondary telephone line.

(b) The termination of such telephone line will constitute no hindrance to regular City activities and duties.

(c) The person seeking such termination agrees that no messages will be telephoned, except actual alarms, except by an authorized agent of him/her with official access to customer files.

(d) The person seeking the termination maintains adequate equipment and work force to repair, maintain or otherwise service alarms sold or leased by him. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-3).

8.05.040 Restriction – Monitoring panels, annunciators, or receiving equipment.
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any monitoring panels, annunciators, light panels, or receiving equipment in any City building except as provided in SCCC 8.05.030 upon aforesaid approval of the application and authorization by the City Manager or his/her designated representative. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-4).

8.05.050 Installation and maintenance costs.
As a condition of approval and authorization, all costs and recurring charges incurred in the installation and maintenance of a private alarm system shall be borne by the person requesting an alarm termination. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-5).

8.05.060 Removal of unauthorized equipment.
As a condition of approval and authorization, in addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City Manager or his/her designated representative may, whenever he shall have knowledge of the use of any device or attachment not operated or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, order the removal of such device or attachment or such termination to which such device or attachment is connected. Failure to remove such device, attachment or termination upon being ordered to remove the same shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-6).

8.05.070 Hold harmless.
As a condition of approval and authorization, the City, its departments, officers or authorized agents shall be protected, defended (including attorney fees), indemnified and held harmless from any liability by the person or business and applicant which has the termination for any malfunction of the alarm system in reporting of the emergency it was intended to report. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 4-7-70. Formerly § 8A-7).

Chapter 8.10
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

8.10.010  Definitions.

8.10.020  Permit – Required – Exceptions.

8.10.030  Permit – Application – Examination of premises – Issuance and transferability renewal.

8.10.040  Permit – Fee.

8.10.050  Permit – Denial for failure to meet certain specifications.

8.10.060  Permit – Suspension or revocation for refusal to comply with State or local regulations.

8.10.070  Operation of business after suspension or revocation, etc., of permit prohibited.

8.10.080  Notification of City Health Officer upon sale or discontinuance of business.

8.10.090  Sanitary rules and regulations to be made by City Health Officer.

8.10.100  Presence of certain persons on business premises prima facie evidence of intent of business owner to sell food.

8.10.110  Duty of Health Officer to seize adulterated, etc., food.

8.10.120  Inspection required prior to sale of meat.

8.10.130  Sale of certain food products prohibited unless manufactured or prepared in accordance with State law.

Stat. Ref.: Sanitation of restaurants, see H. & S.C.A. §§ 28540 – 28584; sanitation requirements in food processing establishments, see H. & S.C.A. §§ 28280 – 28299; fruit containers, see H. & S.C.A §§ 28310 – 28322; bakeries, see H. & S.C.A §§ 28190 – 28216 (California Bakery Sanitation Law).

8.10.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) "Food" shall include all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in the preparation thereof.

(b) "Food establishment" shall mean and include any public or private market, shop, store, delicatessen, candy factory, storehouse, warehouse, cold storage plant or other plant or other place not a public eating or drinking establishment in or about which any food, foodstuffs or provisions are kept, held, sold, prepared or compounded or offered for sale for human consumption. Such establishments will specifically include but shall not be restricted to grocery stores and warehouses, candy and confectioners' plants or stores, bakeries, bottling works, food and condiment packers, fruit and vegetable stands, markets or other premises where meat or meat food products, sausage, fish, dressed poultry, rabbit or game are kept, stored, handled, manufactured or offered for sale, ice stations and all food processing or cannery plants of any type.

(c) "Restaurant" shall mean any coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, bar, sandwich stand, soda fountain, public school lunch room or cafeteria, labor and construction camp kitchens and dining rooms, public boardinghouse, club and any other eating or drinking establishment which sells or offers for sale food to the public, as well as kitchens, box lunch establishment, catering services, barbecue pits in which food or drink is prepared on the premises for sale or distribution elsewhere. Such term shall also include all cafeterias or restaurants serving commercial establishments as part of the organization and serving the public, whether as employees or visitors.

(d) "Utensils" shall include kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, machinery, implements, receptacles used in processing, storage, distribution or serving of food or drink. (Ord. 942, Art. 1. Formerly § 12-1).

8.10.020 Permit – Required – Exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a restaurant or food establishment or to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution any food or drink intended for human consumption in the City unless such person shall possess a permit to do so from the Health Officer and has paid therefor the permit fee required to be paid by SCCC 8.10.040.

No permit shall be required of any food processing, cannery or other food establishment licensed by the State Department of Health, by the Bureau of Meat Inspection of the State Department of Agriculture or by the Meat Inspection Division of the United States Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 1. Formerly § 12-2).

8.10.030 Permit – Application – Examination of premises – Issuance and transferability renewal.
Application for the permit required in the preceding section shall be made in writing to the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall, upon receipt of such application, make or cause to be made an examination of the premises for which such permit is requested. If, upon examination, the Health Officer, his/her assistant or his/her duly authorized representative shall find such premises and the equipment therein to be in accordance with the laws of the State, the requirements of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Health Officer of the City, the Health Officer shall issue a revocable permit for the conduct of such business. Such permit shall be issued annually for the calendar year and shall not be transferable. Renewal of permits shall be applied for and acted upon in the same manner. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 2. Formerly § 12-3).

8.10.040 Permit – Fee.
The permit fee for conducting a restaurant or food establishment shall be as established by Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 3. Formerly § 12-4).

8.10.050 Permit – Denial for failure to meet certain specifications.
The City Health Officer is hereby empowered to deny or withhold a permit for which an application has been made if, in his/her judgment, the building, premises, equipment, apparatus or reasonable facilities for the establishing, maintaining, conducting or operating the business or institution for which a permit is requested are insufficient, unfit or incapable of being used, maintained or established to comply with this chapter or any other ordinances of the City or the rules and regulations of the City Health Officer or laws of the State. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 4. Formerly § 12-5).

8.10.060 Permit – Suspension or revocation for refusal to comply with State or local regulations.
The Health Officer of the City may suspend or revoke any permit authorized by this chapter whenever he finds that the holder of such a permit fails or refuses to comply with the laws of the State, this chapter or any rules and regulations of the City Health Officer. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 5. Formerly § 12-6).

8.10.070 Operation of business after suspension or revocation, etc., of permit prohibited.
If any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be denied, suspended or revoked by the Health Officer, it shall be unlawful during the period of such denial, revocation or suspension for any person to sell or traffic in any food or drink products in the City at such establishment. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 4. Formerly § 12-7).

8.10.080 Notification of City Health Officer upon sale or discontinuance of business.
Every person who shall sell, exchange, give away, abandon or discontinue any restaurant or food establishment within the city and every person who shall purchase or otherwise acquire any such restaurant or food establishment within the city shall immediately notify the Health Officer, his/her assistant or his/her duly authorized representative as to the fact thereof. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 6. Formerly § 12-8).

8.10.090 Sanitary rules and regulations to be made by City Health Officer.
The City Health Officer is hereby authorized to make such additional rules and regulations as may be necessary to secure the proper sanitation of all restaurants or food establishments and for the proper and orderly administration of this chapter. (Ord. 942, Art. 2 § 7. Formerly § 12-9).

8.10.100 Presence of certain persons on business premises prima facie evidence of intent of business owner to sell food.
The presence in or about any place of business of any person dealing in food or in or about any vehicle used by any such person for the delivery of any food shall be prima facie evidence of intent on the part of such person to sell the same and of the fact that he is holding or offering the same for sale. (Ord. 942. Formerly § 12-10).

8.10.110 Duty of Health Officer to seize adulterated, etc., food.
The Health Officer, his/her assistant and his/her duly authorized representative are hereby authorized and directed to seize and destroy or denature any tainted, diseased, decayed or partially decayed or unwholesome meat, fish, shell fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or other unwholesome food found within the city. (Ord. 942. Formerly § 12-11).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to Pure Foods Act, see H. & S.C.A. §§ 26500 to 26599.

8.10.120 Inspection required prior to sale of meat.
It shall be unlawful for any person or agent or employee of any person to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution in the City the flesh of any cattle, horse, sheep, lamb, swine or goat unless the same bears on each primal part thereof the "Inspected and Passed" stamp of an establishment operating under Federal or State inspection or approved municipal inspection. (Ord. 942. Formerly § 12-12).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to meat and meat inspection generally, see Ag. C.A. §§ 18751 to 18755.

8.10.130 Sale of certain food products prohibited unless manufactured or prepared in accordance with State law.
It shall be unlawful for any person or agent or employee of any person to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution in the City any sausage or other meat food product unless the same has been manufactured or prepared in accordance with the laws of the State. (Ord. 942. Formerly § 12-13).

Chapter 8.15
WEEDS
Sections:

8.15.010  Defined.

8.15.020  Permitting weeds to grow on premises, streets or sidewalks prohibited – Removal.

8.15.030  Violation declared nuisance – Resolution by City Council – Notice generally.

8.15.040  Form of notice required in SCCC 8.15.080.

8.15.050  Hearing on proposed destruction or removal.

8.15.060  Order to abate – Authority of City officers to enter upon private property – Right of property owner to abate.

8.15.070  Account and report of costs of abatement – Generally.

8.15.080  Abatement – Notice.

8.15.090  Hearing on proposed assessment, etc.

8.15.100  Costs of abatement by City to constitute special assessment and lien on property until paid.

8.15.110  Collection of assessments.

Stat. Ref.: Cities authorized to abate weeds, Gov. C.A. § 39560 et seq.; authority of city to declare weeds and rubbish along streets, etc., nuisances, Gov. C. A. § 39561.

8.15.010 Defined.
"Weeds," as used in this chapter, means all weeds growing upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or private property in the City and shall include any of the following:

(a) Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.

(b) Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property.

(c) Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous.

(d) Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health.

(e) Accumulation of garden refuse, cuttings and other combustible trash. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-3).

8.15.020 Permitting weeds to grow on premises, streets or sidewalks prohibited – Removal.
No owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of any building, lot or premises within the city shall permit weeds to remain upon such premises, public sidewalks, streets or alleys between such premises and the centerline of any public street or alley.

Every property owner shall remove or destroy weeds from his/her property and in the abutting half of any street or alley between the lot lines as extended. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-4).

8.15.030 Violation declared nuisance – Resolution by City Council – Notice generally.
Whenever any weeds are growing upon any private property or in any street or alley within the city, the City Council shall pass a resolution declaring the same to be a public nuisance and order the Chief of the Fire Department to give notice of the passage of such resolution by posting and publication in the same manner and for the time set forth in SCCC 8.15.080, and stating therein that, unless such nuisance be abated without delay by destruction or removal of such weeds, the work of abating such nuisance will be done by the City authorities and the expense thereof assessed upon the lots and lands from which or in the front or rear of which such weeds were destroyed or removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-5).

8.15.040 Form of notice required in SCCC 8.15.080.
The notice required in the preceding section shall be in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ________ pursuant to the provisions of SCCC 8.15.030, the City Council of said City passed a resolution declaring that all weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street or alley, as defined in SCCC 8.15.010, constitute a public nuisance, which nuisance must be abated by the destruction or removal thereof.

NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall, without delay, remove all such weeds from their property, and the abutting half of the street in front and alleys, if any, behind such property, and between the lot lines thereof as extended, or such weeds will be destroyed or removed and such nuisance abated by the City authorities, in which case the cost of such destruction or removal will be assessed upon the lots or lands from which, or from the front or rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed; and such cost will constitute a lien upon such lots or lands until paid, and will be collected upon the next tax roll upon which general municipal taxes are collected. All property owners having any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the Council of said City, to be held in the Council Chambers of the City Hall, City of Santa Clara, on ________ at ________ o'clock P.M., when and where their objections will be heard and given due consideration.

Dated this ____ day of ________, 20___

_________________________________
Chief of Fire Department
City of Santa Clara

(Ord. 896; Ord. 1110. Formerly § 13-6).

8.15.050 Hearing on proposed destruction or removal.
At the time stated in the notice, as set out in SCCC 8.15.040, the City Council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds and may hold such hearings whenever needed. The City Council by motion or resolution shall allow or overrule any objections, after which the City Council shall thereupon be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work of destruction or removal of such weeds. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-7).

8.15.060 Order to abate – Authority of City officers to enter upon private property – Right of property owner to abate.
The City Council shall, by resolution, order the Chief of the Fire Department to abate nuisances designated under SCCC 8.15.030 or cause the same to be abated by having the weeds destroyed or removed by cutting, disking, chemical spraying or any other method as may be determined by the City Council and the Chief of the Fire Department and his/her deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives. Such persons are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. Any property owner shall have the right to destroy or remove such weeds himself/herself or have the same destroyed or removed at his/her own expense but such removal must take place prior to the arrival of the Chief of the Fire Department or his/her authorized representatives to remove them. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-8).

8.15.070 Account and report of costs of abatement – Generally.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep an account of the cost of abating nuisances described in SCCC 8.15.030 and embody such account in a report and assessment list to the City Council, which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-9).

8.15.080 Abatement – Notice.
The City Clerk shall post copies of such report and assessment list on the bulletin board in the Council Chambers of the City Hall, on the bulletin board in the lobby of the City Hall and on the bulletin board near the entrance door of the Fire Department headquarters, together with a notice of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where such report and assessment list will be submitted to the City Council for hearing and confirmation, notifying property owners that they may appear at such time and place and object to any matter contained therein. A like notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated within the city. The posting and first publication of such notice shall be made and completed at least ten days before the time such report is submitted to the City Council. Such notice, as so posted and published, shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF HEARING ON
REPORT AND ASSESSMENT
FOR WEED ABATEMENT

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ________ the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Santa Clara filed with the City Clerk of said City a report and assessment on abatement of weeds within said City, copies of which are posted on the bulletin board in the Council Chambers in the City Hall; on the bulletin board in the lobby of the City Hall; and on the bulletin board near the entrance door of the Fire Department Headquarters at 777 Benton Street, Santa Clara.

NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ________ at the hour of ________ o'clock P.M., in the Council Chambers of said City Hall, said report and assessment list shall be presented to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation, and that any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place and be heard.

Dated this _____ day of ________, 20__

_________________________________
City Clerk
City of Santa Clara

(Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-10).

8.15.090 Hearing on proposed assessment, etc.
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report provided in SCCC 8.15.070, the City Council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance and the Chief of the Fire Department shall attend such meeting with his/her record thereof. Upon such hearing, the City Council may make such modifications in the proposed assessment therefor as it may deem necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-11).

8.15.100 Costs of abatement by City to constitute special assessment and lien on property until paid.
The cost of abating such nuisance, as described in SCCC 8.15.030, upon or in the front or rear of the various lots or parcels of land respectively referred to in the report provided in SCCC 8.15.070 shall constitute special assessments against such respective lots or parcels of land, and after such made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such until paid. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-12).

8.15.110 Collection of assessments.
The Director of Finance of the City shall cause the amount of the assessment to be entered on the City assessment roll opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon upon the property. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general City taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for City taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment.

The property owner has the option, if he so desires, of paying the assessment directly to the collector's office before entry of the same on the assessment roll. (Ord. 896. Formerly § 13-13).

Chapter 8.20
MOSQUITO ABATEMENT
Sections:

8.20.010  Declaration of findings, intent and policy.

8.20.020  Mosquito breeding places.

8.20.030  Enforcement.

8.20.040  Notice to abate.

8.20.050  Contents of notice.

8.20.060  Hearing – Appearance – Order – Penalties for failure to comply.

8.20.070  Recurrence of nuisance.

8.20.080  Abatement by Health Officer.

8.20.090  Payment of cost by owner.

8.20.100  Lien on property.

8.20.110  Recordation of notice of lien – Priority of lien.

8.20.120  Action to foreclosure – Time for commencement.

8.20.130  Satisfaction of lien from proceeds of sale – Disposition of balance.

8.20.140  Exemption from lien provisions.

8.20.150  Alternative method of collection.

8.20.160  Collected with City or County taxes.

8.20.170  Health Officer defined.

8.20.010 Declaration of findings, intent and policy.
The City Council of the City of Santa Clara concurs with the board of supervisors in Ordinance No. NS-517.30 of this County, and expressly finds and declares that mosquito breeding places constitute a hazard to public health. It is the intent of this chapter to cooperate with Santa Clara County health officials and to establish procedures for abating mosquito breeding places and provide legal means for recovering the cost of abatement in the incorporated areas of the City to implement County of Santa Clara's procedures applicable to the unincorporated areas. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-43).

8.20.020 Mosquito breeding places.
No person shall permit any accumulation of water upon any premises in which mosquitoes breed. Any breeding place for mosquitoes is a public nuisance and a hazard to public health. The presence of mosquito larvae or pupae in any accumulation of water, whether upon the ground surface, pond, pool or container of any description shall constitute prima facie evidence that such a place is a breeding place for mosquitoes. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-44).

8.20.030 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter; and in the performance of this duty, the Health Officer is hereby authorized to enter at any reasonable hour any premises as may be necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-45).

8.20.040 Notice to abate.
Whenever a public nuisance specified in this chapter exists upon any property the Health Officer may notify in writing the owner and party in possession, or the agent of either, of the existence of the nuisance. The written notice may be served by any person authorized by the Health Officer in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. The contents of the written notice shall conform to the requirements of SCCC 8.20.050. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-46).

8.20.050 Contents of notice.
The notice shall:

(a) State the finding of the Health Officer that a public nuisance exists on the property and the location of such nuisance on such property.

(b) Direct the owner and party in possession to abate the nuisance within a specified time by destroying the larvae or pupae that are present.

(c) Direct the owner and party in possession to perform, within a specified time, any work necessary to prevent the recurrence of breeding in the places specified in the notice.

(d) Inform the owner and party in possession that failure to comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall subject the owner and party in possession to civil penalties of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day the nuisance continues after the time specified for the abatement of the nuisance in the notice.

(e) Inform the owner and party in possession that before complying with the requirements of the notice, the owner and party in possession may appear at a hearing before the Health Officer at a time and place stated in the notice. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-47).

8.20.060 Hearing – Appearance – Order – Penalties for failure to comply.
Before complying with the requirements of the notice the owner and party in possession may appear at a hearing before the Health Officer at a time and place fixed by the Health Officer and stated in the notice. At the hearing the Health Officer shall determine whether the initial finding as set forth in the notice is correct and shall permit the owner and party in possession to present testimony in his/her behalf. If, after hearing all the facts, the Health Officer makes a determination that a nuisance exists on the property, the Health Officer shall order compliance with the requirements of the notice or with alternate instructions issued by the Health Officer.

Any failure to comply with any order of the Health Officer issued pursuant to this section shall subject the owner and party in possession to civil penalties as determined by the discretion of the Health Officer, which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day in which such order is not complied with. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-48).

8.20.070 Recurrence of nuisance.
Any recurrence of the nuisance within thirty (30) days of the time specified for abatement of the nuisance may be deemed to be a continuation of the original nuisance. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-49).

8.20.080 Abatement by Health Officer.
In the event that the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice or at the hearing, the Health Officer may abate or cause the abatement of the nuisance by destroying the larvae or pupae and by taking appropriate measures to prevent the recurrence of further breeding. All services of Santa Clara County Health Officer or personnel under this chapter shall be without cost or charge to the City. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50).

8.20.090 Payment of cost by owner.
The cost of abatement of a nuisance to applicable governmental entity shall be repaid to it by the owner of the property. The owner shall not, however, be required to pay such cost unless, either prior or subsequent to the abatement by the Health Officer, a hearing or hearings are held by the Health Officer at which the property owner is afforded an opportunity to be heard and it is determined by the Health Officer that a nuisance actually exists, or existed prior to abatement by the Health Officer or governmental entity and that the cost of abatement for which payment is to be sought was necessarily expended in abating the nuisance and Health Officer orders payment. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.1).

8.20.100 Lien on property.
All sums expended by the Health Officer or his/her governmental entity in abating or causing the abatement of a nuisance or preventing its recurrence, when notice of the lien is filed and recorded as provided in SCCC 8.20.110 shall become a lien upon the property on which the nuisance is abated, or its recurrence prevented. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.2).

8.20.110 Recordation of notice of lien – Priority of lien.
Notice of the lien, particularly identifying the property on which the nuisance was abated and the amount of such lien, and naming the owner of record of such property, shall be recorded by the Health Officer in the Office of the County Recorder within one year after the first item of expenditure by the Health Officer or appropriate governmental entity or within ninety (90) days after the completion of the work, whichever first occurs. Upon such recordation, such lien shall have the same force, effect and priority as if it had been a judgment lien imposed upon real property which was not exempt from execution and shall accrue interest as does a judgment lien, except that it shall attach only to the property described in such notice, and shall continue for ten years from the time of the recording of such notice unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.3).

8.20.120 Action to foreclosure – Time for commencement.
An action to foreclose the lien shall be commenced within six months after the filing and recording of the notice of lien. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.4).

8.20.130 Satisfaction of lien from proceeds of sale – Disposition of balance.
When the property is sold, enough of the proceeds to satisfy the lien and the costs of foreclosure shall be paid to the governmental entity entitled to reimbursement; and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property if known, and if not known, shall be paid into the court in which the lien was foreclosed for the use of the owner when ascertained. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.5).

8.20.140 Exemption from lien provisions.
The lien provisions of this chapter do not apply to the property of any County, City, district, or other public corporation. However, the governing body of the County, City, district, or other public corporation shall repay to the governmental entity the amount expended by that entity upon any of its property upon presentation by the Health Officer of a verified claim or bill. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.6).

8.20.150 Alternative method of collection.
As an alternative method of collection of the amount of lien, the Health Officer, after ordering to be paid all sums necessarily expended in abating such nuisance, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the assessor and the tax collector for the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of those officers to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or parcel of land. If the City taxes are collected by the County officials, the notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the County assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.7).

8.20.160 Collected with City or County taxes.
Thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City or County taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City or County taxes. All laws applicable to the levying, collection and enforcement of the City taxes and County taxes are hereby made applicable to such lien or special assessment taxes. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.8).

8.20.170 Health Officer defined.
As used in this chapter, the term "Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the County of Santa Clara or his/her authorized representative; or any other substitute officer of the City staff serving under the City Manager from time to time designated by the City Manager of the City to serve as "Health Officer" under this chapter. (Ord. 1476 § 1, 8-30-83. Formerly § 3-50.9).

Chapter 8.25
ACCUMULATION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
Sections:

8.25.010    Definitions.

8.25.020    Declaration of policy.

8.25.030    Disposal of refuse on public property or on private property of another.

8.25.040    Accumulation of refuse on property of owner or occupant.

8.25.050    Removal of refuse by persons.

8.25.060    Owner may contract for special collection services.

8.25.070    Spillage or leakage of refuse.

8.25.080    Containers required – Description, storage and labeling.

8.25.090    Number of containers required.

8.25.100    Requirements for new developments and retrofits.

8.25.110    Collection hours, quietness of collections and collection equipment.

8.25.120    Frequency of collection.

8.25.130    Liability for payments of service.

8.25.140    Penalty for failure to pay for refuse service.

8.25.150    Administration by City Manager.

8.25.160    Inspection of premises.

8.25.170    Disposal of dangerous materials or substances or hazardous wastes.

8.25.180    Property interest in refuse removed.

8.25.190    Authorized persons for refuse collection.

8.25.200    Contract required.

8.25.210    Application – Filing, contents.

8.25.220    Public hearing requirements.

8.25.230    Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.

8.25.240    Notice of hearing – Publication of notice – Time for hearing.

8.25.250    Public hearing requirements – Protests – Considerations – Grant of contract.

8.25.260    Duty to maintain books.

8.25.270    Violation by grantee – Liability for damages to the City – Liability for operating without a contract.

8.25.275    Mandatory recycling.

8.25.276    Mandatory organic waste recycling.

8.25.280    Recyclable material – Deposit and collection.

8.25.285    Construction and demolition debris recycling.

8.25.290    Clean green.

8.25.300    Clean-up campaign.

8.25.310    Responsibility for enforcement.

8.25.320    Violation.

8.25.330    Violations for disposal of refuse.

8.25.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

(a) “A” Definitions.

(1) “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake construction, demolition or renovation projects within the city.

(b) “B” Definitions.

(1) “Bulk bag” means a durable sack with four lift loop handles and flat bottom designed to hold construction and demolition materials, with a capacity of no more than one cubic yard.

(c) “C” Definitions.

(1) “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City or a duly appointed representative designated by the City Manager.

(2) “Clean green” means green waste that is placed in a container provided and serviced by the City or its designated collector.

(3) “Clean-up campaign” means a special collection program for residents to dispose of bulky items and green waste.

(4) “Collector” means the City or any exclusive or nonexclusive franchise hauling contractor duly authorized by the City Council to collect, transport and dispose of refuse under specific contract terms with the City.

(5) “Commercial” means the designated zoning for commercial, professional office or general office development as shown on the official zoning map of the City.

(6) “Commercial business” means any firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation occupying property zoned for commercial, industrial, institutional or mixed use on the official zoning map of the City.

(7) “Compostable material” means organic refuse that can be biologically degraded or transformed under controlled conditions designed to promote aerobic decomposition.

(8) “Composting” means the biological degradation and transformation of organic refuse under controlled conditions designed to promote aerobic decomposition.

(9) “Construction and demolition debris” or “C&D debris” means used or discarded materials removed from the premises during a construction, demolition or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on any pavement, residential structure, commercial building or other structure.

(10) “Construction and demolition debris materials check-off list” means a report submitted by the applicant when obtaining a construction or demolition permit that identifies the various types of construction and demolition debris that will be generated as a result of any covered project.

(11) “Construction and demolition debris recycling report” means a report prepared that identifies the amounts of all construction and demolition debris generated as a result of a covered project, and the amounts recycled or diverted.

(12) “Container” means all types of receptacles used for the storage of refuse including but not limited to carts, front-load roll-off bins, drop body debris bins and compactors.

(13) “Contamination” means the placement of nonrecyclable materials into a container designated for recycling, or material that is not compostable in a container designated for clean green or organic waste.

(d) “D” Definitions.

(1) “Disposal” means the final disposition of refuse at a landfill or other permitted disposal facility, as defined in California Public Resources Code Section 40192.

(2) “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than a landfill or transformation facility.

(e) “E” Definitions.

(1) “Enclosure” means a structure designed to store containers.

(f) “F” Definitions.

(1) “Food establishment” means any establishment that sells or otherwise provides prepared food for consumption on or off its premises, and includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, bars, pubs, coffee shops, cafeterias, caterers, convenience stores, liquor stores, grocery stores, supermarkets and delicatessens.

(2) “Food waste” means unused and discarded solid food products/scraps including, but not limited to, vegetables, fruits, meat, fish, shells, bones, cheese, bread, paper-based tea bags and coffee grounds. Food waste is an organic waste.

(g) “G” Definitions.

(1) “Garbage” means all classes of refuse that are not recycled or recovered through composting or anaerobic digestion process and is disposed of in a landfill or other permitted disposal facility.

(2) “Green waste” means a broad subset of compostable materials that includes lawn and shrubbery clippings, weeds, leaves, tree limbs, wood and other similar waste materials that are rejected, abandoned or discarded by the owner or producer of materials.

(h) “H” Definitions.

(1) “Hazardous waste” means a waste with properties that make it potentially dangerous or harmful to human health and the environment as classified by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.

(i) “I” Definitions.

(1) “Industrial” means the designated zoning for industrial development as shown on the official zoning map of the City.

(2) “Institutional” means the designated zoning for public or quasi-public development as shown on the official zoning map of the City.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” Definitions.

(1) “Landfill” means a permitted disposal facility that is used for the disposal of garbage.

(2) “Litter” means, but it is not limited to, plastic, paper, cigarette butts, floor sweepings, trash, rubbish, food, cloth, metal, recyclable material, or other waste matter that is not properly stored in a container or trash bag.

(m) “M” Definitions.

(1) “Material recovery facility” means a facility that processes mixed types of refuse for the purpose of removing recoverable materials for recycling, composting or other landfill diversion activity.

(2) “Mixed use” means the designated zoning for mixed use as shown on the official zoning map of the City.

(3) “Mixed waste processing” means the process of removing recyclable materials or compostable material from loads of mixed refuse before sending the garbage to a landfill for disposal.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) “O” Definitions.

(1) “Organic waste” means organic materials, including, but not limited to, materials generated from tree trimmings, shrubbery, pruning, vegetable garden waste, dead plants, weeds, leaves, grass clippings, food waste, nonfood vegetative matter, soiled paper and cardboard that decomposes biologically.

(p) “P” Definitions.

(1) “Permitted disposal facility” means any facility, duly approved by the State of California, which is authorized to accept the disposal of specific types of refuse.

(2) “Push/pull service” means a service offered by a collector for a fee in which the collector moves a container from its storage location to a service point, and returns the container to the storage location after servicing.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) “R” Definitions.

(1) “Recoverable material” means all materials that have the potential to be recovered from refuse containers for recycling, composting, anaerobic digestion or other processes. This material includes, but is not limited to: green waste, food waste, plastics, glass, white paper, newspaper, mixed paper, cardboard, electronics, scrap metals and miscellaneous types of construction and demolition debris.

(2) “Recyclable” means all recoverable material that is recycled and made into a new product, but does not include recoverable material that is not recycled.

(3) “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become garbage and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. The collection of organic materials for the purpose of composting or conversion to biogas are considered recycling programs.

(4) “Refuse” means all classes of solid waste generated in the city, including all waste matter and materials, putrescible or nonputrescible, solid or liquid wastes, except sewage, whether combustible or noncombustible, including garbage, recyclable materials, and organic waste, and excluding hazardous waste.

(5) “Residential” means the designated zoning for residential development as shown on the official zoning map of the City, or other property used for single-family or multifamily residential purposes, regardless of zoning designation.

(6) “Responsible party” means an individual or entity that is responsible for implementing and paying for refuse collection services at a residential or commercial business property.

(7) “Reuse” means the further or repeated use of materials, including but not limited to C&D debris.

(s) “S” Definitions.

(1) “Salvage” means the controlled removal of C&D debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later recycling or reuse.

(2) “Self-haul” means a responsible party who transports refuse to a permitted disposal facility using their own vehicle and employees rather than using a franchised hauler.

(3) “Single-stream recycling” means a recycling program offered by collectors in which generators place multiple types of nonconstruction and demolition recoverable materials in a single container that is designated specifically for recyclable materials and is taken to a material recovery facility for processing.

(4) “Source-separated recycling” means a recycling program offered by collectors in which generators place a single type of recyclable or compostable material in a container designated specifically for that material.

(t) “T” Definitions.

(1) “Trash bag” means a clear plastic bag designated as the proper protective storage unit for food waste placed into an organic waste recycling container.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.020 Declaration of policy.
The City Council finds that it is beneficial and in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens of the City that there be a comprehensive system for the periodic collection, removal and disposal of all refuse from all premises in the City. The charges levied pursuant to this chapter are a charge for the privilege of having refuse collection, removal, and disposal service and are to be paid regardless of whether the privilege is actually used. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.030 Disposal of refuse on public property or on private property of another.
(a) No person shall store, collect, haul, transport, or dispose of any refuse contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(b) No person shall throw, drop, leave, dump, bury, burn, place, keep, accumulate or otherwise dispose of any refuse upon public property or the private property of another with or without permission or approval of the property owner, except in conjunction with special collections programs specifically approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.040 Accumulation of refuse on property of owner or occupant.
(a) No owner or occupant of property shall permit the accumulation of refuse or hazardous waste on such property.

(b) The City reserves the right to require property owners to provide and maintain enclosures for garbage, recycling and clean green containers whenever such enclosures are necessary to prevent litter, restrict access to containers, preserve the health, safety and welfare of the public, or enhance aesthetic appearance.

(c) The location and enclosure of all containers shall be easily accessible and maintained free of litter, uncontained garbage, or other materials.

(d) Enclosure requirements for containers servicing various classes of property are set forth in the City Zoning Code Ordinance (SCCC Title 18), as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.050 Removal of refuse by persons.
(a) Any owner or occupant of a property zoned for residential, institutional, or commercial use, subject to the exceptions provided in subsection (b) of this section, must use the collection services provided by the City under its collection programs and the City’s exclusive franchise collector.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a person who is not a collector may dispose of refuse as follows:

(1) Any person may self-haul and dispose of refuse from his/her own private residence to a permitted disposal facility.

(2) Any person may engage in composting of organic waste for use on that person’s premises.

(3) Any owner or occupant of properties zoned for “industrial” use may dispose of refuse generated on such property, or cause it to be removed from the property and disposed of at a permitted disposal facility. Said person may either enter into a private agreement with a collector to have his/her refuse removed and disposed of or he/she may remove and dispose of such refuse himself/herself, utilizing his/her own employees. Any such private arrangement for the disposal of refuse in industrial zones must be in accordance with this chapter and City’s agreements with collectors.

(4) Any owner or occupant of commercial or institutional property may haul its own refuse, utilizing its own employees and equipment, from the premises occupied by it or under its control and dispose of such refuse at a permitted disposal facility subject to such conditions as the City Council finds appropriate.

(5) Any refuse produced or created on property owned by the City, the Sports and Open Space Authority of the City of Santa Clara, the City of Santa Clara Housing Authority or the Santa Clara Stadium Authority may be hauled by the City, by a person legally permitted to operate a business located on such property, either personally or by utilizing his/her own employees, or by a collector authorized by the City Council to haul and dispose of such refuse pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(6) A person who is engaged in the business of gardening or tree trimming, and a person who is engaged in building construction or building demolition, and is in either case in possession of a valid business license issued by the City, is authorized to remove and dispose of green waste or refuse, respectively, produced by such business activity itself; provided, that in all of such cases such disposal shall be made at a permitted disposal facility.

(7) The removal and disposal of refuse by any person pursuant to this section shall not relieve such person from the requirements of any applicable City ordinance or resolution, or from the requirement of the payment of minimum refuse service, or other applicable charge.

(8) Any collector may haul or dispose of recyclable material; provided, that such collector purchases such materials or does not charge the person who generates such materials, directly or indirectly, by way of service fees, bin or container rentals or otherwise, for such service.

(9) A person who is collecting food or other items for the purpose of a charitable donation.

(10) All of the persons subject to the exceptions stated in this section must be in full compliance with all applicable Federal and State laws, City ordinances and resolutions, including this chapter.

(c) A collector shall dispose of refuse in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and its applicable franchise contract. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.060 Owner may contract for special collection services.
Subject to the provisions of SCCC 8.25.050, any owner or occupant of any premises may contract with its collector for special services over and above regular services provided by the collector. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.070 Spillage or leakage of refuse.
No person or collector shall allow any refuse of any kind whatsoever to leak, spill, blow or drop from any vehicle operated or controlled by such person or collector in the city on any public street or place within the city. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.080 Containers required – Description, storage and labeling.
(a) Containers shall be used to store, until collected, accumulated garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, organic waste or clean green in such a manner that will not create a public health, vector or nuisance problem.

(b) All containers shall have lids that remain tightly closed while containers are stored in an enclosure or within the side or rear yard of the premises, and when containers are set out for collection. Containers shall be placed so as to avoid spilled liquid or materials being discharged into the storm drainage system and/or city right-of-way or street.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any premises within the city, or for any person owning, controlling, or maintaining any premises within the city where refuse is created, produced, or accumulated, to:

(1) Fail or neglect to procure and maintain a sufficient number of containers for receiving and holding all refuse that is produced, created, or accumulated on the premises during one week, unless a more frequent collection schedule is provided to such premises. If a more frequent collection schedule is provided, the number of containers must be sufficient to hold the refuse generated during the shorter period.

(2) Fail or neglect to place, keep, and maintain each and every container within an enclosure or within the side or rear yard of the premises where the refuse is produced.

(d) All containers shall be stored in an enclosure or within the side or rear yard of the premises. Containers shall not be set out upon the public right-of-way in front of said premises prior to 5:00 P.M. the day prior to collection. Containers must be removed from the public right-of-way on the collection day, after service.

(e) Collectors shall label all containers with the name of the collector and a customer service phone number, and maintain containers free of graffiti.

(f) All refuse shall be stored in containers except at times when the City Council shall authorize the placement of certain types of refuse upon the public right-of-way without containers. Containers shall be at all times kept in good, safe, usable, and sanitary condition.

(g) The City Manager or designee may direct a collector to clean or change out containers that are producing odors. The responsible party shall reimburse the collector for this service. Waste water generated from the cleaning operation must be disposed via the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.090 Number of containers required.
(a) For the purpose of this section, a container is deemed to have a capacity of no less than twenty (20) gallons liquid measure. In determining the sufficiency of the number of containers required for any of the following places or premises, the following minimum standards shall apply:

(1) Single-family residential users shall have no less than one container with a minimum capacity of twenty (20) gallons.

(2) Apartment houses, duplexes, condominiums, and other types of multifamily residential buildings shall have no less than one container or its equivalent per dwelling unit.

(3) Motels, hotels, trailer parks, or mobile home parks shall have no less than one container or its equivalent per unit or space.

(b) Where insufficient containers are maintained on premises to hold all refuse created, produced, or accumulated on a place or premises to the detriment of the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the City Manager may require a higher level of service, including push/pull service, increased container size, or increased collection frequency, and the cost of said service shall be paid for by the occupant of the premises or the owner of unoccupied premises. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.100 Requirements for new developments and retrofits.
(a) New commercial developments shall provide collection trucks a minimum straight approach clearance of forty (40) feet, forty (40)-foot turning radius, and height clearance of no less than fourteen and one-half (14.5) feet in drive-mode, and twenty (20) feet for service mode. Private roads shall be constructed to accommodate weights of sixty thousand (60,000) pounds.

(b) New single-family residential developments shall accommodate a minimum turning radius of thirty-three (33) feet (sixty-six (66) feet curb to curb to allow for a one hundred eighty (180)-degree turn).

(c) All new solid waste enclosures shall meet the following specifications:

(1) Drain to sanitary sewer, or be covered and located twenty-five (25) feet or more from any storm drain inlet.

(2) Entrance shall have a slope with a minimum gradient of two percent but no greater than four percent to prevent outside stormwater runoff from entering the enclosure.

(3) A double, swinging gate with bollards or J-hooks shall be installed at the front of the enclosure to provide a minimum of one hundred twenty (120)-degree swing area and a minimum, unobstructed inside opening of twelve (12) feet.

(4) Inside area shall be large enough to store at least three containers, one for garbage, one for recycling, and one for organic waste.

(5) Have a six-inch-thick minimum, reinforced concrete pad to accommodate no less than forty thousand (40,000) pounds. The approach/point of service shall have a twelve (12)-foot-wide and eight-inch-thick minimum, reinforced concrete pad to accommodate no less than sixty thousand (60,000) pounds.

(d) Food establishments shall place tallow bins within the enclosure when possible. If enclosure is not sized to include the tallow bin(s), a separate dedicated enclosure with drainage to sanitary sewer shall be provided. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.110 Collection hours, quietness of collections and collection equipment.
(a) Refuse collection shall not occur after 6:00 P.M. or prior to 7:00 A.M. at or adjacent to properties zoned for residential use.

(b) All collections shall be made as quietly as possible. All unnecessarily noisy trucks or equipment for such uses are prohibited.

(c) Collection vehicles must meet the following standards:

(1) All collection vehicles licensed to travel on public streets shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code, as amended.

(2) All garbage, recyclable materials, clean green and organic waste shall be conveyed in standard industry-type collection vehicles, so when constructed, loaded and maintained there will not be any leakage, spillage or loss of contents therefrom.

(3) All containers shall be covered while collection vehicles are in operation to prevent spillage and, as far as possible, access thereto by flies, insects, rodents or other vectors.

(4) All collection vehicles operated by authorized collectors shall be painted in a uniform color to enhance the visibility of the vehicle and distinguish them from other authorized collectors. Such vehicles shall be numbered in consecutive sequence and shall have the contractor’s name, in-service telephone number, place of business and the number of the vehicle painted in letters of contrasting color on each side and rear of each vehicle. Said rear number, and any cautionary message or device shall be readable from a distance of one hundred (100) feet.

(5) All collection vehicles shall be operated, to the extent practical, without unnecessary noise, disturbance or commotion.

(6) Collectors shall be responsible for picking up all litter generated from operating collection vehicles. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.120 Frequency of collection.
All refuse from all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional properties within the city shall be collected at least once a week, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Manager. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.130 Liability for payments of service.
Every person occupying, owning, controlling, or maintaining any premises within the city where a refuse container is required to be maintained shall be liable for the applicable refuse service charges. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.140 Penalty for failure to pay for refuse service.
(a) All charges imposed by the City Council for refuse collection and disposal service shall be a civil debt owing to the City from the person maintaining or controlling the premises entitled to or receiving the service.

(b) All such charges shall be billed along with the other municipal utility bills and shall be subject to the provisions of the City’s utility rules and regulations governing the collection and payment of utility charges.

(c) The collection of the charges imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the City for the failure of any person to pay said charges. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.150 Administration by City Manager.
(a) The City Manager or designee shall apply the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter; and

(b) The City Manager shall resolve all disputes concerning the administration or enforcement of this chapter. The City Manager’s decision in such matters shall be final. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.160 Inspection of premises.
To the extent permitted by law, the City Manager or designee may inspect all premises within the city from time to time and examine the condition of the premises to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.170 Disposal of dangerous materials or substances or hazardous wastes.
(a) No person shall place any explosive, highly flammable, toxic, radioactive material or substance, or hazardous waste in any container with the intent to dispose of said material, substance or hazardous waste without first making special arrangements as required by Federal, State, or local law for the collection, storage, transportation and disposal of such material, substance or hazardous waste. For purposes of this chapter, the term “hazardous waste” shall be defined as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117, as amended.

(b) The City may provide by contract or otherwise for a duly licensed local depository or facility to be available to service all the residential living units in the city in the disposition of “hazardous waste” generated on such premises.

(c) The City Council finds that it is beneficial and in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the city that hazardous waste in residential units be appropriately disposed of from the residential premises all in accordance with the law to any City-provided local depository or facility therefor. Any charge(s) levied pursuant to this section is a charge for the privilege of having such City-provided depository or facility available and is to be paid regardless of whether the privilege is actually used.

(d) All hazardous wastes shall be stored, transported and disposed of as required by Federal, State and local law, and all hazardous waste shall be deposited at any City-supplied depository or facility.

(e) All charges imposed by the City Council for supplying depository or facility to service residential living units in the city in the deposition of “hazardous waste” shall be a civil debt owing to the City from the person maintaining or controlling the premises entitled to or receiving the service.

(f) All such charges shall be billed along with the other municipal utility bills and shall be subject to the provisions of the City’s utility rules and regulations governing the collection and payment of utility charges. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.180 Property interest in refuse removed.
All refuse, upon being removed from the premises where produced or accumulated, shall become and be the property of the collector immediately upon the collection thereof. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.190 Authorized persons for refuse collection.
The City may by contract grant one or more franchises for the collection and disposition of any refuse within the city limits. Any such franchise may be exclusive or nonexclusive as to the type of refuse and/or the type of premises covered as the City shall determine. For this purpose contracts may be entered into by the City in the manner authorized by the Charter of the City or by law, including, but not limited to, Section 49300 of the Public Resources Code. The rights and privileges granted by any contract pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned without the express written consent of the City Council. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.200 Contract required.
Except as allowed under SCCC 8.25.050, no person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of any refuse kept or accumulated in the City unless authorized to do so under and by virtue of a contract then existing between the person and the City. The City may in its discretion and in accordance with SCCC 8.25.190 enter into a contract with any person or persons thereby authorizing such person or persons to engage in the business of collecting, transporting and disposing of refuse produced, kept or accumulated in the city. Each and every such contract shall describe the terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations as may be deemed necessary or convenient for the preservation, protection or enhancement of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare; provided, that no contract shall be granted without reserving to the City adequate compensation for the privilege conferred. The City may in its discretion periodically seek proposals from collectors for new contracts. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.210 Application – Filing, contents.
The procedure to obtain a contract granting a franchise under this chapter shall be as follows:

(a) Any person desiring an amendment to an existing franchise contract solely for a change in the collection rates contained therein and pursuant to the terms and conditions of said contract shall obtain such amendment by following the procedures as set forth in that contract. The City shall consider such an amendment pursuant to the terms of the contract. No public hearing shall be required unless expressly provided for in such contract and the procedures included in this chapter shall be inapplicable to the extent inconsistent with the contract.

(b) Any person desiring to obtain a contract or an amendment to an existing contract, except as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall apply for a contract, which includes an amended contract, for the purpose of providing certain services that the applicant seeks permission from the City to supply, relating to collecting, transporting, or disposing of garbage, recyclable materials, clean green or organic waste in the City. The applicant shall apply by filing with the City an application to provide such services. Such application shall include the following:

(1) The name and address of the applicant as well as the principal officers and directors of the applicant if the applicant is not a natural person;

(2) The service that the applicant proposes to provide, the cost of such service, and the terms and conditions of such service;

(3) The term for which the applicant desires to engage in business;

(4) The compensation to be paid by the applicant for the privilege conferred by the contract;

(5) An assurance satisfactory to the City Manager that the services proposed do not conflict with the operative provisions of any existing exclusive franchise contract; and

(6) Any other information required by the City Manager to evaluate the applicant’s qualifications, experience, and financial ability to provide such service. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.220 Public hearing requirements.
(a) The City may designate certain date(s) for receipt and/or review of applications, and set application(s) on an appropriate City Council agenda in conformance with such designation.

(b) At the designated time, the City shall notice and provide a public hearing whenever it finds that the application(s) for a refuse contract is/are completed to its satisfaction, except under the following conditions:

(1) The City determines that the application cannot be approved as applied for without conflict with the operative provisions of an existing exclusive franchise contract; or

(2) The applicant does not advance fees required by SCCC 8.25.230.

(c) If the City is not mandated to notice and provide a hearing under subsection (b) of this section, the application shall be deemed rejected and no contract shall be awarded on the basis of such application. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.230 Duty of applicant – Publication expenses.
Applicant for a contract shall pay to the City a fee in the form of a sum of money sufficient to reimburse the City for all expenses in connection with the processing of the application, including publication expenses. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.240 Notice of hearing – Publication of notice – Time for hearing.
When a public hearing is mandated under SCCC 8.25.220, the application(s) shall be placed on a City Council regular agenda provided that notice of the day, hour and place of the public hearing has been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least once within the ten days prior to the hearing date so that all persons having an interest in granting the contract may appear before the City Council and be heard thereon. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.250 Public hearing requirements – Protests – Considerations – Grant of contract.
(a) At the time set for the public hearing for consideration of a pending application for a refuse contract, if such a hearing is required under this chapter, the City Council shall:

(1) Consider the applicant’s ability to carry out the service proposed to be provided by the contract, the financial and business experience and standing of the applicant, and any other pertinent factors, including the public interest served; and

(2) Hear the application and the comments of interested persons.

(b) The City Council may adjourn the public hearing from time to time at the City Council’s discretion.

(c) Following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall decide if the contract shall be granted.

(d) Henceforth, a person’s acceptance of a franchise by entering into a contract with the City under the provisions of this chapter shall operate as an abandonment of all of that person’s preexisting franchises, rights and privileges in lieu of which the contract is granted, except as expressly provided in such contract.

(e) If the City Council’s proffered contract is not accepted by the applicant by execution within ten days of the City Council’s decision to enter into the contract to grant the franchise, the City Council’s offer is revoked and the application is denied. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.260 Duty to maintain books.
Any person holding the privilege granted by a contract pursuant to this chapter shall keep and maintain such books and records as may be required by the City Council as part of said contract. The City shall have free access and the right at any time to inspect and audit any books and records required to be maintained by the person holding the privilege granted under this chapter and for a period of three years following the expiration or termination of the franchise, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.270 Violation by grantee – Liability for damages to the City – Liability for operating without a contract.
(a) The grantee of a contract under this chapter shall be liable to the City for all damages proximately caused or resulting from the failure of the grantee to faithfully observe and perform any provisions of such contract and/or any provision of this chapter. If legal proceedings are necessary to enforce the provisions of the contract against any grantee of said contract, said grantee shall be liable for the value of the services of attorneys and of other personnel as well as the expenses of the City that are necessary to gain compliance.

(b) Except as provided in SCCC 8.25.050(b), any person providing services consisting of collecting, transporting, or disposing of refuse in the city without the benefit of a duly executed contract with the City shall be subject to criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter and shall be liable to the City for the value of the services of attorneys, other personnel, and expense of the City. Such person shall also be liable for the fees the City would have been entitled to if said person had been the duly authorized collector under contract with the City. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.275 Mandatory recycling.
(a) All responsible parties of residential properties are required to subscribe to and maintain residential recycling services for each individual household in the dwelling. An exception may be granted at the discretion of the City Manager or the City Manager’s designated representative if it is determined there is not sufficient storage space for the containers at the residential property.

(b) All responsible parties of commercial business properties are required to subscribe to and maintain commercial recycling services at commercial business properties that generate greater than or equal to four cubic yards of refuse per week. If the collector transports containers of refuse generated at the commercial business property to a material recovery facility for the purposes of mixed waste processing, the commercial business property will be deemed to be subscribing to recycling services. An exception may be granted at the discretion of the City Manager or the City Manager’s designated representative if it is determined there is not sufficient storage space for the containers at the commercial business property.

(c) Collectors are prohibited from providing garbage service to responsible parties of commercial business properties subject to the mandatory recycling requirements without providing a recycling program that includes the collection of a container no less than thirty-two (32)-gallon capacity, provided by the collector, at least one time per week. The only exceptions to this requirement are the following:

(1) The collector provides a mixed waste processing program to the commercial business in which refuse containers are taken to a material recovery facility for processing to remove recyclable and/or compostable materials.

(2) The collector may verify the responsible party has implemented and maintains a recycling program with a different service provider.

(3) The collector may verify the responsible party has been granted an exception to the mandatory commercial recycling program from the City Manager or the City Manager’s designated representative.

(d) The disposal of garbage in containers designated for source-separated or single-stream recycling and composting is prohibited.

(e) All new construction and remodeling of existing residential and commercial business structures is required to be designed to adequately store containers for garbage, recycling and organic waste, if applicable. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.276 Mandatory organic waste recycling.
(a) All responsible parties of commercial business properties are required to divert organic waste from landfill by subscribing to an organic waste recycling program that includes collection and recycling services. If the collector transports containers of refuse generated at the commercial business property to a material recovery facility for the purposes of mixed waste processing, the commercial business property shall be deemed to be subscribing to organic recycling services. An exemption may be granted at the discretion of the City Manager or designee if it is determined there is not sufficient storage space for the containers at the commercial business property.

(b) On and after April 1, 2016, commercial businesses generating eight cubic yards or more of organic waste per week are required to subscribe to and maintain organic waste recycling services.

(c) On and after July 1, 2016, commercial businesses at industrial properties generating four cubic yards or more of refuse per week are required to subscribe to and maintain organic waste recycling services.

(d) On and after January 1, 2017, commercial businesses zoned for nonindustrial use generating four cubic yards or more of organic waste per week are required to subscribe to and maintain organic waste recycling services.

(e) On and after January 1, 2019, commercial businesses zoned for nonindustrial use generating four cubic yards or more of refuse per week are required to subscribe to and maintain organic waste recycling services.

(f) All collectors authorized in accordance with SCCC 8.25.190 are required to provide organic waste collection and recycling services to commercial businesses subject to the organic waste recycling requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section.

(g) All commercial businesses that either self-haul or donate organic waste are required to provide satisfactory proof to the City in the form of disposal or donation receipts.

(h) It shall be unlawful for a responsible party to place refuse that is not organic waste or an approved trash bag in a container designated for organic waste. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.280 Recyclable material – Deposit and collection.
(a) It shall be unlawful to dispose of any material other than recyclable materials accepted by a collector in a container designated for recycling. The City Manager or designee may mandate an increase of service under SCCC 8.25.090(b) for repeated contamination violations.

(b) Recyclable material set out for collection at residential properties or other classes of properties (subject to the right of any collector under such collector’s contract with the City) that may be so designated by the City Council shall become the property of the City, the City’s authorized recyclable materials collector, or a person expressly authorized by the owner or occupant of the properties served, and only these persons shall have the exclusive right to said recyclable material.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any nondesignated collector to remove recyclable materials that are set out for any City residential curbside recycling program or any other commercial recycling program. Violators are subject to penalty as provided for in SCCC 8.25.320 (Violation) and SCCC 8.25.330 (Violation for disposal of refuse).

(d) Various properties and facilities may be approved from time to time by the City as authorized locations for the deposit of recyclable materials. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.285 Construction and demolition debris recycling.
(a) Covered Projects. All construction, demolition and renovation projects within the city, meeting one or more of the following, shall comply with this section:

(1) The project is subject to the criteria and requirements specified in the applicable California Green Building Standards Code; or

(2) The project involves construction, demolition or renovation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more.

(A) For the purposes of determining whether a project meets the foregoing thresholds, all phases of a project and all related projects taking place on a single or adjoining parcel(s), as determined by the City Manager or designee, shall be deemed a single project.

(B) No building, demolition or site development permit shall be issued for a covered project unless and until the applicant has submitted a construction and demolition debris materials check-off list, identifying all waste materials expected to be generated as a result of the project.

(b) Applicants for any covered project are required to recycle or divert at least fifty percent (50%), or the amounts, criteria and requirements specified in the applicable California Green Building Standards Code, whichever is more restrictive, of materials generated for discard by the project.

(c) Within sixty (60) days after the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the City Manager or designee a construction and demolition debris recycling report, demonstrating that it has met the diversion requirement for the project.

(d) Any applicant that fails to meet the diversion mandate in subsection (b) of this section must pay a penalty. The penalty amount shall be equal to the project square footage, multiplied by the difference between the required diversion percentage and the actual project diversion percentage, multiplied by one dollar ($1.00) per square foot.

(e) Any applicant that fails to submit the construction and demolition debris recycling report within sixty (60) days following completion of the project shall be charged a late fee, in an amount of ten percent of the diversion penalty fee or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, whichever is greater.

(f) Any applicant that fails to submit the construction and demolition debris recycling report within one hundred twenty (120) days following completion of the project shall be subject to civil or criminal penalties as authorized by SCCC 8.45.010. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.290 Clean green.
(a) It shall be unlawful to dispose green waste in a container designated for garbage or recycling.

(b) The City Manager or designee may require a single-family or multifamily residence to subscribe to clean green collection services.

(c) It shall be unlawful to dispose of any material other than plant material accepted by a collector in a container designated for clean green. The City Manager or designee may mandate an increase of service under SCCC 8.25.090(b) for repeated contamination violations. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.300 Clean-up campaign.
(a) All items must be set out no later than 7:00 A.M. on the Monday of the designated collection week, but no earlier than the Saturday prior to the designated collection week.

(b) All concrete, asphalt, dirt, brick, rocks, drywall and/or sawdust must be placed in a bulk bag to prevent stormwater runoff pollution potential. The placement of these materials directly onto the street is prohibited.

(c) Garbage, medical waste, liquids, paint, house and garden chemicals, cleaners, batteries, ammunition, explosives, auto parts containing fluids, and other hazardous waste shall not be placed on the street for collection.

(d) Unwanted material may only be placed in front of the residence that generated the debris. Placing items in front of a neighbor’s home will be construed as illegal dumping. Items shall not be set out in front of red-painted curbs, in alleys, private streets, or against fences, retaining walls, hydrants or landscaping.

(e) Residents and businesses that do not subscribe and pay for the clean-up campaign program are prohibited from placing debris on the street for collection through the program. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.310 Responsibility for enforcement.
The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the City Manager or designee. In addition, other employees of the City are hereby authorized to act as agents of the City with the power to inspect, issue notices of violation, and write citations for any violation of this chapter, including but not limited to peace officers, building inspectors and/or code enforcement staff. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.320 Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

8.25.330 Violations for disposal of refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person or collector to dispose of refuse on the land utilized by the City, if any, as an authorized disposal facility except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1947 § 3, 1-12-16).

Chapter 8.30
PUBLIC NUISANCES
Sections:

8.30.010  Findings and purpose.

8.30.020  Definitions.

8.30.030  Property maintenance – Public nuisances.

8.30.040  Responsibility for property maintenance.

8.30.050  Authority of enforcement officer.

8.30.060  Abatement of public nuisances.

8.30.070  No duty to enforce.

8.30.080  Emergency cleanup or abatement.

8.30.090  Nonemergency abatement by the City.

8.30.100  Conclusive notice.

8.30.010 Findings and purpose.
(a) The City Council of the City of Santa Clara does hereby find that it is necessary to provide for the abatement of conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public in such ways to constitute a public nuisance; and, to provide standards to safeguard life, health, and public welfare in keeping with the character of the City by allowing for the maintenance of property or premises for each of the following purposes:

(1) To safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the people by maintaining property or premises in good and appropriate condition;

(2) To promote a sound and attractive community appearance; and

(3) To enhance the economic value of the community, and each area in it, through the regulation of the maintenance of property or premises.

(b) Accordingly, the City Council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Reduce the threat to health, safety, welfare, appearance, and economic value due to the decline in property condition(s) by lawfully delineating the circumstances under which such condition(s) may be considered illegal and/or abated; and further finds that:

(2) Abatement of such condition(s) is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City because maximum use and enjoyment of property or premises in proximity to one another depends upon maintenance of those properties or premises at or above the minimum standard. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-1).

8.30.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

(a) "Abandoned," in addition to those definitions provided by State codes, local ordinances, and case law, means and refers to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, will be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned:

(1) Present operability and functional utility;

(2) The date of last effective use;

(3) The condition of disrepair or damage;

(4) The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;

(5) The status of registration or licensing of the item;

(6) The age and degree of obsolescence;

(7) The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the item versus its market value; and

(8) The nature of the area and location of the item.

(b) "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer in his/her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.

(c) "Attractive nuisance" means any condition, instrument, or machine which is unsafe, unprotected, and may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or, any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation which may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors.

(d) "Dismantled" means that from which essential equipment, parts, or contents have been removed or stripped and the outward appearance verifies the removal.

(e) "Enforcement officer" means that City officer or employee as may be designated in writing by the City Manager to enforce property or premises maintenance, zoning, and other City Code violations, as authorized by Penal Code Section 836.5.

(f) "Inoperative" means incapable of functioning or producing activity for mechanical or other reasons.

(g) "Lienholder" means any person, as defined in this chapter, who has a recorded interest in real property, including mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or holder of other recorded liens or claims of interest in real property.

(h) "Nuisance" means any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.

(i) "Owner" means the registered owner of a vehicle, the person(s) to whom property tax is assessed on real or personal property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, renter(s), lessor(s), and other occupants residing permanently or temporarily on property.

(j) "Person" means individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, social club, fraternal organization, trust, estate, receiver, or any other entity.

(k) "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, including adjacent streets, sidewalks, parkways, and parking strips.

(l) "Property" means any real property, including, but not limited to land, lot, or parcel of land, or any hereditament held by any owner, and shall include any alley, sidewalk, parkway, or unimproved public easement abutting such real property, lot, or parcel of land.

(m) "Structure" means anything constructed, built, or planted upon, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which structure requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including fences, gates, garages, carports, swimming and wading pools, patios, outdoor areas, paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.

(n) "Wrecked" means that which has the outward manifestation or appearance of damage to parts and contents that are essential to operation. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-2).

8.30.030 Property maintenance – Public nuisances.
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any owner or other person in control of said property or premises to keep or maintain property, premises, or rights-of-way in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist:

(a) Abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperable, unlicensed and discarded objects, equipment or appliances such as, but not limited to, vehicles, boats, water heaters, refrigerators, furniture which is not designed for outdoor use, household fixtures, machinery, equipment, cans, or containers standing or stored on property or on sidewalks or streets which can be viewed from a public street or walkway, alley, or other public property which items are readily accessible from such places, or which are stored on private property in violation of any other law or ordinance;

(b) Discarded putrescibles, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or recyclable items which have not been recycled within thirty (30) days of being deposited on the property which are determined by an enforcement officer to constitute a fire hazard or to be detrimental to human life, health, or safety;

(c) Oil, grease, paint, other petroleum products, hazardous materials, volatile chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, or waste (solid, liquid, or gaseous) which is determined by an enforcement officer to constitute a fire or environmental hazard, or to be detrimental to human life, health, or safety;

(d) Lumber (excluding lumber for a construction project on the property with a valid permit), salvage materials, including but not limited to auto parts, scrap metals, tires, other materials stored on premises in excess of seventy-two (72) hours and visible from a public street, walkway, alley, or other public property;

(e) Receptacles for discarded materials and recyclables which are left in the front yard following the day of the regularly scheduled refuse pick-up for the property;

(f) Swimming pool, pond, spa, other body of water, or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, unsanitary, empty, which is not securely fenced, or which is determined by the enforcement officer to be detrimental to life, health, or safety;

(g) Any premises that detrimentally impacts the surrounding neighborhood because of dilapidation, deterioration, or decay or is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used, or is not secured, or is improperly secured; and

(h) Any condition on a property that meets the requirements of subsections (h)(1) and (2):

(1) Is injurious to health, is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; and

(2) Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-3).

8.30.040 Responsibility for property maintenance.
The owner, occupant, lessee, or tenant of any property within the city shall be responsible for the maintenance of property and premises in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter and this Code. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-4).

8.30.050 Authority of enforcement officer.
Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the enforcement officer in any manner authorized by the chapter or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, civil actions, and abatement. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-5).

8.30.060 Abatement of public nuisances.
(a) Nonexclusive Authority to Abate. The City may choose to abate any public nuisance or violation of this Code through any of the abatement methods set forth in this Code or in other local, State, or Federal law, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing, or adversely affecting the City's ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of those proceedings as the City may deem are applicable. Proceeding under this section will not preclude the City from proceeding under other sections of this chapter. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any condition exists in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he/she may take enforcement action pursuant to this section.

(b) Right of Entry. The enforcement officer may enter any property or premises at all times to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this chapter whenever the enforcement officer has cause to believe a violation of provisions of this chapter is occurring, provided that:

(1) The enforcement officer shall present proper credentials, state the reason for entry, and request entry from the owner or occupant.

(A) If entry is denied, he/she may seek a court ordered inspection warrant if cause exists pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq.

(B) If entry is denied, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

(2) The enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of unoccupied property or premises, inform the owner of the reasons for entry, and request entry.

(3) The enforcement officer shall not enter any property or premises in the absence of permission to enter, unless an inspection warrant has been issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-6).

8.30.070 No duty to enforce.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the City to enforce the prohibitions in this chapter against all or any properties which may violate this chapter. In the City's prosecutorial discretion, and as the City's resources permit, this chapter may be enforced only as to a limited number of problem properties per year. Nothing in this section or the absence of any similar provisions from any other City law shall be construed to impose a duty upon the City to enforce such other provision of law. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-7).

8.30.080 Emergency cleanup or abatement.
In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, when the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives find and determine that the severity of the violation warrants immediate action, he/she may clean up or abate violation thereof. The cost of such cleanup or abatement may be recovered by the City in a civil action. Such emergency cleanup or abatement will not relieve the person of further action which may be taken by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives, including, but not limited to, liability for any violations of this chapter or any other applicable provisions of State law and local ordinances. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-9).

8.30.090 Nonemergency abatement by the City.
Following determination by the City Manager that a nuisance shall be abated by the City, the notices required by Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1 (entitled "State Housing Law Regulations"), Section 1 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations shall be given and a hearing shall be conducted as provided therein. Following abatement, the costs of abatement, including those authorized by this chapter, shall be confirmed by the City Council as provided in the California Code of Regulations and thereafter placed as a lien on the subject property. The proceeding provided by the California Code of Regulations is not exclusive. The City may abate by all other legal means available to it. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-11).

8.30.100 Conclusive notice.
Mailing of notice of any hearing or order under this chapter to the owners of the real property concerned, as the owners' names and addresses are shown on the last equalized roll upon which City taxes are collected, shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper persons and addresses for mailing the resolution, and the failure of any or all of the addressees to receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. Further, the posting of notice of a hearing or order pursuant to this chapter shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate notice to any and all occupants, users, or possessors of the property or its contents, and the failure of any such occupant, user, or possessor to see, read, understand, or otherwise receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 11-1-94. Formerly § 22A-12).

Chapter 8.35
SMOKING AND TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Sections:

8.35.010    Purpose.

8.35.020    Definitions.

8.35.030    Application to City-owned facilities.

8.35.040    Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment.

8.35.045    Prohibition of smoking in open-air dining areas.

8.35.048    Prohibition of smoking in unenclosed public areas.

8.35.050    Smoking policy in places of employment.

8.35.060    Smoking-optional areas.

8.35.070    Placement of signs.

8.35.080    Enforcement.

8.35.090    Nonretaliation.

8.35.110    Other applicable laws.

8.35.120    Multiunit residences.

8.35.130    Possession of tobacco by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.

8.35.140    Smoking of cannabis.

8.35.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:

(a) To protect public health, safety, and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in various specific locations, as set forth in this chapter;

(b) To reduce litter, wastes and pollution; and

(c) To reduce exposure to secondhand smoke, which has been shown to cause negative health effects.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any establishment regulated under Chapter 8.37 SCCC (“Smoking Lounges”) or to those areas designated under SCCC 9.05.160(o). (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

(a) “Employee” means any natural person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits, including but not limited to temporary, permanent, part-time, and full-time employees and independent contractors, as defined under applicable law.

(b) “Employer” means any person, as defined in this section, who employs the services of one or more persons.

(c) “Enclosed” means closed in by a permanent roof and the exterior walls with appropriate openings for ingress, egress, and ventilation.

(d) “Hotel” means hotel, motel, motor inn, bed and breakfast, boarding house, and other similar establishments in which the operator has the status of an innkeeper.

(e) “Multiunit residence” means property containing two or more attached units, except the following, which are specifically excluded:

(1) A campground;

(2) A hotel or motel satisfying the requirements of State and local law;

(3) A single-family home; and

(4) A single-family home with a detached or attached in-law or second unit.

(f) “Open-air dining area” means any portion of an eating establishment that contains seating for members of the public, including streets and sidewalks, to consume food or drink in an area which is out-of-doors, covered, or otherwise outside the confines of the interior premises.

(g) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, municipal corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(h) “Place of employment” means any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, offices, work areas, hallways, lobbies, employee lounges, conference rooms, employee cafeterias, locker rooms, dressing areas, or eating places. A private residence is not a place of employment for purposes of this chapter, unless it is used as a child care facility, health care facility, or community care facility.

(i) “Public parks” means any park, playground, swimming pool, recreation center or any other area in the City, owned and used by the City, and devoted to active or passive recreation.

(j) “Reasonable distance” means a distance of thirty (30) feet in any direction.

(k) “Smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, including any type of electronic and/or battery operated cigarette or vaporizer device (regardless of product name or descriptor), the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of tobacco, nicotine or other substances.

(l) “Sports arena” means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, pool halls, and other similar places where members of the public assemble indoors to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events.

(m) “Service area” means any publicly or privately owned enclosed or unenclosed area, including streets and sidewalks, that is designed to be used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service, or to make a transaction, whether or not the service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term “service area” includes, but is not limited to, areas including or within reasonable distance of information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, transit stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines, and taxi lines.

(n) “Unenclosed” means any area that is not an enclosed area.

(o) “Unit” means a personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. “Unit” includes, but is not limited to, an apartment; a condominium; a townhouse; a room in a long-term health care facility, assisted living facility, or hospital; a hotel or motel room; a room in a single room occupancy (“SRO”) facility; or a room in a homeless shelter. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.030 Application to City-owned facilities.
All facilities owned and controlled by the City, including but not limited to jails, cafeterias, libraries, public parks, offices, and any council, board, commission, and agency meeting area, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.040 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment.
Except as otherwise provided in SCCC 8.35.060, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of employment within the City of Santa Clara, including, but not limited to, the following places. The use of the phrase “public place” in this chapter is intended to be expansive. The following examples are illustrative of places deemed public for purposes of this chapter. The prohibition in this chapter is not limited to the list of examples.

(a) Elevators.

(b) Restrooms.

(c) Service lines.

(d) Laundromats.

(e) Retail stores and all areas in shopping malls inside and outside of retail stores, restaurants, bars, restrooms, and offices.

(f)  Areas available to or open to and customarily used by the general public in all business and nonprofit entities, including, but not limited to, offices (such as the offices of attorneys, doctors, accountants, other professionals, and service providers) and banks.

(g) Restaurants.

(h) Hotels.

(i) Aquariums, amusement parks, galleries, libraries, arcades, or museums when open to the public.

(j) Facilities that are primarily used as theaters, auditoriums, or halls; or that are used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, musical performances, ballets, lectures, debates, or other similar performances, except when smoking is part of any such performance.

(k) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and rooms and offices of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’ offices, and dentists’ offices.

(l) Sports arenas, convention halls, banquet rooms, and meeting rooms.

(m) Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores, convenience stores, warehouse stores, and supermarkets.

(n) Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including, but not limited to, school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee (including joint committees), or agencies of the City, or any political subdivision of the State during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent that such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City.

(o) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, senior citizen residences, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.

(p) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in multiple-unit commercial facilities.

(q) Polling places.

(r) Private clubs. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.045 Prohibition of smoking in open-air dining areas.
Smoking is prohibited in all open-air dining areas located on private or public property, including the public right-of-way. In addition, smoking is prohibited within reasonable distance of an open-air dining area, except while actively passing on the way to another destination. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.048 Prohibition of smoking in unenclosed public areas.
Except as otherwise provided in SCCC 8.35.060, smoking shall be prohibited in all unenclosed public places within the City of Santa Clara, including, but not limited to, the following places. The use of the phrase “public place” in this chapter is intended to be expansive. The following examples are illustrative of places deemed public for purposes of this chapter. The prohibition in this chapter is not limited to the list of examples.

(a) Public parks.

(b) Service areas.

(c) Public places, when being used for a public event, including a farmer’s market, parade, craft fair, concert, or any event which may be open to or attended by the general public, except that smoking is permitted on streets and sidewalks being used in a traditional capacity as pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfares, unless otherwise prohibited by law.

(d) Reasonable distance from any operable doorway, window opening, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.

(e)  Reasonable distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.050 Smoking policy in places of employment.
(a) Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each employer located within the City of Santa Clara shall adopt, implement, make known, and maintain a written smoking policy that shall contain the following requirements:

Except as set forth in SCCC 8.35.060, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, locker rooms, dressing areas, and all other enclosed facilities. In addition, smoking shall be prohibited in unenclosed areas of employment, such as open air dining areas, public parks, service areas, and public places when being used for a public event.

(b) The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption.

(c) All employers shall comply with the provisions of this section and shall be responsible for implementation of its provisions in their place(s) of employment.

(d) “No Smoking” signs shall be conspicuously posted at building entrances and in employee lounges, restrooms, locker rooms, dressing areas, cafeterias, and lunchrooms. The minimum size of signs posted under this section shall be six inches by four inches.

(e) All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy to all employees.

(f) Places of employment exempt from the prohibition on smoking in SCCC 8.35.060 shall also be exempt from this section. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.060 Smoking-optional areas.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter, unless smoking or the use of combustible materials is otherwise regulated by the City Code or any other provision of law or regulation:

(1) Private residences, except when used as a child care facility, health care facility, or community care facility. If the private residence is within a multiunit residence, then the residence is subject to the provisions of SCCC 8.35.120.

(2) Smoking-optional hotel rooms rented to guests, which shall not include meeting and banquet facilities. Hotels shall reserve and maintain no less than eighty percent (80%) of the enclosed areas of guest rooms as smoke-free rooms.

(3) Retail or wholesale stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia. (Insignificant sales of nontobacco items shall not disqualify a retail store under this provision.)

(4) Vehicles, except as otherwise limited under applicable law.

(5) Enclosed areas, while bingo games are being conducted pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5 and with a valid conditional use permit; provided, that: (A) no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is present on the premises; (B) physically separate smoke-free room(s) are provided to patrons; (C) a separate ventilation system is provided for the smoke-free room(s); and (D) the location and operation do not constitute a “place of employment” under applicable State law. The operator of a bingo game shall comply with the requirements of this chapter within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any property may prohibit smoking within the entire property or a portion of the property. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.070 Placement of signs.
“No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every building, as well as on entrances at eye level, or other places where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building or other place. The minimum size of signs posted under this section shall be six inches by four inches. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.080 Enforcement.
(a) Notice of these regulations shall be given to all applicants for a business license.

(b) The City Manager or his/her designee shall require, while a premises or establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections or certification from the owner, manager, operator, or other person having control of such establishment, that all requirements of this chapter have been complied with, including but not limited to the requirements of SCCC 8.35.050 and 8.35.070.

(c) Owners, operators, property managers, and officers of homeowners’ associations for residential properties, whether rental or owner-occupied, are required to post signs, provide notice to residents or tenants or their guests of the requirements of the law prohibiting smoking, and give written notice to violator(s) of this chapter that the violator(s)’ actions are in violation of the law prohibiting smoking. If the owners, operators, property managers, and officers of homeowners’ associations for residential properties have satisfied these requirements, they shall not be responsible for violations of the requirements of this chapter by tenants or residents, or guests of tenants or residents.

(d) Owners, operators, and property managers of commercial rental properties shall not be responsible for violations of the requirements of this chapter by tenants, or the guests of tenants, if they have posted signs in accordance with the provisions of this section and have given written notice to violator(s) of this chapter that the violator(s)’ actions are in violation of the law prohibiting smoking.

(e) An owner, operator, or manager (“owner”) of a commercial establishment shall not be responsible for violations of this chapter within an area under owner’s control, by a patron or other member of the public (“patron”); provided, that the owner:

(1) Has posted signs in accordance with this chapter;

(2) Has verbally asked the patron not to smoke; and

(3) Has warned the patron that his/her actions may be a violation of the law prohibiting smoking.

This limitation shall not limit the liability of an employer for the actions of employees in places of employment, or any other violation of this chapter by the employer.

(f) A private citizen may bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(1) In the event a third-party beneficiary to a lease agreement described in SCCC 8.35.120 wishes to avail him or herself of the private right of action provided thereunder, he or she must first provide written notice of the violation to both the violating party and the property owner or manager, by certified mail, and provide them with sixty (60) days within which to cure the violation (i.e., cease the violating behavior, terminate the violating tenant, etc.). Satisfaction of this notice requirement shall be a prerequisite to initiation of the civil action. Presentation of proof that the violation has been fully cured shall be sufficient to except the recipient of such a notice from liability.

(2) Proof of satisfaction of subsection (c) or (d) of this section is sufficient to except the property owner, operator or manager from liability, except as otherwise allowed by applicable State law.

(g) Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the City, in the exercise of its prosecutorial discretion, in any manner authorized by the chapter or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, civil penalties or administrative penalties, as under SCCC 1.05.070. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.090 Nonretaliation.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire on, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant makes a complaint regarding violation of this chapter or exercises any rights granted to him or her under this chapter. No person or landlord shall terminate a tenancy, or modify the terms of a tenancy, or in any manner retaliate against any tenant because such tenant makes a complaint regarding violation of this chapter or exercises any rights granted to him or her under this chapter. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.110 Other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by any other applicable laws. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.120 Multiunit residences.
(a) Beginning August 1, 2019, smoking is prohibited and no person shall smoke inside any new or existing unit of a multiunit residence, in any enclosed or unenclosed common area of a multiunit residence, or within a reasonable distance of any operable doorway, window, opening, or vent of a multiunit residence.

(b) Smoking is prohibited in multiunit residences as provided in subsection (a) of this section, except that a person with legal control over a common area, or authorized representative, may designate a portion of the common area as a designated smoking area; provided, that at all times the designated smoking area complies with subsection (c) of this section.

(c) Designated Smoking Areas in Multiunit Residences. A designated smoking area shall:

(1) Be located in an unenclosed and clearly delineated area totaling not more than ten percent of the total unenclosed area of the multiunit residence for which it is designated;

(2) Be located at least a reasonable distance away from any operable doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area. This requirement is not limited to the doors, windows, openings or other vents in the same multiunit residence. Rather, it is intended to apply to any doors, windows, openings, or other vents within the reasonable distance radius, whether on the same property or otherwise;

(3) Have receptacles designed for and primarily used for disposal of tobacco waste and that are maintained free of tobacco-related litter including, but not limited to, cigarette butts;

(4) Be at least a reasonable distance from, and shall not include, unenclosed areas primarily used by children or that facilitate physical activity, including, for example, playgrounds, parks, swimming pools, and school campuses.

(d) Common Areas Free from Smoking Waste. Persons with legal control over common areas in multiunit residences, and their authorized representatives, shall ensure that all common areas except those meeting the requirements of subsection (c) of this section remain free of smoking and tobacco waste, and ash trays, ash cans, or other receptacles designed for or primarily used for disposal of smoking and tobacco waste.

(e) Signage. “No smoking” signs shall be posted as required by SCCC 8.35.070 of this chapter, but are not required inside any unit of a multiunit residence. Signs shall be maintained by the person or persons with legal control over the common areas or the authorized representative of such person.

(f) Lease Terms. Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a new or existing unit in a multiunit residence entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall include the following:

(1) A true and correct copy of the full text of this chapter.

(2) A description of and/or image depicting the location(s) of any designated smoking area(s) on the property, if any.

(3) A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status to all occupants of residences or residence units within reasonable distance, as to the smoking provisions of the lease or other rental agreement, such that an aggrieved third-party beneficiary may institute a private civil action as against violator(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(g) Whether or not a landlord complies with subsection (f) of this section, the clauses required by that subsection shall be implied and incorporated by law into every agreement to which subsection (f) of this section applies and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on which the landlord could have made the insertions pursuant to subsection (f) of this section.

(h) This chapter shall not create additional liability for a landlord to any person for a tenant’s breach of any smoking provision in a lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multiunit residence if the landlord has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise allowed by applicable State law.

(i) The prohibitions contained in this section do not apply to a person who is smoking while actively passing on the way to another destination. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.130 Possession of tobacco by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
It shall be unlawful for persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess tobacco or tobacco products (including electronic smoking devices and e-liquids whether or not they contain nicotine or tobacco), as defined in Penal Code Section 308 and Business and Professions Code Section 22950.5, in the City of Santa Clara. This section shall not apply to active duty military personnel of at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

8.35.140 Smoking of cannabis.
It shall be unlawful for persons to smoke cannabis wherever the smoking of tobacco is prohibited under this chapter and/or State law. (Ord. 1996 § 1, 2-5-19).

Chapter 8.37
SMOKING LOUNGES
Sections:

8.37.010    Definition.

8.37.020    Permit required.

8.37.030    Operating standards.

8.37.040    Permissible locations.

8.37.050    Permitted hours of operation.

8.37.060    Compliance with State laws related to smoking.

8.37.070    Application for permit.

8.37.080    Determination of application completeness.

8.37.090    Action on application.

8.37.100    Building permits and business tax certificates.

8.37.010 Definition.
“Smoking lounge” means a business establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part, to the smoking of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or other substances, including but not limited to establishments known variously as cigar lounges, hookah lounges, tobacco clubs, tobacco bars, etc. (Collectively referred to as “smoking lounge(s).”) (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.020 Permit required.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a smoking lounge, unless smoking lounges are authorized in the applicable zoning district, and the City has issued either a smoking lounge permit or a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter.

(b) The holding or conducting of any event or activity subject to the provisions of this chapter without a valid permit therefor issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly exempt hereunder, is declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.030 Operating standards.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon the premises within the city, the business of a smoking lounge except in compliance with all of the following requirements:

(a) Type of Business. The business qualifies as a retail or wholesale tobacco shop or private smokers’ lounge, as defined in California Labor Code Section 6404.5(d) and SCCC 8.35.060(a)(3), or the business sells electronic cigarettes for consumption on the premises.

(b) Alcoholic Beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed on the premises.

(c) Intoxicated Persons. A smoking lounge owner or operator shall not permit any person obviously under the influence of any intoxicating drug or beverage to patronize the smoking lounge.

(d) Minors. No persons under eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted within the business.

(e) Entertainment. No live entertainment, including but not limited to singers, disc jockeys, dancers, or comedians, shall be permitted within the business except as authorized pursuant to and in accordance with the terms of a valid entertainment permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.60 SCCC, Public Entertainment, and/or Chapter 5.61 SCCC, Public Entertainment Generally.

(f) Indoor Operations. All business-related activities shall be conducted wholly within a building. Operation of outdoor appurtenances, such as barbecues, fire-pits, braziers or lit coals, shall not be permitted.

(g) Admission Charges Prohibited. No admittance fee, cover charge or requirement of any charge or minimum payment as a condition of entry shall be permitted.

(h) Security. As deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, the smoking lounge shall provide uniformed security guard(s).

(i) Windows. No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the tenant space from outside the premises during operating hours. Any proposed window tint shall be approved in advance by the Santa Clara Police Department.

(j) Interior Lighting. The interior of the business shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernible to persons of normal visual acuity.

(k) Automatic Amusement Games. No automatic amusement game, as defined in SCCC 5.80.010, shall be permitted anywhere within the business.

(l) Ventilation. Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the heating of coals in accordance with all requirements imposed by the Santa Clara Fire Department, or as otherwise required by State or Federal laws. The ventilation system shall also assure that smoke from the smoking lounge is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building hosting the smoking lounge or into any other building in the vicinity of the smoking lounge.

(m) Parking. Parking shall be provided according to the standard of one parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of smoking lounge floor area, or one space for each three seats, whichever is greater.

(n) Occupancy. The occupancy shall not exceed the lesser of (1) the occupancy limit for the premises established by the Santa Clara Fire Department or (2) an occupancy limit established as a condition of the permit approved pursuant to this chapter.

(o) Loitering. The smoking lounge owner or operator shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the smoking lounge either on the premises or within fifty (50) feet of the premises.

(p) Compliance with Laws. The business shall also be in conformity with all other City, State and Federal laws. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.040 Permissible locations.
A smoking lounge is not permitted to be located any closer than the following distances from the listed uses:

(a) Residential zoning districts: five hundred (500) feet;

(b) Public or private pre-school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school or high school: five hundred (500) feet;

(c) Park or recreation facility operated by the City: five hundred (500) feet;

(d) Another smoking lounge: five hundred (500) feet. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.050 Permitted hours of operation.
A smoking lounge shall be permitted to operate during the hours specified in the permit, but in no event shall the smoking lounge exceed the hours of 11:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. on Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 A.M. to midnight on Friday and Saturday. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.060 Compliance with State laws related to smoking.
A smoking lounge shall comply with all State laws pertaining to smoking in the workplace and places of public accommodation and pertaining to the sale or furnishing of tobacco products to minors, including but not limited to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 and California Penal Code Section 308. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.070 Application for permit.
(a) An application for a permit shall be filed with the Planning Division in writing on a form prescribed by the Planning and Inspection Department, and shall be accompanied by plans and elevations necessary to show the detail of the proposed smoking lounge. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set by resolution of the City Council. The form shall contain, at least, the following information:

(1) The legal name, residence address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the proposed establishment making application and the owner of the property;

(2) The legal name, residence address and telephone number of the person submitting the application as authorized agent of the owner(s), if applicable;

(3) The business name, address and telephone number under which the activity will be conducted;

(4) The exact nature and location of the activity for which the permit is requested and an estimate of the numbers of patrons of the establishment;

(5) A security plan for control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and prevention of unlawful conduct by employees and patrons (such as assaults, vandalism, littering, theft, sale or use of controlled substances, and consumption of alcohol) within the building(s) and outside in the areas affected by the public attending the event;

(6) A plan for control of noise affecting nearby premises (noise control plan), with special attention to prevention of noise nuisance to nearby residences, if any;

(7) The hours of operation of the establishment; and

(8) Such other information pertaining to public health and safety as may be required by the City to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of the requirements of the Zoning Code and, in addition, any information that the applicant may wish to include.

(b) Submitting false or misleading information on the application shall constitute grounds for denial or immediate revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.080 Determination of application completeness.
(a) No application shall be deemed as received by the City until the applicant has paid the applicable application fees.

(b) Not more than thirty (30) calendar days after an application and fees have been received, the Planning Division shall make a determination regarding application completeness, and will notify the applicant, via mail or personal delivery, as to whether the application is not complete. If the application is not complete, the notice shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and description of information needed to complete the application.

(c) Not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the submittal of additional information in response to the notification pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the Planning Division shall notify the applicant as to whether the application is still not complete. The Planning Division shall specify those parts of the application that are incomplete, and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and description of information needed to complete the application.

(d) If either determination, pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, is not made within thirty (30) calendar days after the submittal or additional submittal, the application shall be deemed complete and the application shall be eligible for a decision on the merits.

(e) Nothing herein precludes an applicant from waiving the right to a determination of application completeness or from extending the period of time for a determination of completeness.

(f) A determination of application incompleteness may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the applicant. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the Planning Division not more than ten calendar days following the date the Planning Division provides the applicant with a determination of application incompleteness.

(g) Upon receipt of an appeal of application incompleteness, the Planning Commission shall review the application at a public hearing and shall issue a final determination regarding the completeness or incompleteness of the application not later than sixty (60) calendar days after the filing of the written appeal, unless the applicant agrees to extend the time period. If such a determination is not made within sixty (60) calendar days, the application shall be deemed complete and shall be eligible for a decision on the merits.

(h) Nothing in this section shall preclude the City from denying the application on the grounds that the information provided is inadequate or fails to demonstrate that the application should be approved in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.090 Action on application.
(a) Upon a determination by the Planning Division that an application is complete, the Santa Clara Fire Prevention Division or designee shall conduct an appropriate investigation, including, but not limited to, consultation with the Police, Fire and Planning Departments and inspection of the premises as needed.

(b) The Fire Prevention Division shall make a determination as to whether issuance of the permit would allow the smoking lounge to be held or conducted:

(1) In violation of any provisions of this Code, or in violation of any other Federal, State or City law or laws; or

(2) In a building or structure which is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business, activity, or event, or the general public, under the standards established by the Uniform Codes or the California Fire Code, as adopted by the City; or

(3) On premises which lack adequate on-site parking areas for employees and the public patronizing the smoking lounge, under the standards set forth in SCCC Title 18, Zoning, and any regulations adopted by the City, except for existing uses that are legal and nonconforming with respect to parking; or

(4) In a manner in which proposed security measures are determined to be inadequate to deter unlawful conduct on the part of employees or patrons, or to promote the safe and orderly assembly and movement of persons and vehicles, or the proposed noise control plan is determined to be inadequate to prevent disturbance of the neighborhood by excessive noise created by the activity or by patrons entering or leaving the premises.

(c) For zoning districts in which a smoking lounge is a permitted use, the Fire Prevention Division shall issue or deny a smoking lounge permit.

(1) If the Fire Prevention Division makes a determination that issuance of the permit would not violate any of the standards listed in subsection (b) of this section, the Fire Prevention Division shall issue a smoking lounge permit. Otherwise, the Fire Prevention Division shall issue a denial.

(2) If the Fire Prevention Division denies the permit, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the grounds for such denial. The notice shall also advise the applicant of their right to appeal the denial of his or her application and shall state the last date on which an appeal may be filed, which shall be the fifteenth (15th) working day after the date on which the notice was deposited in the mail or was personally delivered to the applicant.

(d) For zoning districts in which a smoking lounge is a conditionally permitted use, the Planning Commission shall issue or deny a conditional use permit.

(1) Prior to the Planning Commission’s consideration of the application, the Fire Prevention Division shall make a determination as to whether issuance of the permit would violate any of the standards listed in subsection (b) of this section, and that determination and the application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission.

(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to SCCC 18.110.030 to consider the application. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either grant or deny a conditional use permit for the smoking lounge, pursuant to the procedures and based upon the findings set forth in Chapter 18.110 SCCC and considering the Fire Prevention Division’s determination.

(3) Planning Commission actions are appealable to the City Council pursuant to SCCC 18.110.070. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

8.37.100 Building permits and business tax certificates.
No building permit or business tax certificate shall be issued in any case where a permit is required by the terms of this title until after the granting of such use permit by the applicable decisionmaking body and the period allowed for appeal has elapsed. In the event of an appeal, no such permit or license shall be granted until the matter has been finally acted upon and the permit for the smoking lounge has been finally approved. Building permits or business tax certificates issued pursuant to this entire section shall conform to the terms and conditions of the permit granted for the smoking lounge. (Ord. 1939 § 2, 3-24-15).

Chapter 8.40
FALSE ALARM REGULATION
Sections:

8.40.010  Purpose and scope.

8.40.020  Definitions.

8.40.030  Alarm permit required.

8.40.040  Permit application.

8.40.050  Permit application fees.

8.40.060  Repealed.

8.40.070  Application review and permit issuance.

8.40.080  Transferability.

8.40.090  Confidentiality.

8.40.100  Alarm systems in apartment complexes – Contracted for by individual tenant.

8.40.110  Alarm systems in apartment complexes – Furnished by the apartment complex as an amenity.

8.40.120  Proper alarm systems operation and maintenance.

8.40.130  Monitoring procedures.

8.40.140  Duties of alarm company.

8.40.150  Alarm system operating instructions.

8.40.160  Alarm dispatch request records.

8.40.170  System performance reviews.

8.40.180  False alarms fees and fines.

8.40.190  Appeal from fees or fines.

8.40.200  Denial, suspension, revocation of alarm permit.

8.40.210  Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit.

8.40.220  Reinstatement of alarm permit.

8.40.230  No response.

8.40.240  Emergency no response.

8.40.010 Purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to maintain the operational reliability and proper use of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.

(b) This chapter governs systems intended to summon police response, requires alarm permits, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension, denial or revocation of alarm permits.

(c) Motor vehicles and recreational vehicles are not subject to this false alarm chapter. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99; Ord. 1836 § 1, 5-6-08).

8.40.020 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) "A" definitions:

(1) "Alarm administrator" means a person or persons designated by the Chief of Police to administer, control and review alarm applications, alarm permits and alarm dispatch requests.

(2) "Alarm company" means the business, by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site.

(3) "Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the police by the alarm company that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

(4) "Alarm site" means a single premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.

(5) "Alarm system" means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with radio frequency signals, which are designed to discourage crime, by emitting or transmitting a remote or local, audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition. Alarm system does not include:

(A) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or

(B) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not have a sounding device which can be heard on the exterior of the alarm site and is not connected to or monitored by an alarm company.

(6) "Alarm user" means any person, firm partnership, corporation or other entity that uses an alarm system at its alarm site.

(b) Reserved for future use.

(c) "C" definitions:

(1) "Chief of Police" means the elected Chief of Police of the City or an authorized representative of the Chief of Police.

(2) "City" means the City of Santa Clara, California.

(3) "Conversion" means the transaction or process by which one alarm company begins monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm business.

(4) "Corrective action" means an appropriate act or acts taken by the alarm user or alarm company that substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms.

(d) "D" definitions:

(1) "Duress alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police response.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) "F" definitions:

(1) "False alarm dispatch" means an alarm dispatch request to the Police Department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed an investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch request which is canceled by the alarm company or the alarm user prior to the time the responding officer reaches the alarm site shall not be considered a false alarm dispatch.

(2) "False alarm hearing officer" means the City Attorney or designee.

(3) "False alarm user awareness class" means a class operated by the alarm companies for the purpose of educating alarm users about the problems created by false alarm dispatches and in the responsible use of their alarm system.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) "H" definitions:

(1) "Holdup alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) "K" definitions:

(1) "Keypad" means a device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) "M" definitions:

(1) "Master alarm permit" means the type of permit required by the owner or property manager of an apartment complex, when individual unit alarm systems are provided as an amenity.

(2) "Monitoring" means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the City for the purpose of summoning police response to the alarm site.

(n) "N" definitions:

(1) "No response" means an affirmative action taken by the Chief of Police, after written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the alarm user that the police will not respond to any further alarms at the alarm site until proof of appropriate corrective action has been taken to substantially reduce the likelihood of additional false alarms dispatches.

(o) "O" definitions:

(1) "One plus duress alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering on a keypad, a code that adds a one-number digit increase to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (example: normal code = 1234; one plus duress code = 1235).

(p) "P" definitions:

(1) "Permit" means authorization for an alarm user to operate an alarm system at their site and remains until such time as a takeover occurs.

(2) "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) Reserved for future use.

(t) "T" definitions:

(1) "Takeover" means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) "V" definitions:

(1) "Verify" means an attempt, by the alarm business, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.030 Alarm permit required.
(a) No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued by the alarm administrator. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm site.

(b) A special classification shall be required for an alarm system equipped for a duress alarm.

(c) The alarm company shall instruct the alarm user to submit an alarm permit application to the alarm administrator for any alarm system installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(d) For those alarms installed prior to the enactment of this chapter, the alarm administrator will notify the alarm user regarding the permit application requirement. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.040 Permit application.
Each application for an alarm permit shall include all of the following information:

(a) The name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user who will be the alarm permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees or fines assessed under this chapter;

(b) The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial or apartment;

(c) The purpose of the alarm system (i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, etc.) for each alarm system located at the alarm site;

(d) A signed certification from the alarm user and alarm company stating:

(1) The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system, whichever is applicable;

(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm system takeover and/or business responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system;

(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing alarm company;

(4) That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms has been left with the applicant;

(5) That the alarm company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms;

(6) That a minimum of three alternate contact persons and current telephone numbers have been provided; and

(7) The classification of the alarm site as being equipped or non-equipped for duress alarm. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.050 Permit application fees.
(a) The alarm permit fee for a residential or a commercial alarm site is determined by resolution of the City Council. No refund of an alarm permit fee will be made.

(b) No additional fee shall be assessed for an alarm system equipped for duress alarm. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.060 Alarm permit duration and renewal.
Repealed by Ord. 1824. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.070 Application review and permit issuance.
(a) Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of permit fees, the alarm administrator shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an alarm permit.

(b) Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application, the alarm administrator shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and so notify the applicant as follows:

(1) The alarm administrator shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation.

(2) If the application is denied, the alarm administrator shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.080 Transferability.
An alarm permit shall not be transferred to another person. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the alarm permit application within fifteen (15) business days. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.090 Confidentiality.
Confidential information contained in alarm permit application shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the City with access to such information, unless subject to disclosure pursuant to California Government Code Section 6250 et seq. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.100 Alarm systems in apartment complexes – Contracted for by individual tenant.
(a) If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can grant access to the apartment to the alarm company which is providing the monitoring service.

(b) A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The fee for this alarm permit or the renewal of this alarm permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential alarm site.

(c) For purposes of enforcing this chapter against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.110 Alarm systems in apartment complexes – Furnished by the apartment complex as an amenity.
(a) If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex provides alarm systems in each residential unit as an amenity, then the owner or property manager of the apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm permit from the alarm administrator. The annual fee for this alarm permit and for each permit renewal per residential unit per year shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. All units, whether occupied or not, shall be included in calculating the required fee.

(b) For purposes of assessing fees or fines and enforcing this chapter, the master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of fees or fines for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm systems in residential units.

(c) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment areas. An annual fee for such an alarm permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential alarm site. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.120 Proper alarm systems operation and maintenance.
(a) An alarm user shall:

(1) Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches;

(2) Maintain a list of three alternate contact persons and current telephone numbers with the alarm company;

(3) Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative(s) to respond to the alarm system's location within one hour when notified by the City to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises; and

(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.

(b) An alarm user shall adjust the alarm system or cause the mechanisms of the alarm system to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated or fifteen (15) minutes for systems operating under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. standards 365 or 609.

(c) An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm company inspect the alarm system after five false alarm dispatches within a thirty (30) day period to insure the alarm meets industry standards. After five false alarm dispatches within a thirty (30) day period, the alarm user must have a properly licensed alarm company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.130 Monitoring procedures.
(a) An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:

(1) Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress or hold-up alarm activation before requesting a police response to an alarm signal;

(2) Report alarm signals to Santa Clara communications by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator;

(3) Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the City in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator;

(4) Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the City in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; and

(5) Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress alarm.

(b) The alarm administrator shall:

(1) Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; and

(2) Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.140 Duties of alarm company.
(a) After January 1, 2000, alarm companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Alarm companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to 1999.

(b) After January 1, 2001, when performing a takeover or conversion, an alarm company must remove the one plus duress alarm capability from the alarm system being taken over or converted.

(c) After January 1, 2000, alarm companies shall not install a device(s) for activating a hold-up alarm which is a single action non-recessed button. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.150 Alarm system operating instructions.
Alarm companies shall provide, and the alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.160 Alarm dispatch request records.
(a) When responding to an alarm dispatch request, the officer and/or communications should record such information as reasonably necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited, to the following information:

(1) Identification of the alarm permit number for the alarm site;

(2) Address of the alarm site;

(3) Unit, area and/or sub-area of premises involved;

(4) Dispatch received time;

(5) Date and time of arrival at the alarm site;

(6) Weather conditions effecting the alarm system activation;

(7) Whether the alarm activation was due to a mechanical failure;

(8) Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any;

(9) Identification of the responsible representative of the alarm company, and/or;

(10) Unable to locate the address.

(b) The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the dispatch was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or was a false alarm dispatch.

(c) In the case of an assumed false alarm dispatch, the responding police officer shall leave notice at the alarm site that the Police Department has responded to a false alarm dispatch. The notice shall include the following information:

(1) The date and time of police response to the false alarm dispatch;

(2) The identification number of the responding police officer; and

(3) A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid fees or fines.

(d) Alarm companies which perform monitoring services must maintain for a period of at least ninety (90) days following request for police dispatch to an alarm site, records relating to the dispatch. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) or point(s) activated, the time of request for police dispatch and evidence that an attempt to verify was made to the alarm site prior to the request for police dispatch. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.170 System performance reviews.
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppression of false alarm dispatch(s), the alarm administrator may require an alarm system inspection by a properly licensed alarm company to insure the alarm meets industry standards. In addition, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm company responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm dispatch. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.180 False alarms fees and fines.
An alarm user or the master alarm permit holder for an apartment complex shall be subject to fees as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99; Ord. 1836 § 2, 5-6-08).

8.40.190 Appeal from fees or fines.
(a) An alarm user may appeal assessment of a fee or fine to the City Attorney's office by filing a written request for hearing setting forth the reasons for the appeal within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the fine. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the City Attorney's office stays the assessment of the fee or fine until the false alarm hearing officer makes a final decision.

(b) The false alarm hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The false alarm hearing officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing including, but not limited to, evidence that a false alarm dispatch was caused by a defective part that has been repaired or replaced within a reasonable time, or that an alarm dispatch request was caused by a criminal offense. The false alarm hearing officer must render a decision within ten days after the appeal hearing is held. The false alarm hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the assessment of the fee or fine. The decision of the false alarm hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the City. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.200 Denial, suspension, revocation of alarm permit.
(a) In addition to the fees pursuant to SCCC 8.40.180(a), fines pursuant to SCCC 8.40.180(e), and suspension pursuant to SCCC 8.40.180(d); the alarm administrator may deny renewal, suspend or revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that any of the following have occurred:

(1) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an alarm permit;

(2) The alarm permit holder has failed to make payment within ninety (90) days of a fee or fine assessed under SCCC 8.40.180;

(3) There have been eight false alarm dispatches within a thirty (30) day period;

(4) An alarm permit for the alarm site was suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected; or

(5) Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(b) A person commits a violation of this chapter if he/she operates an alarm system during the period in which their alarm permit is suspended or revoked.

(c) If the alarm permit is reinstated pursuant to SCCC 8.40.220, the alarm administrator then may suspend or revoke the alarm permit if it is determined that eight subsequent false alarm dispatches occur within sixty (60) days after the reinstatement date. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99; Ord. 1836 § 3, 5-6-08).

8.40.210 Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit.
(a) Upon denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action taken and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the alarm company.

(b) The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the Chief of Police by filing a written request for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within twenty (20) days after receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator. If a request for appeal is not made within the twenty (20) day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final.

(c) Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator suspending or revoking an alarm permit until the Chief of Police has completed his/her review.

(d) The Chief of Police shall conduct a hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The Chief of Police shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.

(e) The Chief of Police must render a written decision within ten days of the appeal hearing. The Chief of Police shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the alarm administrator. The decision of the Chief of Police is final as to administrative remedies with the City.

(f) Any applicant whose permit has been denied pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.220 Reinstatement of alarm permit.
(a) A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new alarm permit if the person:

(1) Submits an updated application and pays a permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council; and

(2) Pays, or otherwise resolves, all fees and fines; and

(3) Submits a certification from an alarm company, that complies with the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm company.

(b) A person whose alarm permit has been suspended pursuant to this chapter may have their alarm permit reinstated upon receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause(s) of the false alarm dispatch(s) has been addressed and appropriate corrective action has been taken. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.230 No response.
(a) The Chief of Police is authorized to implement such procedures and practices as may be reasonably necessary to reduce false alarm dispatches in the city. This may include implementation of a no response action on the part of the Police Department to alarms at alarm site(s), which have eight instances of false alarms dispatches within a thirty (30) day period.

(b) A no response may be implemented by the Chief of Police after written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the alarm user and alarm company of the repeated instances of false alarms at the alarm site and no appropriate corrective action has been taken.

(c) A no response action shall not restrict, or in any manner limit, the alarm user from requesting police response to a 911 emergency incident. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

8.40.240 Emergency no response.
(a) The Chief of Police may issue an order suspending police response or impose an emergency no response to the alarm site for a temporary time period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, if the Chief of Police determines that either:

(1) There have been an unreasonable number of false alarm dispatches at the alarm site for a twenty-four (24) hour period and there is no responsible party available; or

(2) There are continuous (more than four hours) false alarm dispatches occurring at the alarm site with no available means to disengage the alarm system.

(b) The Chief of Police shall ensure that a reasonable effort has been made to notify the responsible alarm company of an emergency no response action.

(c) An emergency no response action shall not restrict, or in any manner limit, the alarm user from requesting police response to a 911 emergency incident. (Ord. 1735 § 3, 6-1-99).

Chapter 8.45
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

8.45.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 8.

8.45.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 8.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 8 [entitled "Health and Safety"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 8 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Chapter 8.50
PORTABLE AUTOMOTIVE SPRAY-FINISHING OPERATIONS UTILIZING FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
Sections:

8.50.010    Purpose and scope.

8.50.020    Business license.

8.50.030    Hazardous waste.

8.50.040    Portable spray-finishing operations.

8.50.050    Signage and emergency equipment.

8.50.060    Cleanup and management of wastes.

8.50.010 Purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to regulate portable spray-finishing operations using flammable or combustible liquids to ensure that the spray-finishing operations will not impact neighboring properties or public safety.

(b) This chapter applies to portable spray-finishing operations that are conducted in an “open-air” environment, including, but not limited to, automotive and equipment refinishing and touch-up operations. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

8.50.020 Business license.
Businesses conducting portable spray-finishing operations within the City limits of Santa Clara are required to obtain a business license prior to conducting business in the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

8.50.030 Hazardous waste.
Generators of hazardous waste must obtain an Environmental Protection Agency Identification Number (EPA ID Number) from the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and be registered with the Santa Clara Fire Department as a hazardous waste generator prior to commencing operations. Prior to commencing operation, such generators must also prior to undertaking any activities obtain and maintain a current hazardous waste generator permit with the City of Santa Clara Fire Department. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

8.50.040 Portable spray-finishing operations.
(a) Portable spray-finishing operations shall not be conducted within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line, or within one hundred (100) feet of any building.

(b) Portable spray-finishing operations shall not be conducted within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any public property.

(c) Portable spray-finishing operations shall be conducted in areas and in a manner that does not create a hazard or nuisance.

(d) The total area being finished shall not exceed two square feet on any vehicle or piece of equipment. Per day, no more than three vehicles or pieces of equipment may be spray-finished at any given location or address.

(e) A sufficient means to collect, contain and remove all over-spray shall be provided and used in all spray-finishing operations.

(f) Spray-finishing operations shall not create odors outside of the spraying area.

(g) When spray-finishing operations are being conducted on private property, written approval for all facets of such operations shall be obtained from the property owner.

(h) Dispensing, use and storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be conducted in compliance with the Santa Clara Municipal Fire and Environmental Code.

(i) Spray-finishing operations shall be conducted in compliance with the Bay Area Air Quality Management District’s Regulation 8, Rule 45 or any other applicable regulation or standard.

(j) Portable spray-finishing operations shall only be conducted in an open-air environment and shall not be conducted under any canopy, in any tent or other structure.

(k) Portable equipment used in spray-finishing operations shall be listed and approved for such use.

(l) Businesses and/or persons conducting spray-finishing operations assume all responsibility for any damage, whether public or private, that is determined by the City to be a result of their spray-finishing operations. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

8.50.050 Signage and emergency equipment.
(a) The area where portable spray-finishing operations are being conducted must be clearly identified by cones and signage in order to prevent nonauthorized persons from entering the area.

(b) There shall be signage posted around the areas in which portable spray-finishing operations are being conducted that state “No Smoking, Open Flames or Spark-Producing Equipment within 50 feet.”

(c) Spill cleanup and control equipment supplies shall be present and maintained in the area during the time which spraying operations are being conducted.

(d) A 4A:80B:C fire extinguisher shall be available within fifty (50) feet, but not closer than twenty-five (25) feet, from the spray-finishing operations. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

8.50.060 Cleanup and management of wastes.
(a) Hazardous waste shall be managed in conformance with the California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.5, and the California Code of Regulations, Title 22. Waste paints, solvents, paint-related materials and residue from wet sanding shall be managed as hazardous waste unless the generator of the waste determines that the waste is nonhazardous using methods described in California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 66262.11.

(b) After the conclusion of spray-finishing operations each day, over-spray residue shall be removed and disposed of properly.

(c) Hazardous waste paint, solvent and paint-related hazardous waste shall be placed in containers labeled as “Hazardous Waste” in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 66262.34(e) and 66262.34(f).

(d) No chemicals, waste or wash water shall be discarded onto the ground or into the storm drain system.

(e) Before and during operations, measures must be taken to sufficiently safeguard the storm drain system in order to prevent materials from entering and contaminating the storm drain system. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 10-10-06).

Chapter 8.55
GRAFFITI
Sections:

8.55.010    Findings.

8.55.020    Definitions.

8.55.030    Nuisance.

8.55.040    Graffiti prohibited.

8.55.050    Removal of graffiti.

8.55.060    Right of City to remove.

8.55.070    Penalty provisions – Administrative citations.

8.55.080    Suspension or delay of driving privileges.

8.55.090    Parental civil liability.

8.55.100    Recovery of City funds against offender.

8.55.110    Administrative fee.

8.55.010 Findings.
In order to prevent graffiti and to provide an immediate and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to other provisions of this Code, Government Code Section 53069.3, and other remedies available at law, of combating the effects of graffiti vandalism on public and privately owned structures and real property, the City Council of the City hereby finds that graffiti is detrimental to property values, degrades the community, causes an increase in crime, is inconsistent with the City’s long-term goals and aesthetic standards, is obnoxious, is a nuisance, and, unless it is quickly removed from public and private property, results in other properties becoming the target of graffiti. It is the intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this notice to all of those who callously disregard the property rights of others, that the law enforcement agencies of the City, including the Police Department and the City Attorney’s office, will strictly enforce the law to its maximum extent and severely prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.020 Definitions.
In addition to those definitions contained in SCCC 1.05.020, the following definitions shall also apply:

(a) “Demand for payment” means an invoice for graffiti abatement costs prepared by the City containing the location and description of defaced property, a summary of graffiti abatement actions performed, a listing of abatement costs and expenses incurred by the City, and the basis for the determination of the responsible person or offender.

(b) “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, inscribed, marred, drawn, sprayed, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to, or on, any surface, without authorization in advance from the owner thereof.

(c) “Property” means real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, within the City limits.

(d) “Responsible person” means any person or entity who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for the management, repair or maintenance of the property.

(e) “Structure” means the same as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

(f) “Surface” means the exposed area of any object, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, curbs, street lamp poles, utility poles, transformers, trees and vegetation, signs, and/or trash receptacles. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.030 Nuisance.
It is hereby declared that graffiti is obnoxious and a public and private nuisance, and is subject to abatement and punishment as defined in this Code. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.040 Graffiti prohibited.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon any public or privately owned property, structure, or surface within the City.

(b) It is unlawful for any person who owns or is otherwise in control of any real property within the City, even if it is located in the City right-of-way, to permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain for longer than seventy-two (72) hours on any surface located on such property and visible to the public. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.050 Removal of graffiti.
(a) It is unlawful for a responsible person to permit property that has been defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours after notification by the City of the existence of graffiti on the property which must be removed. Property shall be considered no longer defaced when the graffiti is removed or the defaced area is covered by paint that is similar in shade and color to the surface upon which the graffiti is placed.

(b) For the purposes of this section, notification to the responsible person shall be by posting a notice on the property to be cleaned that the graffiti must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.060 Right of City to remove.
(a) Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware, or is notified and determines, that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the City, the City shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the Director of Public Works, or designee, determines that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community.

(b) Right of Entry. If a responsible person fails to remove graffiti within seventy-two (72) hours of being notified by the City, the Director of Public Works or designee (including an independent contractor) shall have the right to enter onto the property, paint over or remove said graffiti.

(1) Notice – Method of Service. Before entering onto a person’s property to abate graffiti, the City shall notify the responsible person in writing of its intent to do so. Said notice shall be served by any of the following methods:

(A) Delivering to and leaving personally with the responsible person or a person of suitable age and discretion who resides or is employed at the property (“personal service”); or

(B) Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the last known address of the responsible person (simultaneously, a duplicate notice may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid); or

(C) If the graffiti is on attended or occupied property, by posting or hanging a notice on the defaced property in a manner most likely to give actual notice to the responsible person. All multiple property owners shall establish an agent for service of process with an address, email address and facsimile number where the owner can be notified during normal business hours (8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.). Successful delivery of a notice to the agent’s address or successful transmission of a facsimile to the number provided shall be an acceptable method of service for multiple property owners.

(2) Notice – When Served. The notice shall be deemed served and the responsible person considered notified at the time of personal service; or the successful delivery of the certified letter (or the third day after mailing of the duplicate notice); or seventy-two (72) hours after the notice is posted on the property; or when a facsimile is successfully transmitted to the multiple property owner’s agent for service of process. Actual notice shall cure any defect in the effort to provide constructive notice.

(3) Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the Santa Clara City Code section being violated; the property address or location where the graffiti has been observed; the date(s) and time(s) the graffiti was observed; a description of the corrective action required and time limit, including the need to use paint which is similar in shade and color to the structure or item upon which the graffiti is painted; the consequences of failing to comply; all hearing and appeal rights; and the name of the issuing officer or staff member.

(4) Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering onto private property for the purpose of graffiti removal, the City shall attempt to secure the written or oral consent of the responsible person, which may be incorporated into the required written notice. The responsible person may execute and file with the City a consent form that authorizes the City, without notice, to immediately enter onto the property to paint over any graffiti. Such consent shall be effective indefinitely, until withdrawn in writing by the responsible person.

(5) Graffiti in “Privacy Areas.” Unless a warrant or proper consent is secured, the City shall not remove or paint over graffiti if it is located in an area where the property owner or occupant has a reasonable expectation of privacy (“privacy area”). Likewise, the City shall not remove or paint over graffiti that is not in a privacy area if a privacy area must be entered to abate said graffiti.

(6) Pre-Abatement Conference. A responsible person may request, by telephone, in writing, or in person, that an informal conference be held before the City enters the party’s property to abate graffiti. The request for a conference shall stay the City’s abatement efforts and must be made within seventy-two (72) hours of being served notice pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. The conference shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The purpose of the conference shall be to determine the propriety of the City’s impending abatement action. A decision on the validity of that action shall be made and communicated to the responsible person before the end of the conference (unless a continuance is necessary). If determined to be valid, the City may abate the offending graffiti seventy-two (72) hours after the decision. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.070 Penalty provisions – Administrative citations.
(a) It is the City’s intent that, pursuant to California Penal Code Section 640.6(a), all acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the City shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, et seq., or this chapter. Accordingly, any violation of SCCC 8.55.040(a) shall be a misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail, a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or by such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti clean-up to the maximum extent permitted by California Penal Code Section 594 and/or any other provision of law.

(b) In addition to all other remedies or penalties provided by law, violation of any of the sections contained in this chapter are punishable in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 1.05 SCCC.

(c) Violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney.

(d) Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person or entity and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided herein.

(e) Community service in and for the City may be imposed by the court, in addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, where there has been a conviction or guilty or nolo contendere plea to a violation of this chapter.

(f) Any community service which is required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for a person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be required by the court to be performed in the presence and under the direct supervision of the person’s parent or legal guardian.

(g) If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied for violating this chapter, the parent or legal guardian shall be liable for the payment of the fine or restitution for any intentional acts of the minor. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.080 Suspension or delay of driving privileges.
For each conviction of a person aged thirteen (13) to twenty-one (21) for violation of SCCC 8.55.040(a) or any State law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the City shall petition the sentencing court to suspend existing driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.090 Parental civil liability.
In addition to any other remedy provided herein, each parent or legal guardian shall also be personally liable for any and all costs to any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by that parent or guardian’s minor child, and for all law enforcement costs, City staff costs, attorneys’ fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement in accordance with California Civil Code Section 1714.1. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.100 Recovery of City funds against offender.
(a) Once an offender has been identified by the Police Department, City Attorney or other law enforcement agency and the City has expended funds to remove graffiti, regardless of location, which was caused by the identified offender, the City may recover the funds in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) The Police Department or City Attorney will submit a demand for payment, ordering payment to be made to the City within ten days. The demand for payment shall also provide the offender with notice of appeal procedures.

(2) If the identified offender is a minor, then pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.3(d), the Police Department or City Attorney will submit a demand for payment to the minor and the minor’s parents or guardian having custody and control of the minor, ordering payment to be made within ten days. The demand for payment shall also provide the parents or guardian with notice of appeal procedures.

(b) Appeals from the demand for payment shall be made in accordance with SCCC 1.10.060.

(1) At the hearing, if one is requested, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor may each be heard and provided with the opportunity to show cause why the City should not recover funds from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the City should recover funds from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor.

(2) If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the City should recover funds from the offender or, if a minor, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue an order to that effect, and the amount shall be payable to the City. The determination of the Administrative Hearing Officer is final.

(3) Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2 and 38773.6, the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the funds expended by the City. If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the accounting and demand for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus interest on the unpaid amount, which interest shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid.

(4) In the event the funds have not been paid within thirty (30) days from the date of issuing an accounting and demand for payment, the amount unpaid including any penalty and interest thereon, shall constitute a lien pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.2 against the property of the minor and against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Prior to recording a notice of lien, the City shall provide notice pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2. Any such lien not paid by June 30th of each year may, upon adoption of a resolution by the City Council, be collected along with, and in the same manner as, the general property taxes. The liened property shall be subject to the penalties, procedures, and sale in case of delinquency as provided in the Civil Code of California.

(5) As an alternative to a lien and pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6, the funds shall constitute a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in Government Code Section 38773.6.

(6) In addition to any other remedy provided herein or available at law, the amount owed pursuant to Government Code Section 38772 shall constitute a personal obligation against the offender, or if a minor, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

8.55.110 Administrative fee.
An administrative fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council shall be added as part of any abatement proceedings. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 5-7-13).

Chapter 8.60
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.60.010    Purpose and intent.

8.60.020    Definitions.

8.60.030    Prohibition.

8.60.040    Exemptions.

8.60.050    Enforcement.

8.60.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is intended to promote public safety and protect people engaging in large venue events. In consideration of these concerns, the City is mandating a “no-fly” restriction at all times by unmanned aircraft systems within one-half mile around and over Levi’s® Stadium, over Santa Clara University sports facilities when they are in use, and over large venue special events in public parks and public facilities that will attract large groups of people. All drones are subject to weight and design restrictions. All restrictions are intended to protect persons gathered in groups where a drone incident would cause greater harm and risk of injury due to a greater number of people gathered in a close proximity. It is not intended to restrict legitimate hobbyists operating drones in compliance with FAA rules and any applicable laws, and outside of the prohibited areas. This chapter is not intended to preempt FAA rules, but to operate in conjunction with those rules to promote public safety while recognizing the limitations in the FAA’s enforcement capabilities. (Ord. 1942 § 1, 8-18-15).

8.60.020 Definitions.
(a) “Drone” shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system (UAS) that can fly under the control of a remote pilot or by a global positioning system (GPS) guided autopilot mechanism.

(b) “Large venue special events” shall mean any event held in a public park or open-air facility that is open to the public and intended to attract people. (Ord. 1942 § 1, 8-18-15).

8.60.030 Prohibition.
(a) Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, drones or UASs are prohibited from being deployed, launched or flown in any airspace within or over any sporting and/or large venue special event, including but not limited to over and within one-half mile of Levi’s® Stadium, over Santa Clara University sports facilities when they are in use, and over public parks and public facilities during large venue special events.

(b) In all other areas of the City, the following restrictions shall apply:

(1) Drones may not be larger than five pounds including any attachments, and may not be equipped with detachable cargo, releasable payload, or any device equipped to carry a weapon. Any modifications to a drone must be pursuant to FAA approval.

(2) Drones over five pounds may be operated only by a registered member of the Academy of Model Aeronautics (AMA), if the operator is subject to and compliant with AMA rules. Notwithstanding the weight limit, all other provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1942 § 1, 8-18-15).

8.60.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not prohibit the use of drones or UASs by any law enforcement agency for lawful purposes and in a lawful manner. (Ord. 1942 § 1, 8-18-15).

8.60.050 Enforcement.
Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070 and Chapter 8.45 SCCC, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. Violators may be guilty of a misdemeanor. Equipment flown in violation of this chapter may be confiscated. (Ord. 1942 § 1, 8-18-15).

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.05    In General

9.10    Regulation of Noise and Vibration

9.15    Regulation of the Distribution of Certain Advertising Material Including Handbills

9.20    Restrictions on Certain Commercial Drug Paraphernalia Activities

9.25    News Racks

9.30    Trespassing

9.35    Regulation of Use of Parks by Large Groups

9.40    Regulation of Self-Service Display of Tobacco Products

9.45    Enforcement of Title

9.50    Repealed

9.55    Prohibition Against Discrimination

9.60    Food and Beverage Service Worker Retention

Chapter 9.05
IN GENERAL
Sections:

9.05.005    Definitions.

9.05.010    Disturbing the peace.

9.05.020    Special response fee.

9.05.025    Public nuisance – Posting of premises – Notice to owner.

9.05.027    Landlord liability.

9.05.030    Evasion of an admission fee.

9.05.040    Intoxicating liquors – Drinking in public prohibited except as authorized.

9.05.050    Violation of certain rules and regulations of the governing body of a school district or of the Parks and Recreation Department.

9.05.060    Amplified sound.

9.05.070    Enforcement and penalties for violation – Authority of enforcement officer.

9.05.080    Minors – Possession of certain weapons without parental consent prohibited.

9.05.090    Sale of weapons to minors without request of parents, etc., prohibited.

9.05.100    Minors – Reports required by owners, etc., of certain businesses.

9.05.110    Certain social gatherings unlawful.

9.05.120    Weapons – Discharging of firearms restricted.

9.05.130    Unsafe or disruptive conduct.

9.05.140    Cost recovery for acts of vandalism.

9.05.145    Recovery of costs, fees, expenses, and penalties – Personal debt – Liens.

9.05.150    Drug-free zones.

9.05.160    Activities and conduct prohibited in stadium sporting or entertainment events.

9.05.165    Activities and conduct prohibited in parking facilities adjacent to the stadium or parking facilities used for stadium events.

9.05.170    Penalties.

9.05.005 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Juvenile” means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.

(b) “Loud and unreasonable noise” means any noise which is loud, boisterous, irritating, penetrating or unusual, or that is unreasonably distracting in any other manner, such that it is likely to disturb people of ordinary sensitivity in the vicinity of such noise, and includes, but is not limited to, noise made by an individual alone (or by a group of people) and/or by instruments or devices under their control.

(c) “Minor” means any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.

(d) “Party, gathering or event” means a group of three or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or a social activity. A “loud party, gathering or event” shall mean an incident that results in any loud or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the neighborhood. An “unruly party, gathering or event” is any incident that threatens the public health, safety or welfare and is unlawful under the provisions of this Code or the laws of the State of California.

(e) “Person responsible for the event” means and includes but is not limited to:

(1) The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering or event takes place irrespective of whether such person knew of the event or knew or intended that alcoholic beverages would be possessed or consumed by minors; provided, however, that the term “person” shall not include the owner of the premises where the owner leases or rents the premises to a third party and has no actual knowledge that the party, gathering or event in question would take place on the premises, unless the owner or owner’s representative has received written notice pursuant to SCCC 9.05.025;

(2) The person in charge of the premises;

(3) The person who organized the event and/or the host of the event;

(4) If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile shall be considered “persons” and as such shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police or fire services imposed pursuant to this chapter, irrespective of whether the parent(s) knew of the event or knew or intended that alcoholic beverages would be possessed or consumed by minors.

(f) “Police service costs” and “fire service costs” means and includes the salaries and benefits of the police officers and firefighters for the amount of time spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering or event and the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured officers; the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property; and the costs arising from the use of any City equipment in responding to or remaining at a party, gathering or event.

(g) “Special response fee” means the sum total of all costs incurred by the City in connection with each response, including, but not limited to, the costs incurred by the City for employee time, applicable administrative overhead costs, costs incurred to repair any damage caused to City property, and costs incurred relating to any injuries to City personnel. When applied to public nuisance abatement, at the discretion of the City, it may be imposed as a predefined fee amount.

(h) “Stadium” means that certain unenclosed, multipurpose sports and entertainment structure located in the city at 4900 Marie P. DeBartolo Way, the peripheral boundaries of which are the gates for access and egress and the walls surrounding the outer perimeter of the building.

(i) “Authorized representative” means the responsible officer(s) or the person(s) or entity(ies) designated by the Santa Clara Stadium Authority.

(j) “Tailgating” means the use of any item (including tables, chairs, freestanding canopies or umbrellas, awnings attached to recreational vehicles, coolers, barbeques, grills, games, generators, televisions, sound systems, food or drink, food or drink preparation or serving equipment, or other items as identified by the City Manager or designee) for the purpose of an outdoor gathering by one or more people prior to, during or after a scheduled stadium event. (Ord. 1822 § 4, 9-11-07; Ord. 1922 § 2, 4-8-14).

9.05.010 Disturbing the peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street or in any public place within the city to do any of the following:

(a) To urinate or defecate, except at a lavatory facility.

(b) To willfully and maliciously disturb any lawful assemblage or procession of persons by noise, profanity or rude, obnoxious or indecent conduct.

(c) To, between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., make, cause, suffer or permit to be made any loud and unreasonable noise (1) which is made within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any building or place regularly used for sleeping purposes, or (2) which disturbs, or would tend to disturb, any person within hearing distance of such noise. This subsection (c) applies to activities on private property as well as on public property.

(d) Enforcement. Pursuant to SCCC 9.45.010 (which incorporates SCCC 1.05.070), the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action.

(1) However, the penalty amounts for infractions provided in SCCC 1.05.070 are expressly superseded by the following provision for greater infraction fines. Any violation of this section deemed an infraction is punishable by:

(A) A fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first violation;

(B) A fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a second violation within a one-year period;

(C) A fine not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) for a third violation within a one-year period;

(D) A fine not exceeding nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for a fourth violation within a one-year period.

(2) The administrative citation provisions of Chapter 1.10 SCCC, Administrative Penalties –Citations, may also be utilized, and the infraction penalty progression provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall apply.

(e) As part of any civil or criminal prosecution, or administrative action, under this chapter, community service may be imposed as a penalty in an amount and form acceptable to the City. (Ord. 1764 § 3, 3-12-02; Ord. 1822 §§ 2, 3, 5, 9-11-07; Ord. 1849 § 1, 11-24-09. Formerly 9.05.060).

Stat. Ref.:    Fighting, noise, offensive words, Pen. C. § 415.

9.05.020 Special response fee.
(a) When three or more persons gather together at a premises or place in the City and a police officer at the scene determines that one or more persons are engaged in activities that are causing a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of any member of the public, or that such activities in any way constitute an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any other person, the police shall give written notice to one or more of the persons who are engaged in, or who are in control of, such activities that the activities must immediately cease, and that if a subsequent police response arising out of the same or similar activities is required within seventy-two (72) hours following such notice, a special response fee will be charged to each person identified in subsection (b) of this section. The special seventy-two (72) hour response fee is defined as the cost incurred by the City in connection with such response or five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is greater, and the cost calculation shall be determined as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. In those instances where multiple responses are made to the same location, but the subsequent response(s) to the same location are not made within seventy-two (72) hours, the fee progression for multiple incidents within a year of one another as provided in subsection (f) of this section will apply. In instances where the number of incidents within a year results in a fee greater than the seventy-two (72) hour response, the greater amount shall apply.

(b) Each person responsible for, or engaged in, activities requiring a response as defined in subsection (a) of this section will be held jointly and severally liable for payment of the special response fee. A responsible person includes a person residing at or otherwise in control of the property, as well as the person(s) who organized or sponsored the gathering. If any person responsible for, or engaged in, said activities is a minor, the minor’s parents or guardians shall also be liable for such fee.

(c) The special response fee shall be calculated as the sum total of all costs incurred by the City in connection with each response as defined in subsection (a) of this section, including, but not limited to, the costs incurred by the City for employee time, applicable administrative overhead costs, costs incurred to repair any damage caused to City property, and costs incurred relating to any injuries to City personnel. Such fee will not be in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each single response.

(d) If a person assessed a special response fee fails to pay the fee when due, a delinquency penalty of ten percent shall be added to the fee on the last day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, however, the total amount of such penalties shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fee. In addition, such person shall be assessed interest on the amount of the delinquent fee, exclusive of any penalties thereon, at the rate of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, from the date the fee first became delinquent until the date the fee is paid.

(e) This section shall only apply to activities described in subsection (a) of this section, or for which a citation may be issued for a violation of a City ordinance or State statute.

(f) Enforcement. Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil or administrative action.

(1) The penalty amounts for infractions provided in SCCC 1.05.070 are expressly superseded by the following provision for greater infraction fines. Any violation of this section deemed an infraction is punishable by:

(A) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second response occurring within seventy-two (72) hours after a written warning has been issued;

(B) A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second response occurring after seventy-two (72) hours has elapsed from the written warning, but within thirty (30) calendar days from the warning;

(C) A fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second response occurring within a one-year period, but more than thirty (30) calendar days from the warning;

(D) A fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third response within a one-year period from the warning;

(E) A fine not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the fourth response within a one-year period from the warning;

(F) A fine not exceeding nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for the fifth response within a one-year period from the warning. If a fifth response is required, the location shall be posted as a public nuisance;

(G) A fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any response in excess of a fifth response within one year from the warning.

(2) The administrative citation provisions of Chapter 1.10 SCCC, Administrative Penalties –Citations, may also be utilized, and the infraction penalty progression provided in subsection (f)(1) of this section shall apply. (Ord. 1764 § 5, 3-12-02; Ord. 1822 § 6, 9-11-07; Ord. 1849 § 2, 11-24-09. Formerly 9.05.070).

9.05.025 Public nuisance – Posting of premises – Notice to owner.
(a) It is unlawful and a public nuisance to conduct a party, gathering or event on any private property in a manner which constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a segment of a neighborhood, as a result of conduct constituting a violation of law. Examples of such unlawful conduct include generation of excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, serving alcohol to minors, fighting, disturbing the peace, vandalism and littering.

(b) A party, gathering, or event which constitutes a public nuisance may be abated by the City by all reasonable means, including but not limited to an order requiring disbandment, and citation and/or arrest of any person under applicable local laws and state statutes. If a party, gathering or event is of such a magnitude that it requires immediate abatement, the fee shall be an additional five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any other fee imposed under this chapter or other law.

(c) When the City intervenes at a gathering which constitutes a nuisance under this chapter, the premises at which such nuisance occurred shall be posted with a notice substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit “A” stating that the intervention of the City has been necessitated as a result of a public nuisance under this chapter caused by an event at the premises, the date of the intervention, and that any subsequent event at the same premises, which necessitates City intervention, shall result in a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in addition to any other fee imposed by this chapter or other law, and in the joint and several liability of any guests causing the public nuisance, or any persons who own or are residents of the property at which the public nuisance occurred, or who sponsored the event constituting the public nuisance. The residents of such property shall be responsible for ensuring that such notice is not removed or defaced for three months from the time of posting and shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to any other fee imposed by this chapter or other law, if such notice is removed or defaced; provided, however, that the residents of the house or sponsor of the event, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is posted in order to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent display.

(d) Notice of the event shall also be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the City’s property tax assessment records and shall advise the property owner that any subsequent event within a one-year period on the same premises necessitating City intervention shall result in liability of the property owner for all penalties associated with such intervention.

EXHIBIT A

(Section 9.05.025)

IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING PUBLIC NUISANCE

PURSUANT TO SANTA CLARA CITY CODE CHAPTER 9.05, THE NEXT DISTURBANCE AT THE PREMISES WILL RESULT IN MONETARY PENALTIES IMPOSED UPON ALL PARTICIPANTS AND SPONSORS OF THE EVENT, AND ALL PROPERTY OWNERS OF THE PREMISES.

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT on _______________________________, at _________________ a.m./p.m., the Santa Clara Police Department found that a public nuisance caused by a disturbance of the public peace and/or threat to public safety occurred at the premises located at ________________________________. If there is a subsequent event on these premises that constitutes such a public nuisance and necessitates the intervention of the Police Department or Fire Department on or before ____________, every participant in and sponsor of such event shall be jointly and severally liable for the monetary penalties connected with this response. If there is a subsequent event on these premises that constitutes such a public nuisance and necessitates the intervention of the Police Department or Fire Department within one (1) year from the date of this notice, the occupants and owner of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs connected with any subsequent response.

(Signature of Officer issuing notice)

    _________________________________

(Name of Officer)

_________________    ______________

(Title of Officer)    (Phone Number)

______________;    ______________

Date Issued    Case Number

(Ord. 1822 § 7, 9-11-07).

9.05.027 Landlord liability.
If the City is required to respond to parties, gatherings or events on the same premises more than once in any one-year period, the person(s) who own the property where the party, gathering or event took place shall be jointly and severally liable for fees and monetary penalties as set forth in this chapter, in addition to liability for any injuries to City personnel or damage to City property; provided, that notice has been mailed to the owner of the property as set forth in SCCC 9.05.025, and the gathering occurs at least one week after the mailing of such notice. For purposes of this section, where a gathering takes place within the confines of a single unit in a multiple-unit building, the owner of the property shall be deemed to be the owner of the single unit and not the owner of the other noninvolved units. (Ord. 1822 § 8, 9-11-07).

9.05.030 Evasion of an admission fee.
Every person who shall enter, or attempt to enter, premises for which an admission fee is charged (such as an amusement park, theatre, sporting event, dance, etc.) without paying the admission fee, or without the authorization of the person in charge of the premises, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 1344 § 1, 1-25-77; Ord. 1531 § 9, 9-17-85. Formerly § 18-8).

9.05.040 Intoxicating liquors – Drinking in public prohibited except as authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquor when upon any public right-of-way (which includes the street, park strip, sidewalk and public property up to the private property line) lane, alley, public park or other public property, except as may be authorized by the City Council.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquor while upon any private parking lot open to the public.

(c) Any person possessing any open container of alcohol in any City-owned park or City-owned public place shall be guilty of an infraction. This shall not apply where the possession is within premises located in a park or other public place for which a license has been issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

(d) This section is intended to have no application to situations which would invoke application of appropriate State laws. These State laws would include, but not be limited to, restrictions on the drinking, possession or storage of an open receptacle containing an intoxicating liquor while a person is in a motor vehicle upon a highway (California Vehicle Code Sections 23221, 23222 and 23223), or restrictions on the possession of an intoxicating liquor by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) on a public street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public (California Business and Professions Code Section 25662).

(e) This section shall not be construed to prohibit the transportation of any intoxicating liquor from one location to another in a manner permitted under State law. (Ord. 1726 § 2, 12-1-98; Ord. 1896 § 1, 6-12-12. Formerly § 18-9).

9.05.050 Violation of certain rules and regulations of the governing body of a school district or of the Parks and Recreation Department.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, knowingly and intentionally, any rule or regulation made by the governing board of a school district under the authority of the California Education Code including Section 38133 thereof, with regard to priority rights granted to a scheduled individual or to a scheduled group of individuals to utilize school district open space or recreational lands or facilities.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, knowingly and intentionally, any rule or regulation of the Parks and Recreation Department of the City as such are from time to time approved by the City Council with regard to priority rights granted to a scheduled individual or to a scheduled group of individuals to utilize open space or recreational lands or facilities over which the Parks and Recreation Department of the City is operating and maintaining a program of recreational or athletic activities including but not limited to scheduling and supervision of open space or recreational lands or facilities on school district lands within the geographical city limits of the city. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 10-2-84; Ord. 1531 § 11, 9-17-85. Formerly § 18-10).

9.05.060 Amplified sound.
(a) Definitions.

(1) “Enforcement officer” means that City officer or employee who may be designated from time to time in writing by the City Manager to enforce this section and/or SCCC 9.05.120, as authorized by Penal Code Section 836.5, or any peace officer.

(2) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, municipal corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(3) “Sound system” includes, but is not limited to, sound amplifier, microphone, speaker, amplified or electrified instrument, connective cable or wire, and power source connections.

(4) “Operate” means to operate, maintain, use, connect, and/or permit to be operated, maintained, used, or connected.

(b) Permit Required.

(1) Outdoor Amplification of Music. Except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a valid permit issued pursuant to this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sound system outdoors or to cause amplified music, including music from a live performance, to be projected outdoors in the City for a period of more than five minutes in any one day for any purpose.

(2) Outdoor Amplification of Sound Other than Music. Except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a valid permit issued pursuant to this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sound system outdoors, to cause amplified sound to be projected outside of any building, or to cause amplified sound to be projected from any vehicle in the City for a period of more than five minutes in any one day for any purpose.

(c) Application for Permit. The application for an amplified sound permit shall meet each of the following requirements:

(1) The application shall be signed by the person applying for the permit and by a person with control of the premises (if that person is different from the person applying for the permit). Each person signing the application must be over the age of eighteen (18).

(2) The application shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable application fee, set forth in the City’s fee schedule, established by City Council resolution. No fee is required for applications for City-sponsored events conducted on City-owned property.

(d) Consideration of Permit Application. Except as provided in this subsection, all applications shall be referred to the City Council for consideration. The City Manager, or designee, may issue a permit for the activities identified in subsection (b) of this section in the following circumstances:

(1) The amplification location is the City’s Central Park or the Santa Clara University campus; or

(2) The amplification location is a private residence that has had no police-verified disturbances during the prior year (as measured from July 1st to June 30th of the following year). The permit issued shall limit the amplification of sound to the hours between 9:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.; or

(3) The amplification location is City-owned property and the application is for a City-sponsored event.

(e) Federal Communications Commission Pre-emption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person having a fixed place of business in the City and paying a license fee for such business and whose amplification or broadcasting of sound in connection with any radio receiving set receiving regularly broadcasting stations is exclusively controlled by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 455; Ord. 1639 § 3, 7-21-92; Ord. 1668 § 1, 1-10-95. Formerly § 18-11).

9.05.070 Enforcement and penalties for violation – Authority of enforcement officer.
Enforcement of SCCC 9.05.060 and/or this section may be accomplished by the enforcement officer in any manner authorized by this Code or by any other law, including, but not limited to, issuance of criminal citations, civil actions, and abatement. The enforcement officer may require amplified sound to cease regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this section. (Ord. 455; Ord. 1639 § 3, 7-21-92; Ord. 1668 § 1, 1-10-95 Formerly § 18-11.1).

9.05.080 Minors – Possession of certain weapons without parental consent prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to have in his/her possession any pistol, or other weapon capable of receiving any charge, cartridge or explosive unless by the written consent of his/her parent or guardian. (Ord. 217. Formerly § 18-14).

9.05.090 Sale of weapons to minors without request of parents, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to sell, dispose of or give to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years any pistol, air gun or other weapon capable of receiving and discharging any charge, cartridge or explosive without the written request of his/her parent or guardian. (Ord. 217. Formerly § 18-26).

9.05.100 Minors – Reports required by owners, etc., of certain businesses.
Each owner, agent, manager or keeper of a hotel, boarding house, lodginghouse, rooming house, tenement house, motor court, motel, bungalow court or apartment house in the City shall immediately report to the office of the Chief of Police of the City the presence therein, between the hours of 10:30 P.M. and the time of sunrise immediately following, of any and all minors under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such minor is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such minor. Such report shall contain the name, age, last known residence addresses of the parents, guardians or other persons having the care, custody or control of such minor, so far as such information can be ascertained by the person required herein to make such report. (Ord. 659. Formerly § 18-17).

9.05.110 Certain social gatherings unlawful.
(a) No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall consume or have in his/her possession or control any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to the public, unless that person is under the supervision of his/her parent or legal guardian.

(b) Except as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution, and the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, no person shall suffer, permit, allow or host a party, gathering or event at his/her place of residence or other private property, place or premises under his/her control where persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by, any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. (Ord. 1762 § 3, 8-21-01; Ord. 1822 § 9, 9-11-07. Formerly 9.05.220).

9.05.120 Weapons – Discharging of firearms restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, or project (or cause to be projected, fired, or discharged), within the corporate limits of the City, a projectile weapon. For purposes of this section, projectile weapons shall be referred to as “firearms.” Firearms shall include, but not be limited to, any gun, rifle, pistol, firearm, cannon (or explosive device of similar nature), air rifle, air pistol, air gun, BB gun, gas operated gun, pellet gun, flare gun, dart gun, paint gun, bow, crossbow, slungshot, slingshot, wrist rocket, or any instrument of any kind, character, or description which expels, launches, or propels a projectile of any kind with sufficient force to cause damage to property, or injury or death to a person or persons.

The foregoing provisions as to the use of firearms shall not apply to: (a) peace officers or soldiers in the discharge of their official duties and while in the exercise of reasonable care; (b) a person using firearms in necessary self defense; (c) a person, as defined by SCCC 1.05.020, conducting a fixed place of business in the City and which has obtained City approval for the particular land use and which has obtained all other City Code, regulation, and policy approvals; (d) schools conducting supervised classes, such as archery classes; (e) such other activities which first secure permission from the City Council to conduct the activity. (Ord. 217; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1-27-70; Ord. 1651 § 1, 11-16-93. Formerly § 18-22).

9.05.130 Unsafe or disruptive conduct.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person attending a place of amusement open to the public, such as an amusement park, theater, sporting event, dance or other place of entertainment or any City park, to do any of the following actions without lawful authority:

(1) Line jumping – stepping, jumping or pushing into lines ahead of others who are waiting.

(2) Running, using roller skates or roller blades, or riding on any coaster, scooter, skateboard, or bicycle with willful and reckless disregard for the safety of others, including but not limited to:

(A) Running, using roller skates or roller blades, or riding on any coaster, scooter, skateboard, or bicycle unsafely through substantially congested pedestrian areas;

(B) Running, using roller skates or roller blades, or riding on any coaster, scooter, skateboard, or bicycle into another person;

(C) Running, using roller skates or roller blades, or riding on any coaster, scooter, skateboard, or bicycle which causes another to abruptly move out of the way to avoid collision.

(3) Throwing or dropping of objects – willful and reckless throwing or dropping of any object which may injure another person or damage the personal property of another person.

(b) Such conduct or actions shall be deemed unsafe or disruptive and be considered a threat to public health and safety and is prohibited. (Ord. 1545 § 1, 6-24-86; Ord. 1919 § 1, 2-11-14. Formerly § 18-23).

9.05.140 Cost recovery for acts of vandalism.
(a) Pursuant to the California Penal Code Section 594(c)(2), as amended from time to time, the City of Santa Clara hereby declares that anyone convicted of vandalism may be ordered by the court to pay law enforcement costs associated with their identification and apprehension in an amount not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00); and

(b) The City will provide evidence of, and bear the burden of, establishing the reasonable costs incurred during the identification and apprehension of the defendant; and

(c) The City’s costs are in addition to any other costs incurred or recovered by the City, and payment of these costs does not in any way limit, preclude, or restrict any other right, remedy, or action otherwise available to the City; and

(d) If a minor-defendant is personally unable to pay a fine levied for acts of vandalism, the parent of that minor-defendant shall be liable for payment of the fine. However, a court may waive payment of the fine, or any part thereof, by the parent upon a finding of good cause. (Ord. 1731 § 2, 4-27-99).

9.05.145 Recovery of costs, fees, expenses, and penalties – Personal debt – Liens.
(a) Any and all costs, fees, expenses, and/or penalties assessed by the City under this chapter shall constitute a personal debt of the violator owed to the City. The City shall be entitled to recover any such debt through any legal and/or equitable action, and shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with such recovery. If the violator is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the debt.

(b) When any violation of this chapter has occurred on real property owned in whole or in part by the violator, any and all costs, fees, expenses and/or penalties assessed by the City, and which remain unpaid after demand by the City, shall become a lien on the property on which the violation has occurred. Such police or fire service costs, expenses and penalties shall be collected in the same manner as City taxes, and thereafter the property upon which they are a lien shall be sold in the same manner as property now is sold for delinquent taxes.

(c) The City Attorney shall have the authority to take any action in law or equity to recover such costs, fees, expenses and/or penalties. In any such action or proceeding, the City shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 1822 § 10, 9-11-07).

9.05.150 Drug-free zones.
(a) The City Council of the City of Santa Clara designates every public park and library within the jurisdiction of the City as a drug-free zone.

(b) The City of Santa Clara will post notice of this law at every public park and library within the city. (Ord. 1734 § 2, 5-18-99).

9.05.160 Activities and conduct prohibited in stadium sporting or entertainment events.
The following activities are prohibited within the stadium:

(a) No person shall intentionally throw, discharge, launch or spill any solid object (including footballs, baseballs, beach balls, Frisbees or other such items) or liquid substance or otherwise cause such object or substance to be thrown, discharged, launched, spilled or to become airborne.

(b) No person, including off-duty peace officers, shall bring into or possess within the stadium any firearm or dangerous weapon, including but not necessarily limited to knives, impact weapons, chemical agents, or electronic control devices (Tasers, stun guns) unless expressly authorized by the Santa Clara Chief of Police.

(c) No person shall explode, set off, discharge or otherwise release or cause to be released any smoke bomb, fireworks, stink bomb or other substance which is physically harmful or otherwise irritating, offensive, repugnant or disgusting to the eyes or sense of smell.

(d) No person shall enter any area of the stadium not open to the general public, including the field area, or any other area set apart for the participants, athletes, performers, officials, attendants or service personnel at any time before, during or after a stadium event, except with credentials or other valid passes expressly allowing such entry and issued by the authorized representative.

(e) No person shall bring into or possess within the stadium any can, bottle, thermos, vacuum bottle, canteen, flask or other similar container containing alcohol unless expressly authorized by the authorized representative.

(f) No person shall gain or attempt to gain admittance to the stadium except through an access gate open for public access and by presenting a valid event ticket, valid credentials, or otherwise paying the posted charge required for admission, or enter or attempt to enter the stadium during non-event days or hours, unless expressly authorized by the authorized representative. Any person who violates this section or evades the posted admission charge shall be a trespasser and may be ejected and/or cited for trespassing.

(g) No person shall behave in so disruptive, unsafe, noisy, boisterous or profane manner as to disturb spectators or participants at any stadium event so that assigned personnel must address the person to cease or prevent a recurrence of the disruptive, unsafe, noisy, boisterous or profane behavior.

(h) No person shall urinate or defecate except in a designated lavatory facility.

(i) No person shall violate any local ordinance or State law.

(j) No person shall refuse to obey an ejection order made pursuant to enforcement of this section, or shall re-enter the stadium during the event that person was ejected from by purchase of another ticket or by any other means.

(k) No person shall bring into or possess within the stadium any noise-making device including but not necessarily limited to air horns, powered megaphones, bugles, drums or other musical instruments unless expressly authorized by the authorized representative.

(l) No person shall lead, conduct or otherwise bring or allow to remain in the stadium any animal, bird, fish or reptile, except service dogs certified by the State of California and which are in actual use.

(m) No person shall refuse to obey the lawful order of law enforcement officers or stadium security personnel.

(n) Subsections (a) through (m) of this section shall not apply to any duly authorized employee, agent or officer of the authorized representative while acting in the course and scope of his or her employment, nor shall it apply to any duly authorized event participant, performer, athlete, official, security or service personnel specifically authorized to perform such an act by the authorized representative while acting in the scope of his or her employment or participation.

(o) Smoking is prohibited except in areas designated by the authorized representative.

(p) During events with ticketed assigned seating, no person is to occupy a seat and/or designated area for which he or she does not possess a valid ticket.

(q) No person shall remain standing in or block any aisle or passageway beyond the time reasonably necessary to transit the aisle or passageway. Aisle or passageway shall mean those areas immediately adjacent to the seating areas that are intended as walkways leading to or from seats or exits. Aisle or passageway shall also mean the concourse areas when large crowds have gathered in sufficient numbers so as to block such aisle or passageway. (Ord. 1922 § 3, 4-8-14; Ord. 1940 § 1, 6-16-15).

9.05.165 Activities and conduct prohibited in parking facilities adjacent to the stadium or parking facilities used for stadium events.
(a) No person shall throw, discharge, launch or spill any solid or liquid object including footballs, baseballs, Frisbees and other such items in a manner that disturbs public order or causes a threat to public safety.

(b) No person shall explode, set off, discharge, or otherwise release or cause to be released any smoke bomb, fireworks, stink bomb, or other substance which is physically harmful or otherwise irritating, offensive, repugnant or disgusting to the eyes or sense of smell within the parking areas.

(c) No person shall participate in any activity, including, but not limited to vehicle driver training, volleyball, baseball, soccer, football, roller skating, bicycle riding, or skateboarding within the parking areas unless expressly authorized by the authorized representative. This subsection shall not apply to the use of nonmotorized vehicles for purposes of travel to a parking facility or between parking facilities.

(d) No tables, barbecues, chairs, umbrellas or other objects shall be permitted on walkways, driveways, landscaped areas, vehicle access lanes and promenades in the parking areas without the permission of the authorized representative. Tailgating is only allowed in specific permitted parking lots.

(e) No person shall lead, conduct or otherwise bring or allow to remain in the parking areas any animal, bird, fish or reptile except service dogs certified by the State of California and which are in actual use.

(f) No person shall bring or attempt to bring a vehicle into the parking areas without paying the prescribed charge required for admission. No employee of the authorized representative or any employee of any organization holding an event at the stadium shall enter or attempt to enter the parking areas without presenting a valid ticket or pass to that event, or a pass or identification indicating that the person is an on-duty employee working the event.

(g) No person shall park or stop a vehicle in more than one parking space. If the vehicle exceeds twenty (20) feet in length, the driver thereof shall park said vehicle in parking spaces for nonstandard size vehicles and pay for the additional space and display evidence of such payment.

(h) No person shall utilize in any manner more than the parking space that his or her vehicle is entitled to occupy under the provisions of this chapter. Roadways and fire lanes shall remain clear at all times of vehicles and objects to maximize use for traffic circulation and emergency response.

(i) No person shall urinate or defecate except in a designated lavatory facility.

(j) No person shall interfere in any manner with the use of an adjacent parking space.

(k) No person shall allow any sound amplification system to be heard from fifty (50) or more feet when in a parking area, unless that system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This section does not apply to authorized emergency personnel or vehicles.

(l) The authorized representative may set reasonable closing times for parking areas. Some or all parking areas may be closed or have limited access during events to deter persons from remaining in parking areas instead of attending events. No person shall remain within the parking areas after being informed by law enforcement or security personnel the facilities are closed or that access is limited. No person shall refuse to obey the lawful order of a peace officer or security personnel made pursuant to enforcement of this section.

(m) No person shall bring, or cause to be brought, for the purposes of sale or barter, or have for sale, or sell or exchange, or offer for sale or exchange any food, drink, service, goods, wares, ticket or merchandise, or solicit employment, business or contributions of money or other property, within any portion of the parking areas including the perimeter sidewalk of the facility.

(n) No person shall bring within the perimeter of the boundaries of the stadium parking areas, or cause to be brought to the parking areas, a beer keg or any type of glass container. This subsection shall not apply to patrons possessing prescribed medication in glass containers.

(o) Subsections (a) through (n) of this section shall not apply to any duly authorized employee, agent or officer of the authorized representative while acting in the course and scope of his or her employment, nor shall it apply to any duly authorized participant, performer, athlete, official, security or service personnel specifically authorized to perform such an act by the authorized representative while acting in the scope of his or her employment or participation. (Ord. 1922 § 3, 4-8-14).

9.05.170 Penalties.
(a) Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be ejected from the stadium and related parking facilities by any peace officer or other security personnel of the authorized representative.

(b) In addition to the penalties described in subsection (a) of this section, a violation of SCCC 9.05.160(b), (c) or (d) or 9.05.165(b) is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. A violation of any other subsection of SCCC 9.05.160 or 9.05.165 is an infraction, punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense.

(c) Prohibited items may be confiscated and not returned to the owner. (Ord. 1922 § 3, 4-8-14; Ord. 1940 § 2, 6-16-15).

Chapter 9.10
REGULATION OF NOISE AND VIBRATION
Sections:

Article I. Noise and Vibration from Fixed Sources

9.10.010  Purpose.

9.10.020  Definitions.

9.10.030  Application of regulations.

9.10.040  Noise or sound regulation.

9.10.050  Vibration regulation.

9.10.060  Noise, sound, or vibration evaluation criteria.

9.10.070  Exceptions.

9.10.080  Plan submittal.

9.10.090  Existing sound, noise, or vibration sources.

9.10.100  Special permit approval.

9.10.110  Manner of enforcement.

9.10.120  Additional remedies.

Article II. Off-Street Operation of Certain Construction Sites

9.10.210  Purpose.

9.10.220  Definitions.

9.10.230  Regulation.

9.10.240  Exemption from regulation.

Article I. Noise and Vibration
from Fixed Sources

9.10.010 Purpose.
It is determined and declared by the City Council of the City that certain noise or vibration levels are detrimental and contrary to the public health, welfare and safety and that persons in the City of Santa Clara require protection from unnecessary, excessive, and unreasonable noise or vibration from fixed sources in the community. It is the intent of the City Council in adopting this chapter to control unnecessary, excessive, unusually loud, and annoying noise or vibration within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place, and use and are detrimental to the public health, comfort, convenience, welfare, safety, and prosperity of persons in the City of Santa Clara. It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit such noise or vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise or vibration level is not detrimental to his/her life, health, or enjoyment of property.

It is also the intent of the City to maintain quiet in those areas which currently maintain low noise and vibration levels and to implement programs aimed at reducing noise and vibration in those areas within the city where noise and vibration are above acceptable levels. The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted herein are for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity and the peace and quiet of all persons in the City of Santa Clara.

Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that any noise or vibration which is created, caused, or maintained, or allowed to be created, caused, or maintained, in a manner prohibited by, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter, is unlawful and a public nuisance. It is further determined that private civil actions seeking enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be necessary and desirable to accomplish the goals sought herein. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.1).

9.10.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words or phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

(a) "A-weighted sound level" means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

(b) "Commercial area" means an area zoned for commercial uses.

(c) "Decibel" means a unit for measuring the amplitude level of a sound or noise, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.

(d) "Disturbing, excessive, or offensive sound, noise, or vibration levels" means any sound, noise, or vibration which annoys or disturbs human beings or which causes or tends to cause an adverse physiological or psychological effect on human beings and which conflicts with the criteria of sound levels set forth in this chapter.

(e) "Emergency work" means any work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger of damages, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility services.

(f) "Fixed noise, sound, or vibration source" means a stationary device which creates sound or vibration while operating in a fixed or stationary position, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

(g) "Industrial area" means an area zoned for industrial uses.

(h) "Mobile noise, sound, or vibration source" means any noise, sound, or vibration source other than a fixed noise, sound, or vibration source, including but not limited to vehicles, hand-held power equipment, and portable music amplifiers. Certain mobile noise, sound, or vibration sources, such as aircraft, are preempted from City regulation.

(i) "Noise level" means the same as sound level. The terms may be used interchangeably in this chapter.

(j) "Person" means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or entity, public or private, including but not limited to, any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.

(k) "Public space" means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

(l) "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions.

(m) "Residential area" means an area zoned for single-family, duplex or multifamily residential use.

(n) "Sound level" means sound volume measured in decibels with a sound level meter as defined herein, by the use of the "A" frequency weighted and "fast" time averaging, unless some other time averaging is specified.

(o) "Sound level meter" means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighing networks, designed for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.

(p) "Vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable person of average sensitiveness to be aware of the vibration, including by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 inch/second over the range of one to 100 Hz.

(q) Terminology. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined above, shall conform with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. All definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from American National Standard Acoustical Terminology (ANSAT). (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.2).

9.10.030 Application of regulations.
This chapter shall apply only to fixed noise, sound, or vibration sources and shall not apply to any mobile noise, sound, or vibration source. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.3).

9.10.040 Noise or sound regulation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to allow to be operated, any fixed source of disturbing, excessive or offensive sound or noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, such that the sound or noise originating from that source causes the sound or noise level on any other property to exceed the maximum noise or sound levels which are set forth in Schedule A, as follows:

Schedule A

Exterior Sound or Noise Limits

 

 

 

Receiving Zone
Zoning Category

Time Period

Noise
Level (dBA)

 

 

 

Category 1

 

 

Single-family and duplex residential
(R1, R2)

Commencing at 7:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M. that evening

55

 

Commencing at 10:00 P.M. and ending at 7:00 A.M. the following morning

50

Category 2

 

 

Multiple-family residential, public space (R3, B)

Commencing at 7:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M. that evening

55

 

Commencing at 10:00 P.M. and ending at 7:00 A.M. the following morning

50

Category 3

 

 

Commercial, Office (C, O)

Commencing at 7:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M. that evening

65

Commencing at 10:00 P.M. and ending at 7:00 A.M. the following morning

60

Category 4

 

 

Light Industrial (ML, MP)

Anytime

70

Heavy Industrial (MH)

Anytime

75

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the noise or sound standards for the various zone districts as presented in this Schedule A shall apply to all such properties within a specified zone, as designated on the most recent update of the official zoning map of the City. For planned development, agricultural or mixed zoning site, the most restrictive noise standard for the comparable zone district, as determined by the Director of Planning and Inspection, shall apply. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.4).

9.10.050 Vibration regulation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause, permit, or allow the operation of, any fixed source of vibration of disturbing, excessive, or offensive vibration on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, such that the vibration originating from such source is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at the closest property line point to the vibration source on the real property affected by the vibration. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.5).

9.10.060 Noise, sound, or vibration evaluation criteria.
(a) The characteristics and conditions which will be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists shall include, but not be limited to the following:

(1) The volume level of the noise or amplitude of the vibration;

(2) Whether the nature of the noise or vibration is usual or unusual;

(3) Whether the origin of the noise or vibration is from a natural source or mechanical source;

(4) The level of the ambient noise;

(5) The proximity of the noise or vibration to sleeping facilities;

(6) The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise or vibration emanates and the area where it is received;

(7) The time of day or night the noise or vibration occurs;

(8) The duration of the noise or vibration; and

(9) Whether the noise or vibration is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

(b) All sound, noise, or vibration measurements shall be taken at the closest point to the noise or vibration source on the adjacent real property, or on any other property, affected by the noise or vibration. The most restrictive exterior noise limits for the applicable zoning category, as established in SCCC 9.10.040, Schedule A, shall apply.

(c) If the measured ambient noise level at any given location differs from those levels set forth in SCCC 9.10.040, Schedule A, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in five dBA increments in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect said ambient noise level.

(d) In the event the alleged offensive sound or noise contains music or speech conveying informational content, the limits for the applicable zoning category set forth in SCCC 9.10.040, Schedule A, shall be reduced by five dBA. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.6).

9.10.070 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to noise, sound or vibration created by the following:

(a) The performance of emergency work, including the operation of emergency generators and pumps or other equipment necessary to provide services during an emergency.

(b) Warning devices necessary for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare including but not limited to, civil defense and fire sirens, or commercial, residential, or residential burglar alarms.

(c) Outdoor events which are conducted pursuant to a valid permit or license issued by the City relative to the staging of said events.

(d) City-owned electric, water and sewer utility system facilities, including but not limited to, receiving station equipment, substation equipment, generating plant equipment, water well station equipment, water booster pumping station equipment, and sewer lifting and pumping station equipment.

(e) Construction activities which occur during allowed hours, as otherwise specified in the Code.

(f) Firework displays authorized by permit from the City of Santa Clara Fire Department.

(g) The operation of heliports authorized by a conditional use permit granted by the City. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.7).

9.10.080 Plan submittal.
(a) Any plans submitted to the City for plumbing, electrical or mechanical permits for any stationary equipment shall be accompanied by documentation or a written statement signed by the property owner verifying that the equipment noise sound, or vibration levels shall not exceed the standards of this chapter.

(b) The initial granting of a permit for such equipment shall not affect the obligation of each person owning or operating such equipment for continued compliance with the noise, sound, and vibration level requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.8).

9.10.090 Existing sound, noise, or vibration sources.
Sound, noise or vibration sources in place and operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified this chapter, which are subsequently found to not be in compliance by persons in control of such sources with the noise, sound, and vibration level requirements set forth in this chapter, shall be brought into compliance within thirty (30) days of date of receipt of written notice of noncompliance from the City. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.9).

9.10.100 Special permit approval.
As provided within the City's Zoning Ordinance, a special permit may be granted to allow for an exception, for limited duration, from the provisions contained in all or a portion of this chapter, for certain noise, sound, or vibration sources which exceed the above-stated maximum allowable levels. Such permits may be granted, provided findings are made by the granting body that the existence of the noise, sound, or vibration source for the period of time specified in the permit is necessary and beneficial to the public welfare of the City. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.10).

9.10.110 Manner of enforcement.
Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. However, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Manager or his/her designee, in enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice, or educational means. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.11).

9.10.120 Additional remedies.
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any fixed source of noise, sound, or vibration which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of average sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 1588 § 1, 6-14-88. Formerly § 18-26.13).

Article II. Off-Street Operation of
Certain Construction Sites

9.10.210 Purpose.
The City Council of City finds that certain off-street construction and construction-related operations on construction sites which are in close proximity to residential properties if left unregulated as to times for such operations cause excessive and annoying noise, dust, fumes potentially injurious to persons and properties in residential neighborhoods, all of which adversely affect the public peace, health, welfare and safety and which shall be regulated for the protection of the public in enjoyment of their lives and properties. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 7-15-86. Formerly § 18-32.1).

9.10.220 Definitions.
A "construction site" for the purpose of this chapter is a privately owned parcel of real property on which any building, or related improvement of road, walkway, pool or landscape, construction is taking place or to which construction materials, supplies or implements are delivered in connection with such construction. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 7-15-86. Formerly § 18-32.2).

9.10.230 Regulation.
No person shall engage or authorize others to engage in construction of any building or related road or walkway, pool or landscape improvement, or in construction operations related thereto, including delivery of construction materials, supplies, or improvements on or to a construction site within three hundred (300) feet of any residentially zoned property except within the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. following on weekdays other than holidays, Monday through Friday, inclusive; and within the hours of 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. following, inclusive, on any Saturday which is not a holiday. A holiday, for the purpose of this section, is each day or part thereof upon which any of the following holidays are observed pursuant to California law:

(a) January 1st.

(b) The third Monday in January (Martin Luther King, Jr., Day).

(c) The third Monday in February.

(d) The last Monday in May.

(e) July 4th.

(f) The first Monday in September.

(g) The Thursday in November appointed as Thanksgiving Day and the day immediately following.

(h) December 25th.

No such work is permitted on such holidays. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. 1556 § 1, 9-16-86. Formerly § 18-32.3).

9.10.240 Exemption from regulation.
Exempt from the regulations of this chapter are:

(a) Emergency construction and repair that is necessary for protection of life and property;

(b) Operation preempted from local regulation by State law, such as construction of public school buildings;

(c) Furnishing utility-type services including construction and maintenance of utility facilities;

(d) Public inspections; and

(e) Any work on an existing single-family or duplex (two-family) dwelling undertaken by the property owner. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 7-15-86. Formerly § 18-32.4).

Chapter 9.15
REGULATION OF THE DISTRIBUTION
OF CERTAIN ADVERTISING MATERIAL INCLUDING HANDBILLS
Sections:

9.15.010  Purpose and intent.

9.15.020  Definitions.

9.15.030  Handbill distribution prohibited.

9.15.040  Public register of objections.

9.15.050  Business tax certificate required.

9.15.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect against criminal activity, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of privacy and to otherwise prevent litter and the accumulation of uncollected written materials. (Ord. 1722 § 5, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-33.1).

9.15.020 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) "Distribute" means deliver, dispense, apportion or scatter something.

(b) "Handbill" means any commercial advertising, booklet, card, circular, dodger, newspaper, pamphlet, sample specimen, sheet or other printed or written notices, advertising any art, article, business, commodity, entertainment, meeting, merchandise, person, service, skill or thing offered, sold, or rendered for hire, reward, price, trade or profit.

(c) "Handbill restriction register" means a list of those addresses in the City that request no handbills be distributed or left on the premises. (Ord. 1722 § 5, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-33.2).

9.15.030 Handbill distribution prohibited.
No person shall distribute any handbill to or upon any premises in the City:

(a) When such premises has posted thereupon a legible sign with letters at least one inch high in a conspicuous place near the entrance and visible from the street stating "no handbill distribution" or words to that effect; or

(b) When the owner or occupant of such premises has filed with the Director of Finance of the City a written notice objecting to the time of delivery of handbills to such premises.

It is the intent of this provision that for a person to be in violation of this section he must have had knowledge of the prohibition before or at the delivery of handbills to such premises. (Ord. 1722 § 5, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-33.3).

9.15.040 Public register of objections.
The Director of Finance shall keep a register open to public inspection showing the premises covered by objections filed in accordance with the provisions of SCCC 9.15.030(b). (Ord. 1722 § 5, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-33.4).

9.15.050 Business tax certificate required.
A handbill distributor shall apply for and obtain a business tax certificate with the municipal services/business tax division as required in SCCC 3.40.500. Each applicant shall provide a statement that the handbill restriction register has been reviewed and information therein noted and agrees not to distribute handbills to any premises listed in the register. A copy of the handbill restriction register may be obtained upon request and payment of such charge as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1722 § 5, 10-27-98. Formerly § 18-33.5).

Chapter 9.20
RESTRICTIONS ON
CERTAIN COMMERCIAL DRUG PARAPHERNALIA ACTIVITIES
Sections:

9.20.010  Purpose and intent.

9.20.020  Legislative findings.

9.20.030  Minors.

9.20.040  Minors – Excluded.

9.20.050  Sale and display rooms.

9.20.060  Sale and display rooms – Nuisance.

9.20.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the City in enacting this chapter that commercial activities in the City in connection with the selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia used, designed, modified, altered or intended to be used for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California (drug paraphernalia) occur in such a manner and be so restricted that the parents and guardians of persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age and responsible for the minor's welfare, shall have an opportunity to exercise meaningful parental guidance in the drug field where there has been a continuing problem of substance abuse among the young people of this community. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-74).

9.20.020 Legislative findings.
The City Council of the City finds and declares that the open display of the drug paraphernalia mentioned above encourages youngsters to experiment with and use illegal drugs outside of the knowledge and consent of the responsible parent or legal guardian, prevents the exercise of parental responsibility, contributes to the breakdown of families, and constitutes a nuisance hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-75).

9.20.030 Minors.
No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of any room in any place of business, selling or displaying for the purpose of sale any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia used, designed, modified, altered, or intended to be used for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain in, enter, or visit such room while such a device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia is in the open or exposed to public view, unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his/her parents, or by his/her legal guardian. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-76).

9.20.040 Minors – Excluded.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be, remain in, enter, or visit any room in any place used for the sale or displaying for sale of any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia used, designed, modified, altered, or intended to be used for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, and while such a device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia is in the open or exposed to public view, unless such person is accompanied by one of his/her parents, or his/her legal guardian. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-77).

9.20.050 Sale and display rooms.
A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which any person under the age of eighteen (18) years is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia used, designed, modified, altered, or intended to be used for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, and while such a device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia is in the open or exposed to public view, unless the person under the age of eighteen (18) years is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-78).

9.20.060 Sale and display rooms – Nuisance.
The violation of any provision of this chapter or the distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, and from which minors are not excluded as prescribed in this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, a violation of this chapter shall not constitute a misdemeanor nor give rise to any criminal prosecution. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 7-17-79. Formerly § 18-79).

Chapter 9.25
NEWS RACKS
Sections:

9.25.010  Purpose and intent.

9.25.020  News rack identification.

9.25.030  Prohibition of news racks where vehicles permitted.

9.25.040  Unlawful obstructions.

9.25.050  Display of certain matter prohibited.

9.25.060  Definition of explicit sexual acts.

9.25.070  Impounding.

9.25.080  Return of impounded news racks.

9.25.090  Hearings.

9.25.100  Appeal procedure.

9.25.110  Other remedies.

9.25.120  News rack owner to hold City harmless.

9.25.010 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds and declares that the uncontrolled placement and maintenance of news racks on the public rights-of-way (the paved roadway, curb, gutter, park strip, sidewalk, and other portion of the publicly owned real property up to the private property line) and the proliferation of such devices which display words and pictorial material describing and depicting explicit sexual conduct and nudity, which is thrust indiscriminately on children and unwilling adults, unreasonably interferes with and obstructs the public's use of the public rights-of-way, constitutes unwarranted invasions of individual privacy, is injurious to health, is indecent and offensive to the senses, and is such an obstruction of the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the entire community. The City Council also finds, however, that the use of such rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and publications that access to these areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The City Council further finds that these strong and competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can only be satisfactorily achieved through the means of this chapter designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the time, place and manner of using such news racks. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-80).

9.25.020 News rack identification.
Every person, principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself/herself, for any other person, or as an officer of any corporation who places or maintains, or causes to be placed or maintained, a news rack on or projecting onto any portion of a public right-of-way in the jurisdictional boundaries of the City shall permanently and clearly affix to each news rack identification which includes the news rack owner's name, address and telephone number as required by Business and Professions Code Section 17570 for the purposes of all notification pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-81).

9.25.030 Prohibition of news racks where vehicles permitted.
No person shall place or maintain any news racks on any portion of, or projecting onto, into or over any portion of the roadway on which vehicles are lawfully permitted. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-82).

9.25.040 Unlawful obstructions.
No news rack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained in the public right-of-way in the following locations and manner:

(a) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.

(b) Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.

(c) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.

(d) Within three feet of any driveway.

(e) Within three feet ahead of, and fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign or pavement markings marking a designated bus stop measured parallel to the flow of traffic.

(f) Within three feet of any bus bench.

(g) At any location where the news rack causes, creates, or constitutes a traffic hazard.

(h) At any location where the news rack unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to, or the use and enjoyment of abutting property.

(i) Where the news rack will physically endanger persons or property.

(j) Where the news rack will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the paved roadway.

(k) At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet.

(l) On a sidewalk with a width of less than eight feet. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-83).

9.25.050 Display of certain matter prohibited.
Publications which are offered for sale from news racks placed, maintained on, or projecting over or onto the public right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view any of the following:

(a) Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

(b) Any picture or illustration of the genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region of any person or persons where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

(c) Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-84).

9.25.060 Definition of explicit sexual acts.
"Explicit sexual acts," as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-85).

9.25.070 Impounding.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee:

(a) May immediately correct any violation of SCCC 9.25.040 and shall do so without impounding if such correction can be accomplished simply, easily, quickly, and without expense.

(b) May, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, immediately remove and impound any news rack in violation of this chapter if the violation is creating a physically dangerous or hazardous condition which cannot be corrected simply, easily, quickly, and without expense. Notice of such action and the right to request a hearing in accordance with this chapter shall be mailed to the name and address appearing on the news rack identification within five working days after such action.

(c) May, when a news rack is in violation of this chapter, notify the person whose name appears on the news rack identification that the news rack will be impounded unless the violation is corrected or a hearing requested. The method of giving notice, which shall be in the discretion of the Chief of Police, and the time limit within which the violation is to be corrected or a hearing requested, are as follows:

(1) Notice in person or by telephone – within two working days of the date of such notice.

(2) By mail – within five working days of the date of the notice.

(3) Affixing a notice to the news rack – within seven working days of the date of the notice.

(d) May impound any news rack in accordance with the decision following any hearing requested pursuant to this chapter upon a finding of facts sufficient to constitute a violation of any section of this chapter.

(e) If a hearing on the impounding of the news rack is not timely requested or if the news rack is not returned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police may sell or otherwise dispose of the news rack, and its contents, and deposit the proceeds, if any, from any such sale or other disposition, and any moneys contained in said news rack, in the City treasury. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-86).

9.25.080 Return of impounded news racks.
(a) Unless the news rack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the person whose name appears on the news rack identification or, if such person is unknown, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded news rack may obtain the return of an impounded news rack and its contents upon paying an impound fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the reasonable additional costs, if any, of impounding the news rack in excess of said twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The period in which to obtain the return of an impounded news rack shall be as follows:

(1) No hearing – at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding.

(2) A hearing held – at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the decision from such hearing becomes final.

(b) The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall, after a hearing in accordance with this chapter, order the news rack returned without payment of any impound fee, or, if an impound fee has previously been paid, return such impound fee whenever it is determined that this chapter has not been violated.

(c) A court before which criminal charges concerning an impounded news rack are pending, shall, upon dismissal of the charges or a finding of acquittal, and upon a finding of good cause, order an impounded news rack returned with or without payment of an impound fee or order the return of the impound fee paid. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-87).

9.25.090 Hearings.
(a) Request for Hearing. Any person maintaining a news rack charged with being in violation of this chapter may, at any time within ten days of a notice (as provided in SCCC 9.25.070(c)) of the alleged violation, request in writing a hearing before the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

(b) Stay on Impounding Pending Decision. A timely request for a hearing, made prior to any impounding, shall operate to stay any impounding until five working days after the decision is rendered, unless further stayed pending any appeal therefrom.

(c) Conduct of Hearing. A hearing shall be held, unless continued by agreement, within five working days of the request for a hearing. At the hearing any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the news rack was in violation of this chapter or whether the news rack should be returned without payment of an impound fee.

(d) Decision. A decision shall be rendered within five working days after the close of the hearing.

(e) Notice of Decision. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing or may send notice of the decision by mail. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-88).

9.25.100 Appeal procedure.
(a) Appeal from Hearing Decision. Any person who has requested a hearing may, within five working days of the date appearing on the said notice of decision, appeal such decision to the City Manager or his/her designee.

(b) Contents of Appeal. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the legal and factual basis upon which the appeal is to be based and shall be filed with the Chief of Police and City Manager or their respective designees. The Chief of Police shall forward the notice of appeal, together with a copy of his/her decision, to the City Manager or his/her designee.

(c) Stay Pending Appeal. A timely appeal from the Chief of Police's decision shall operate to stay any impounding pending a decision on appeal by the City Manager or his/her designee pursuant to this section.

(d) Action by the City Manager. Within ten working days of receipt of both the notice of appeal and the Chief of Police's decision, the City Manager or his/her designee may take any of the following actions:

(1) Grant a stay of the decision or any impounding pending further consideration by the City Manager or his/her designee.

(2) Approve the Chief of Police's decision and order.

(3) Disapprove the Chief of Police's decision and order.

(4) Modify the Chief of Police's decision and order.

(5) Set aside the Chief of Police's decision and order and hold a hearing de novo as if no hearing previously had been held. Said hearing de novo will be held within five working days of said decision to set aside, or as soon thereafter as the hearing may be conducted. A decision by the City Manager, or his/her designee, which shall be final, shall be made within five working days after the hearing de novo. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-89).

9.25.110 Other remedies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not limit the City utilizing other remedies authorized by law. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-91).

9.25.120 News rack owner to hold City harmless.
As a condition precedent to having its news rack situated on the public right-of-way, the news rack owner shall protect, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers and employees from all claims, injuries, liabilities, damages, cost and expense arising from the placement of a news rack on the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 5-18-82. Formerly § 18-92).

Chapter 9.30
TRESPASSING
Sections:

9.30.010  Trespass upon private property prohibited – Exceptions.

9.30.020  Trespass on City property – When prohibited.

9.30.010 Trespass upon private property prohibited – Exceptions.
(a) No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises after being notified by the owner or lessee, or other person in charge thereof to remove himself/herself therefrom.

(b) No person, without express permission of the owner or lessee, or other person in charge of private property or business premises, shall enter upon such private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee, or other person in charge thereof, to keep off or keep away therefrom.

(c) No person, without the express permission of the owner or lessee, or other person in charge of private property or business premises, shall enter or remain upon such business, commercial premises, or other private property if said premises or property is conspicuously posted with signs forbidding trespass at each door, driveway, gate, or other entrance to said premises or property; said signs shall be at least two feet in length by eighteen (18) inches in width, and said signs shall state in letters at least two inches in height: "No Trespassing – SCCC 9.30.010."

(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply in any of the following instances:

(1) When its application results in, or is coupled with, any act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act (California Civil Code Section 51 et seq.), or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person including, but not limited to, color, race, religious creed, sexual orientation, age, ancestry, or national origin;

(2) When its application results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code, or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers;

(3) When its application would result in an interference with, or inhibition of, peaceful labor, picketing, or other lawful labor activities;

(4) When its application would result in an interference with, or inhibition of, any other exercise of the constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech, such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinion; or

(5) When such person is upon another's private property or business premises under claim of color or legal right. This exception is applicable (but not limited to) the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies: marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or visitation disputes; disputes regarding title to or rights in real property; landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute; employer-employee disputes; business-type disputes such as those between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person claims rights to the present pursuant to order, decree, or process of a court.

(e) The notification referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be given orally or in the form of a written notice, posted in any conspicuous place; in either case, the notice shall identify the prohibited area and the time period, if limited, during which such prohibition remains in effect.

(f) For purposes of this section, "person in charge" includes peace officers of the City of Santa Clara if written authorization to enforce said section has been previously obtained from the owner, owner's agent or person in lawful possession of the property in question. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 4-12-83; Ord. 1624 § 1, 5-14-91; Ord. 1823 § 1, 9-11-07. Formerly § 18-93).

9.30.020 Trespass on City property – When prohibited.
(a) No person shall willfully enter or remain upon any property owned or controlled by the City of Santa Clara after having been ordered not to enter or remain on such property, either by posting of the premises or upon order of authorized City personnel, including the City Manager, any department director, or any peace officer employed by the City of Santa Clara.

(b) Any order to not enter or remain on City property may be limited to certain times (e.g., days or hours), and certain uses (e.g., no swimming or alcohol use) as the City Manager, department director, or peace officer shall find reasonably necessary for the conduct of City business and affairs, for the protection or preservation of the public peace, health and safety, or to avoid personal injury or property damage. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 4-12-83; Ord. 1823 § 2, 9-11-07. Formerly § 18-94).

Chapter 9.35
REGULATION OF USE OF PARKS
BY LARGE GROUPS*
Sections:

9.35.010  Park use permit required for large groups.

9.35.020  Park use application.

9.35.030  Application – Waiver of time.

9.35.040  Action on application – Grounds for denial.

9.35.050  Appeals of decisions on permits to the City Manager.

9.35.060  Fees.

9.35.070  Provisions for special events not covered by title; authority of City Manager to close parks and buildings, remove persons therefrom, etc.

9.35.080  Schedule for uses and capacity of parks.

*Code reviser's note: Ordinance 1749 adds these provisions as Chapter 9.40. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.

9.35.010 Park use permit required for large groups.
No person shall conduct or carry on an assembly of more than fifty (50) people in a park of the City of Santa Clara, which assembly is intended or can reasonably be expected to last more than thirty (30) minutes or which in fact does last more than thirty (30) minutes unless a park use permit has first been issued therefor. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.020 Park use application.
Whenever a park use permit is required by the provisions of this chapter, an application shall be filed with the Director of Parks and Recreation (hereafter referred to as "Director" which shall also include his/her designee) at least ten business days in advance of the date for which the permit is sought, stating:

(a) The name, address and telephone number(s) of the applicant;

(b) The name, address and telephone number of the person, group, organization, or corporation sponsoring the activity;

(c) Dates and hours of the activity;

(d) Estimated attendance at the activity;

(e) Assurance of responsibility of cleaning the entire area;

(f) Description of the proposed activity including a description of equipment to be used in connection therewith and the use to be made of such equipment;

(g) The building or park or portion thereof for which application is made;

(h) The name, address and telephone number of each monitor the applicant will provide, if any; and

(i) Any other information that the Director determines to be reasonably necessary to insure the activity will not result in injury to persons or property or involve violations of law. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.030 Application – Waiver of time.
The Director shall waive the period for permit applications when the activity is spontaneous or organized on short notice in response to an event of obvious importance such as local grievances or important national events, and the full period for permit application would deprive the activity of immediate response to such an event. The Director may waive the period where circumstances make the time requirements impractical or unnecessary. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.040 Action on application – Grounds for denial.
(a) Applications for a park use permit shall be acted upon by the Director within a reasonable time under the circumstances, but in no event less than eight business days before the date for which the permit is sought.

(b) The Director shall issue the permit unless the Director finds:

(1) The park or portion thereof applied for is not available because of prior reservation or City-sponsored or co-sponsored event or will not accommodate the activity of the applicant because of the number of persons expected to attend;

(2) The proposed activity is of a size, nature, or duration that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the areas, as to significantly hinder the police protection of the City;

(3) The applicant failed to timely file an application;

(4) The proposed activity would violate Federal, State, or local laws or regulations;

(5) The applicant fails to agree in writing to clean, repair and restore the building or park or portion thereof to its condition immediately prior to the activity for which the permit is sought;

(6) The applicant or the organizers of the event have used City parks and facilities in the past and have failed to comply with the conditions of the permit they were issued;

(7) The applicant fails to agree in writing to provide monitors at the ratio of one for every fifty persons expected to attend. Such monitors shall be responsible adults and shall be in attendance for the entire duration of the event or activity for which the permit is issued;

(8) The organizers of the event, or agents or persons acting in concert with the organizers, have specific intent, manifested by specific statements or plans, to engage in or provoke violence;

(9) The applicant fails to agree in writing to provide chemical toilet facilities for any event where the estimated attendance exceeds one thousand (1,000) persons or, in parks which do not have toilet facilities, chemical toilets for any event that the estimated attendance exceeds fifty (50) persons. Such facilities shall be provided at the ratio of one for each additional four hundred (400) persons or fraction thereof. This requirement shall apply only if the Director specifically requires chemical toilet facilities for the application.

(c) Where the Director finds, from the application and his/her initial investigation thereof, that one or more of the conditions exist justifying denial, the Director shall notify the applicant thereof in writing of the intent to deny the permit. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial. The applicant may request in writing that a hearing be held before the Director on the matter. Such notice shall be filed with the Director within two business days of the Director's notice specified above and the hearing shall be held not more than two business days thereafter. The Director within one business day of the hearing shall render a decision to the applicant. Said decision shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds therefore. If the applicant makes no request for a hearing before the Director as provided herein, the notice of intent to deny the permit shall operate as a denial.

(d) The decision of the Director may be appealed by the applicant to the City Manager pursuant to SCCC 9.35.050. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.050 Appeals of decisions on permits to the City Manager.
An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director on any permit provided for in this chapter to the City Manager, or designee. The applicant must file such appeal with the City Manager within two business days of the Director's decision. The City Manager, or designee, shall hold a hearing within two business days of the filing of such appeal, at which time applicant may present any evidence relevant to the application. The City Manager, or designee, shall within two business days of such hearing issue a decision either affirming the denial of the application, or directing the Director to issue a permit. The decision of the City Manager, or designee shall be in writing, shall specify the grounds therefore, and shall be final. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.060 Fees.
Fees for the permits provided for in this chapter shall be as provided by resolution of the City Council. Such fees must be paid at the time the application is filed, and the application shall not be considered complete until such fee is paid. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.070 Provisions for special events not covered by title; authority of City Manager to close parks and buildings, remove persons therefrom, etc.
The City Manager, or designee, shall provide for special events and circumstances not covered by this title. In so doing, the City Manager, or designee, shall act to secure the public peace and welfare and to further the maximum use of the parks for the comfort and convenience of all. The City Manager, or designee, may close any park, building or portion thereof, and remove all persons therefrom when in the City Manager's judgment, such closing will best preserve the public peace, prevent damage to public property, or quell riots, mobs or violence. The City Manager, or designee, may also cause to be removed any and all persons whose presence on the premises is disruptive to the normal and safe use and enjoyment of the premises. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

9.35.080 Schedule for uses and capacity of parks.
The Director shall promulgate a schedule that shows uses and capacities of each park. Such schedule shall be adopted by and may be amended by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 3-14-00).

Chapter 9.40
REGULATION OF SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections:

9.40.010  Definitions.

9.40.020  Storage and display of tobacco products.

9.40.030  Retaliation prohibited.

9.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases hereafter set forth shall have the meanings given them in this section.

(a) "Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or bidis (also spelled beadies).

(b) "Vendor assistance" means that in the course of a sale of a tobacco product, only the owner, manager or employee of the vendor establishment has physical access to the tobacco product until a legal sale has been completed. (Ord. 1751 § 2, 3-28-00).

9.40.020 Storage and display of tobacco products.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or is employed by commercial, retail or wholesale establishment where tobacco products are sold to store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, such tobacco products in an area that is accessible to the public without vendor assistance.

(b) Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of tobacco products in an area viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without vendor assistance. (Ord. 1751 § 2, 3-28-00).

9.40.030 Retaliation prohibited.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any person because that person has reported any violations of or otherwise participated in the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1751 § 2, 3-28-00).

Chapter 9.45
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

9.45.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 9.

9.45.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 9.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 9 [entitled "Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 9 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Chapter 9.50
MULTIPLE RESPONSES TO LOUD OR UNRULY PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS
(Repealed by Ord. 1822)

Chapter 9.55
PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION
Sections:

9.55.010    Purpose and intent.

9.55.020    Definitions.

9.55.030    Prohibited acts of discrimination – Employment.

9.55.040    Prohibited acts of discrimination – Housing and real estate transactions.

9.55.050    Prohibited acts of discrimination – Business establishments or public accommodations.

9.55.060    Prohibited acts of discrimination – Educational institutions.

9.55.070    City services, facilities and transactions.

9.55.080    General exceptions.

9.55.090    Coercion or retaliation.

9.55.100    Enforcement.

9.55.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this chapter, to protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to be free from all forms of arbitrary discrimination, including discrimination based on age, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, gender, sexual orientation and gender identity. The Council’s purpose in enacting this chapter is to promote the public health and welfare of all persons who live and work in Santa Clara. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.020 Definitions.
(a) “Advertising” shall mean to make, print, publish, advertise or otherwise disseminate any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to any employment activity, any business activity, any service activity or any educational activity.

(b) “Age” shall mean eighteen (18) years of age or older except as otherwise provided by law.

(c) “AIDS” means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), AIDS related conditions (ARC), or any other medical condition which a person contracts as a result of having AIDS or ARC.

(d) “Business establishment” shall mean any entity, however organized, which furnishes goods, services or accommodations to the general public. An otherwise qualifying establishment which has membership requirements is considered to furnish services to the general public if its membership requirements consist only of payment of fees, or consist only of requirements under which a substantial portion of the residents of the City could qualify.

(e) “Disability” or “disabled” shall mean, with respect to an individual: a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of the individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. For purposes of this chapter discrimination on the basis of disability means that no covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability because of that individual’s disability. The term “qualified individual with a disability” shall mean an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that the individual holds or desires. Except as herein provided discrimination on the basis of disability is to be interpreted in a manner consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto and judicial decisions lending construction thereto.

(f) “Discriminate, discrimination or discriminatory” shall mean any act, policy or practice which, regardless of intent, has the effect of subjecting any person to differential treatment as a result of that person’s age, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital status, sex, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation or medical condition. “Discrimination” includes the assertion of an otherwise valid reason for action as a subterfuge or pretext for prohibited discrimination.

(g) “Educational institution” shall mean any public or private educational institution including an academy, college, elementary or secondary school, extension course, kindergarten, preschool, nursery school, university, and any business, nursing, professional, secretarial, technical or vocational school.

(h) “Employee” shall mean any individual employed or seeking employment from an employer.

(i) “Employer” shall mean any person who, as of December 1, 2012, for compensation, regularly employs five or more individuals, not including the employer’s parents, spouse or children. For purposes of this chapter, an employer “regularly” employs five individuals when the employer employs five or more individuals for each working day in any twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current or previous calendar year. For purposes of this chapter an “employer” is also any person acting on behalf of an employer, directly or indirectly, or any employment agency.

(j) “Gender” shall have the same meaning as “sex” as that term is used herein and shall be broadly interpreted to include persons who are known or assumed to be transgendered.

(k) “Gender identity” shall mean a person’s actual or perceived sex, and includes a person’s identity, appearance, or behavior, whether or not that identity, appearance, or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person’s sex at birth.

(l) “Labor organization” shall mean any organization which exists and is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection on behalf of employees.

(m) “Medical condition” shall include AIDS, AIDS related conditions and the conditions delineated in California Government Code Section 12926(i).

(n) “Person” shall mean any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or group of persons however arranged.

(o) “Place of public accommodation” shall include: inns; taverns; hotels; motels; restaurants; wholesale outlets; retail outlets; banks; savings and loan associations; other financial institutions; credit information bureaus; insurance companies; dispensaries; clinics; hospitals; theaters; recreational parks and facilities; trail camps; garages; public conveyances; public halls; and all other establishments within the city which offer goods, services, accommodations and entertainment to the public. A place of public accommodation does not include any institution, club or other place of accommodation which by its nature is distinctly private.

(p) “Service” shall mean any activity which contributes to the welfare of others.

(q) “Sexual orientation” shall mean known or assumed heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.

(r) “Transaction in real estate” shall include the exhibiting, listing, advertising, negotiating, agreeing to transfer or transferring, whether by sale, lease, sublease, rent, assignment or other agreement, of any interest in real property or improvements thereon. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.030 Prohibited acts of discrimination – Employment.
With regard to employment, it shall be unlawful for any employers or labor organizations to engage in any of the following acts, wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason:

(a) To fail to hire, refuse to hire or discharge any individual;

(b) To discriminate against any individual, with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, including promotion; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any employer to provide benefits, such as insurance, to individuals not employed by the employer;

(c) To limit, segregate, or classify employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any employee of employment opportunities, or which would otherwise tend to adversely affect his or her status as an employee;

(d) To fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual in such a manner: that would deprive an individual of employment opportunities; that would limit an individual’s employment opportunities; or that would otherwise adversely affect an individual’s status as a prospective employee or as an applicant for employment;

(e) To discriminate against an individual in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other job training, including an on-the-job training program;

(f) To print or publish, or cause to be printed or published, any discriminatory notice or advertisement relating to employment. This subsection shall not be construed so as to expose the person who prints or publishes the notice or advertisement, such as a newspaper, to liability; or

(g) To discriminate in referring an individual for employment whether the referral is by an employment agency, labor organization or any other person. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.040 Prohibited acts of discrimination – Housing and real estate transactions.
With regard to housing and real estate transactions it shall be unlawful to engage in any of the following acts wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason:

(a) To discriminate by impeding, delaying, discouraging or otherwise limiting or restricting any transaction in real property;

(b) To discriminate by imposing different terms on a real estate transaction;

(c) To represent falsely that an interest in real property is not available for transaction;

(d) To include in the terms or conditions of a real property transaction any discriminatory clause, condition or restriction;

(e) To discriminate in performing, or refusing to perform, any act necessary to determine an individual’s financial ability to engage in a real estate transaction;

(f) For a property manager to discriminate by refusing to provide equal treatment of, or services to, occupants of any real property which he or she manages;

(g) To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any discriminatory notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to a real estate transaction or proposed real estate transaction, or financing relating thereto. This subsection shall not be construed so as to expose the person who prints or publishes the notice or advertisement, such as a newspaper, to liability. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit advertising directed to physically disabled persons for the purpose of calling to their attention the existence or absence of housing accommodations or services for the physically disabled;

(h) To discriminate in any financial transaction involving real estate, on account of the location of the real estate be it residential or nonresidential (“redlining”);

(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (h) of this section, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an owner to limit occupancy of a building to tenants on the basis of age in accordance with Federal or California law; and

(j) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (h) of this section, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an owner, lessee or renter to refuse to rent, lease or sublease a portion of a single-family dwelling unit to a person as a roomer or boarder where it is anticipated that the owner, lessee or renter will be occupying any portion of the single-family dwelling or to refuse to rent, lease or sublease where it is anticipated that the owner, renter or lessee will be sharing either a kitchen or a bathroom with the roomer or boarder. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.050 Prohibited acts of discrimination – Business establishments or public accommodations.
It shall be unlawful for a business establishment or place of public accommodation to engage in any of the following acts wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason:

(a) To deny, directly or indirectly, any person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of any business establishment or place of public accommodation; or

(b) To print, publish, circulate, post, or mail, directly or indirectly, a statement, advertisement, or sign which indicates that the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of a business establishment or place of public accommodation will be unlawfully refused, withheld from or denied an individual, or which indicates that an individual’s patronage of, or presence at, the business establishment or place of public accommodation is objectionable, unwelcome, unacceptable, or undesirable. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.060 Prohibited acts of discrimination – Educational institutions.
It shall be unlawful for an educational institution to engage in any of the following acts wholly or partially for a discriminatory reason:

(a) To deny, restrict, abridge or condition the use of, or access to, any educational facilities or educational services to any person otherwise qualified;

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice to limit attendance in classes or programs conducted by an educational institution based upon a reasonable educational objective, except where to do so would otherwise violate a duty imposed upon the institution by Federal or State law to provide reasonable accommodation; and

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an educational institution operated by a religious or denominational institution, or established for a bona fide religious purpose, to admit students or program attendees on the basis of that student’s or attendee’s religious or denominational affiliation or preference. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.070 City services, facilities and transactions.
The City shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as private individuals. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.080 General exceptions.
(a) Any practice which has a discriminatory effect and which would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter shall not be deemed unlawful if it can be established that the practice is not intentionally devised to contravene the prohibitions of this chapter and can be justified by a reasonable business purpose. A reasonable business purpose shall not be based upon the comparative characteristics of one group in contrast to another, or a stereotyped characterization of one group in contrast to another.

(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit promotional activities such as senior citizen discounts and other similar practices designed primarily to encourage participation by protected groups.

(c) It shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to observe the conditions of a bona fide seniority system or a bona fide employee benefit system such as a retirement, pension or insurance plan which is not a subterfuge or pretext to evade the purposes of this chapter.

(d) Prohibited discriminatory practices do not include acts based on a person’s marital status which are reasonably taken in recognition of California community property laws pertaining to the acquisition, financing, holding or transferring of real estate.

(e) It shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to carry out an affirmative action plan. An affirmative action plan is any plan devised to effectuate remedial or corrective action taken in response to past discriminatory practices, or as otherwise required by State or Federal law.

(f) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit selection or rejection based solely upon a bona fide occupational qualification, a bona fide physical requirement, or, as to a religious or denominational institution, based upon a preference for applicants of the same religion or denomination. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit a religious or denominational institution from selecting or rejecting applicants and employees for nonsecular positions on the basis of the applicant’s or employee’s conformance with the institution’s religious or denominational principles. If a party asserts that an otherwise unlawful practice is justified as a permissible bona fide occupational qualification, a permissible bona fide physical requirement or as a permissible bona fide religious or denominational preference, that party shall have the burden of proving:

(1) That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of such a bona fide condition; and

(2) That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the bona fide requirement. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.090 Coercion or retaliation.
(a) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice to coerce, threaten, retaliate against, or interfere with any person in the exercise of, or on account of having exercised, or on account of having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise of, any right granted or protected under this chapter, or on account of having expressed opposition to any practice prohibited by this chapter.

(b) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to require, request, or suggest that a person retaliate against, interfere with, intimidate or discriminate against a person, because that person has opposed any practice made unlawful by this chapter, or because that person has made a charge, or because that person has testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing authorized under this chapter.

(c) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to cause or coerce, or attempt to cause or coerce, directly or indirectly, any person in order to prevent that person from complying with the provisions of this chapter.

(d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair the constitutionally protected right to freedom of speech.

(e) In the course of investigating or proving a charge of discrimination under this chapter, no person shall be required to disclose their sexual orientation or gender. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

9.55.100 Enforcement.
(a) Private Right of Action. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice shall have a civil cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any such civil action shall be brought within one year of the alleged discriminatory act. The court may grant such relief as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, compensatory damages, attorney’s fees, equitable relief, and injunctive relief including an injunction ordering the respondent to cease and desist from the unlawful discriminatory practice. Punitive damages are not recoverable in any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter.

(b) Enforcement by City. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or who aids or incites such a violation shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

(c) State/Federal Remedies.

(1) The civil and criminal remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter are in addition to, not in lieu of, those provided for by State and Federal law. This chapter shall therefore not be construed so as to limit a person’s right to file complaint with the California Fair Employment and Housing Commission or the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or any other State or Federal agency vested with jurisdiction to receive, review and act upon complaints of discrimination of the type prohibited by this chapter.

(2) This chapter shall not be construed as limiting the right of any person to seek remedies in courts of competent jurisdiction pursuant to State or Federal law which grant private rights of action to persons aggrieved by discriminatory acts of the type prohibited by this chapter.

(3) A person’s election to seek remedies provided for in this chapter shall not operate to toll any statute of limitation set forth in State or Federal law for pursuing remedies under State or Federal law for acts of discrimination of the type prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 1899 § 1, 11-13-12).

Chapter 9.60
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE WORKER RETENTION
Sections:

9.60.010    Definitions.

9.60.020    Notification and retention.

9.60.030    Remedies.

9.60.040    Exemption.

9.60.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Building service” means work performed in connection with the care or maintenance of an existing building and includes, but is not limited to, work performed by guards and janitors.

(b) “Building service contract” means a contract let by any covered entity for the furnishing of regularly scheduled building services, and includes any subcontracts for such services in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and for a term of three months or longer.

(c) “Building service contractor” means any person who enters into a building service contract, including any subcontractor.

(d) “Building service employee” means any person employed as a building service employee by a building services contractor or covered entity whose regular place of work is a business or entertainment/convention venue in the City of Santa Clara on a full- or part-time basis (eight hours or more a week) during the ninety (90) days immediately preceding any transition in employment subject to this chapter except for persons who are managerial, supervisory or confidential employees, and persons regularly scheduled to work fewer than eight hours per week at a building.

(e) “Business” means any commercial, industrial, institutional or mixed-use business facility owned or managed by a covered entity in the City in a single building or in contiguous buildings under common ownership or management.

(f) “Covered entity” means any person who hires or retains a food service contractor for the provision of food services at a business facility or entertainment/convention venue within the City, or the City if it hires or retains a food service contractor for an entertainment/convention venue, or any person who hires or retains a building service contractor for the provision of building services at a business facility or entertainment/convention venue within the City.

(g) “Entertainment/convention venue” means a stadium, concert hall, club, convention center, or like venue with a total capacity of at least eight thousand (8,000) that hosts concerts, shows, conventions, or sporting events on a noncontinuous basis.

(h) “Food service” means the on-site preparation, serving and clean-up of food or beverages to persons.

(i) “Food service contract” means a contract for the furnishing of food services, and includes any subcontracts for such services in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and for a term of three months or longer.

(j) “Food service contractor” means any person who hires or retains food service employees in order to provide food services to a covered entity pursuant to a food service contract, including any subcontractor.

(k) “Food service employee” means any person whose regular place of work is a covered entity within the City of Santa Clara on a full- or part-time basis (eight hours or more a week) during the ninety (90) days immediately preceding any transition in employment subject to this chapter, except for persons who are managerial, supervisory, or confidential employees, and persons regularly scheduled to work fewer than eight hours per week.

(l) “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, or other entity, with more than twenty-five (25) employees in the State of California that may employ persons or enter into service contracts, but it does not include a county, school district, community college district, the State of California, and the federal government or any other governmental entity except the City of Santa Clara, the Stadium Authority, the Sports and Open Space Authority and the City of Santa Clara Housing Authority.

(m) “Regularly scheduled” with respect to services means of an ongoing nature and not for a specific event or to accomplish a single repair or up-grade.

(n) “Subcontractor” means any person who is not an employee who enters into a contract with a food service or building service contractor to assist the contractor in performing a food service or building service contract.

(o) “Successor contractor” means (1) any person that has entered into a food service contract or building service contract to provide services to a covered entity that are substantially similar to those provided by such covered entity prior to contracting out the services or those provided to such covered entity under a terminated food service or building service contract, or (2) a covered entity, if the covered entity provides such services following the termination of a food service or building service contract. (Ord. 1964 § 1, 4-4-17).

9.60.020 Notification and retention.
(a) No less than fifteen (15) calendar days before terminating any food service or building service contract, or contracting out services previously performed by the covered entity, a covered entity shall request, and the current food service or building service contractor or the covered entity if it provides the services shall provide to the successor contractor, if one has been named, and the covered entity if different, a full and accurate list containing the name, home address and telephone number, date of hire, and job category of each food service worker or building service employee employed by the current food service or building service contractor or by covered entity at the site or sites covered by the food service or building service contract that will be terminated or let, as applicable.

(b) The successor contractor shall retain for a ninety (90)-day transition employment period all food service or building service employees that were employed by the terminated food service or building service contractor, or by the covered entity if the covered entity has contracted out the services. During the ninety (90)-day transition period, the successor contractor shall not substantially change a food service or building service employee’s work shift or work location.

(c) The successor contractor shall ensure that a notice to food service or building service employees is posted setting forth the rights provided under this section and which includes a copy of any list provided pursuant to subsection (a) of this section with the home addresses and phone numbers redacted, and that such notice is also provided to the food service or building service employees’ collective bargaining representative, if any. The notice and list shall be posted in the same location and manner that other statutorily required notices to employees are posted at the affected sites.

(d) If at any time the successor contractor determines that fewer food service or building service employees are required to perform services than had been performing such services under the terminated food service or building services contract, the successor contractor shall retain the food service or building service employees by seniority within job classification; provided, that during such ninety (90)-day transition period, the successor contractor shall maintain a preferential hiring list of those food service or building service employees not retained at the sites who shall be given a right of first refusal to any jobs within their classifications that become available during that period.

(e) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, during such ninety (90)-day period, the successor contractor shall not discharge without cause a food service or building service employee retained pursuant to this section.

(f) At the end of the ninety (90)-day transition period, the successor contractor shall complete a written performance evaluation for each food service or building service employee retained pursuant to this section. If a food service or building service employee’s performance during such ninety (90)-day period is satisfactory, the successor contractor shall offer such food service or building service employee continued employment under the terms and conditions established by the successor contractor. (Ord. 1964 § 1, 4-4-17).

9.60.030 Remedies.
(a) A food service or building service employee who has been discharged or not retained in violation of this section, or the collective bargaining agent of the employee, may bring an action in any superior court of the State of California having jurisdiction over the successor contractor. Upon finding a violation of this chapter, the court shall award back pay, including the value of benefits, for each day during which the violation occurred and continues to occur. If the court determines that the successor contractor’s violations were willful, it shall order treble back pay and reinstatement. The amount of back pay shall be calculated as the greater of either of the following:

(1) The average regular rate of pay received by the employee during the last three years of the employee’s employment in the same occupation classification multiplied by the average hours worked during the last three years of the employee’s employment.

(2) The final regular rate of pay received by the employee at the time of termination of the predecessor food service or building service contract multiplied by the number of hours usually worked by the employee.

(3) The court may order a preliminary or permanent injunction to stop the continued violation of this chapter.

(4) If the employee is the prevailing party in the legal action, the court shall award the employee or collective bargaining agent reasonable attorney’s fees and costs as part of the costs recoverable. (Ord. 1964 § 1, 4-4-17).

9.60.040 Exemption.
The provisions of this chapter may be waived in whole or in part in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement; provided, that such waiver is set forth in writing in clear and unmistakable terms. (Ord. 1964 § 1, 4-4-17).

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.05    Motor Vehicle and Traffic Regulations

10.07    Temporary Street Closures

10.10    Vehicles – Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative

10.15    Transportation Demand Management Program

10.20    Funeral Escort Services

10.25    Vehicle Parking, Stopping, or Standing Violation Appeal Procedure

10.30    Regulation of Off-Street Operation of Certain Vehicles

10.35    Repealed

10.40    Residential Permit Parking

10.45    Enforcement of Title

Chapter 10.05
MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sections:

10.05.010    Definitions and rules of construction.

10.05.020    Categories of personnel enforcing traffic and parking regulations.

10.05.030    Cruising prohibited.

10.05.040    Warning against cruising.

10.05.050    Identification of cruising control area.

10.05.060    Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.

10.05.070    Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.

10.05.080    Obedience to police or authorized officers.

10.05.090    Required obedience to traffic regulations.

10.05.100    Reserved.

10.05.110    Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or animals.

10.05.120    Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.

10.05.130    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

10.05.140    Exemption of certain vehicles.

10.05.150    Report of damage to certain property.

10.05.160    When vehicles may be removed from streets.

10.05.170    Authority to install traffic control devices.

10.05.180    Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes.

10.05.190    Obedience to traffic control devices.

10.05.200    Installation of traffic signals.

10.05.210    Lane marking.

10.05.220    Distinctive roadway markings.

10.05.230    Removal of traffic control devices.

10.05.240    Traffic control devices – Hours of operation.

10.05.250    Unauthorized painting of curbs.

10.05.260    Emerging from alley, driveway or building.

10.05.270    Turning markers – Intersections – Multiple lanes.

10.05.280    Restricted turns, intersections.

10.05.290    Right turns – Signal-controlled intersections.

10.05.300    One-way streets and alleys.

10.05.310    Driving through funeral procession or parade.

10.05.320    Clinging to moving vehicle.

10.05.330    Commercial vehicles using private driveways.

10.05.340    Riding or driving on sidewalk.

10.05.350    New pavement and markings.

10.05.360    Limited access.

10.05.370    Restrictions on use of freeways.

10.05.380    Obedience to barriers and signs.

10.05.390    No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.

10.05.400    Movement of vehicles exceeding Vehicle Code requirements – Permit required.

10.05.410    Flange wheel machinery.

10.05.420    Crosswalks.

10.05.430    Pedestrian use of crosswalks.

10.05.440    Application of regulations.

10.05.450    Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.

10.05.460    Prohibited parking areas.

10.05.470    Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.

10.05.480    Storage of refuse bins on public streets.

10.05.490    Repealed.

10.05.500    Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.

10.05.510    Washing or polishing vehicles.

10.05.520    Repealed.

10.05.530    Repealed.

10.05.540    Unlawful domestic use of travel trailers, etc.

10.05.550    Emergency parking signs.

10.05.560    Limited parking areas.

10.05.570    Parking prohibited on streets.

10.05.580    Parking parallel on one-way streets.

10.05.590    Diagonal parking.

10.05.600    Parking space markings.

10.05.610    No stopping zones.

10.05.620    Tow away zones.

10.05.630    Parking – Commercial vehicles in residential districts.

10.05.640    Vehicles on City property.

10.05.650    Vehicles on private property.

10.05.660    Special purpose parking permits.

10.05.670    Loading zones.

10.05.680    Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.

10.05.690    Effect of permission to load and unload.

10.05.700    Standing for loading or unloading only.

10.05.710    Standing in passenger loading zone.

10.05.720    Standing in any alley.

10.05.730    Coach and bus zones.

10.05.740    Taxicab stands.

10.05.750    Funeral zone.

10.05.760    Advertising vehicles.

10.05.770    Truck routes.

10.05.780    Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets.

10.05.790    Railway gates.

10.05.800    Trains not to block crossings.

10.05.810    Changes in prima facie speed limits.

10.05.820    Twenty-five (25) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.830    Thirty (30) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.840    Thirty-five (35) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.850    Forty (40) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.860    Forty-five (45) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.870    Fifty (50) miles per hour – Streets.

10.05.880    Regulation of speed by traffic signals.

10.05.890    Use of coasters, skateboards, scooters, roller skates and similar devices restricted.

10.05.900    Shrubbery obstructing visibility of intersections.

10.05.910    Enforcement generally – Penalties for parking violations set by resolution.

10.05.010 Definitions and rules of construction.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined in this chapter, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, and any amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.

(a) Reserved for future use.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) “Bicycle” shall mean a light vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handlebars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “Coach” shall mean any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.

(2) For purpose of subsection (3) of this section, “traffic which is congested” shall mean as such words are defined from time to time in a resolution adopted by the City Council. The determination that a street or highway is congested shall be made by the ranking police officer on duty in the affected area.

(3) “Cruising” shall mean the driving of any motor vehicle past a traffic control point in traffic which is congested, as defined in resolution of the City Council, at or near the traffic control point, as determined by the ranking police officer on duty in the affected area, within a three-hour period after the vehicle operator has been given a written notice on a previous driving trip past the control point that further driving past the control point will be a violation of City ordinance on cruising.

(4) “Curb” shall mean the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word “curb” as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, or from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Divisional island” shall mean a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) “G” definitions:

(1) “Green light cycle” shall mean the period commencing upon the switching of a red light to a green light through to the return of a red light.

(h) “H” definitions:

(1) “Holidays” shall mean the holidays as defined in Sections 6700 and 6701 of the Government Code of the State of California as are from time to time amended.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “Loading zone” shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) Reserved for future use.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Park” shall mean in any verb form to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

(2) “Parkway” shall mean that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.

(3) “Passenger loading zone” shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

(4) “Pedestrian” shall mean any person afoot.

(5) “Place” in any verb form shall include the verb form of the word “maintain.”

(6) “Police officer” shall mean every employee of the Police Department of this City who meets the requirements as set forth in Sections 830.1, 830.6, and 832 of the California Penal Code for peace officer.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Stop” when required shall mean complete cessation of movement.

(2) “Stop” or “stand” when prohibited shall mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

(3) “Sign” or “signs” shall mean, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, any official traffic control device as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

(t) “T” definitions:

(1) “Traffic control point” shall mean a location along a public street or highway utilized as an observation point in order to monitor traffic conditions for potential violations of this chapter.

(2) “Traffic engineer” shall mean the City Manager, or a City employee appointed by the City Manager.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) “V” definitions:

(1) “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1570 § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. 1733 § 2, 5-4-99. Formerly § 17-1).

10.05.020 Categories of personnel enforcing traffic and parking regulations.
There will be several categories of City employees enforcing traffic and parking regulations as indicated in SCCC 10.05.010(i), (p), (u), 10.05.060, and 10.05.080. (Ord. 1570 § 2, 6-23-87. Formerly § 17-2).

10.05.030 Cruising prohibited.
No person shall engage in the activity of “cruising” as defined in this chapter on the portion of public streets or highways identified at the beginning and end of the portion of the street or highway subject to cruising controls by “No Cruising” signs which shall reference Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) and this section. (Ord. 1570 § 3, 6-23-87. Formerly § 17-3).

10.05.040 Warning against cruising.
A written notice may be issued to any person operating or occupying any motor vehicle passing a traffic control point that any subsequent passage past that traffic control point will be a violation of City ordinance on cruising. (Ord. 1570 § 4, 6-23-87. Formerly § 17-4).

10.05.050 Identification of cruising control area.
The traffic engineer, or the ranking police officer on duty within the affected area, shall identify the beginning and end of the portion of the street or highway subject to cruising controls by “No Cruising” signs which shall reference Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) and SCCC 10.05.030. (Ord. 1570 § 5, 6-23-87. Formerly § 17-5).

10.05.060 Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
(a) Police officers, and such other employees of the Police Department as are designated by the Chief of Police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signals in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of a fire (or other emergency) or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers, designated employees of the Police Department, or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the California Vehicle Code.

(b) Employees of the City Street Department and of the City Utilities Departments are hereby authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require in connection with the work of their Departments in the public streets. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1341 § 3, 11-16-76. Formerly § 17-20).

10.05.070 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that pedestrians may operate push button signals. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-21).

10.05.080 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or by law. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-22).

10.05.090 Required obedience to traffic regulations.
It is an infraction for any person driving any vehicle or other conveyance upon any street, or any pedestrian to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required as applicable to any such person under this chapter. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1570 § 6, 6-23-87. Formerly § 17-23).

10.05.100 Reserved.
10.05.110 Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-24).

10.05.120 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer, or employee of this City in their enforcement of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-25).

10.05.130 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this State or any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, or by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-26).

10.05.140 Exemption of certain vehicles.
(a) The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department; any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

(b) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his/her willful disregard of the safety of others.

(c) The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-27).

10.05.150 Report of damage to certain property.
(a) The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by the public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of this City.

(b) Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

(c) The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection (a) of this section within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-28).

10.05.160 When vehicles may be removed from streets.
The City Manager and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives may remove or cause to be removed:

(a) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.

(b) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M., when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.

(c) Any vehicle that is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway; for the installation of underground utilities; where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal.

(d) Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a street or highway within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant located on City streets.

(e) Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a street or highway that has found to be seeping, leaking, or draining any oil, grease, paint, other petroleum products, hazardous materials, volatile chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, or waste (solid, liquid or gaseous) and that is determined by a regularly employed Police Department employee designated by the City Manager, or designee, or the Fire Marshal or his/her designee to constitute a fire or environmental hazard, or to be detrimental to human life, health, or safety. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1665 § 1, 11-15-94. Formerly § 17-29).

10.05.170 Authority to install traffic control devices.
(a) The traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices, including stop at through street and stop signs, generally when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter.

(b) Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

(c) The traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.

(d) Whenever the City Manager or designee designates streets or portions thereof as through streets and intersections at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, and any railroad grade crossings at which vehicles are required to stop, the traffic engineer shall place stop signs as follows:

A stop sign shall be placed on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-30).

10.05.180 Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-31).

10.05.190 Obedience to traffic control devices.
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-32).

10.05.200 Installation of traffic signals.
Whenever the City Council designates any intersection or other place for the placing of official traffic signals, the traffic engineer shall cause such traffic signals to be placed. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-33).

10.05.210 Lane marking.
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-34).

10.05.220 Distinctive roadway markings.
The traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code of those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-35).

10.05.230 Removal of traffic control devices.
The traffic engineer shall remove, relocate or discontinue the use or operation of any traffic control device which is no longer authorized or required by the Vehicle Code, this chapter, or by the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-36).

10.05.240 Traffic control devices – Hours of operation.
The City Manager or designee shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic prohibition, restriction or regulation shall be in effect, unless the traffic engineer is expressly authorized to make such determinations under the provisions of this chapter or by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 2, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-37).

10.05.250 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
No person, unless authorized by the City Council, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-38).

10.05.260 Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-39).

10.05.270 Turning markers – Intersections – Multiple lanes.
(a) The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or by this chapter.

(b) When signs, markers or buttons are in place indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, no person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the direction of such signs, markers or buttons. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-40).

10.05.280 Restricted turns, intersections.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee designates any intersection at which the making of any right, left or U-turn shall be prohibited, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such intersection to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs are in place giving notice of such turning prohibition, no person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-41).

10.05.290 Right turns – Signal-controlled intersections.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee designates any intersection at which the making of a right turn against a traffic signal “stop” shall be prohibited, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such intersection to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs are in place giving notice of such turning prohibition, no person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-42).

10.05.300 One-way streets and alleys.
Whenever the City Council designates any street, alley or any portion thereof as a one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective until and unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movements shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-43).

10.05.310 Driving through funeral procession or parade.
No person shall operate a vehicle between any vehicles composing a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles in traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-44).

10.05.320 Clinging to moving vehicle.
No person shall attach himself/herself, catch on, or hold on, with his/her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Formerly § 17-45).

10.05.330 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
(a) No person shall operate a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

(b) For the purpose of this section, a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-46).

10.05.340 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks at least two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the Director of Public Works, or designee; such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-47).

10.05.350 New pavement and markings.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone-marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-48).

10.05.360 Limited access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-49).

10.05.370 Restrictions on use of freeways.
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by Streets and Highways Code Section 23.5, as amended, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-50).

10.05.380 Obedience to barriers and signs.
No persons, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-51).

10.05.390 No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-52).

10.05.400 Movement of vehicles exceeding Vehicle Code requirements – Permit required.
(a) No person shall move or operate upon any of the City streets any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size, width or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the Vehicle Code, without a written permit from the City Engineer.

(b) The City Engineer may, by written permit, authorize the movement or operation of any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size, width, or weight of vehicle or load in excess of the maximum specified in the Vehicle Code if in his/her judgment the road foundations, surfaces and structures upon which such vehicle or combination of vehicles is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, and when such operation is to be authorized the City Engineer may require such undertaking or other security as he may deem necessary to protect the streets and other public property from injury. The City Engineer may also require applicant to provide evidence of public liability insurance in such maximum amounts as he may prescribe. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-53).

10.05.410 Flange wheel machinery.
No person shall operate over the City streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the truck has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that the flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-54).

10.05.420 Crosswalks.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee determines that a crosswalk shall be established at any location between intersections, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs, marks, or lines at such location.

(b) Whenever the City Manager or designee prohibits pedestrian crossing in any crosswalk at an intersection the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at or adjacent to the intersection to give notice thereof. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-55).

10.05.430 Pedestrian use of crosswalks.
(a) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district.

(b) Except in cases of emergency, or for the purpose of entering or exiting from a parked vehicle, where crosswalks are duly marked at street intersections, no pedestrian shall stand in or cross the roadway within two hundred (200) feet of such crosswalk other than in the marked crosswalk. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1331 § 1, 4-13-76. Formerly § 17-56).

10.05.440 Application of regulations.
(a) The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

(b) The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the City, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-57).

10.05.450 Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-58).

10.05.460 Prohibited parking areas.
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer or traffic sign or signal:

(a) Within any divisional island, unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings.

(b) On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

(c) Upon, along, or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track.

(d) In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.

(e) On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities; where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.

(f) At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk, yield sign, stop sign, or official electrical traffic device, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop within a designated bus stop.

(g) At any place within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant located on City streets.

(h) The parking or storing of any motor vehicle, trailer, or boat in the required landscape area of any residentially zoned lot.

(i) At any area designated as a “fire lane” upon private, noncommercial, property. Such fire lane shall be clearly marked in one or more of the following manners:

(1) By a sign posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the designated place clearly stating in letters not less than one inch in height that the place is a fire lane;

(2) By outlining or painting the place in red and, in contrasting color, marking the place with the words “FIRE LANE,” which are clearly visible from the vehicle; or

(3) By a red curb or red paint on the edge of the roadway upon which is clearly marked the words “FIRE LANE.” (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1118; Ord. 1665 § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. 1732 § 2, 4-27-99. Formerly § 17-59).

10.05.470 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours.

In order to eliminate minor vehicular movements made to obstruct enforcement of vehicle storage restrictions, substantial movement of the vehicle shall be required. The stopping, standing or parking (hereinafter collectively “parking”) of a vehicle in one block on one side of the street shall be deemed one continuous parking. A car will be deemed to have been substantially moved if:

(a) The vehicle is moved to another street;

(b) The vehicle moves across at least one intersection on the same street before the vehicle is parked on the same street; or

(c) The vehicle is parked on the other side of the street within the same block. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1893 § 1, 11-15-11. Formerly § 17-60).

10.05.480 Storage of refuse bins on public streets.
Refuse bins shall not be placed or permitted to remain on any street of this City unless a written permit is first obtained from the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, or his/her designee. The Director of Public Works or City Engineer, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to formulate administrative rules and regulations governing the storage of refuse bins on public streets. Such rules and regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Procedure for issuance of permit;

(b) Preparation of application forms for permit;

(c) A schedule of fees to be charged in connection with the issuance of such permits;

(d) Development of standards pertaining to the size and reflectivity of refuse bins and their temporary location;

(e) Designation of length of time that refuse bins may remain on City streets; and

(f) Such other matters deemed necessary for the public interest.

When approved by the City Council, such rules and regulations shall be immediately effective. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1349 § 1, 4-26-77; Ord. 1769 § 2, 8-20-02. Formerly § 17-60.1).

10.05.490 Use of streets to advertise to the public the private sale of a vehicle.
Repealed by Ord. 1825. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1665 § 3, 11-15-94. Formerly § 17-61).

10.05.500 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, drain or change oil, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-62).

10.05.510 Washing or polishing vehicles.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-63).

10.05.520 Unlawful parking by peddlers, vendors.
Repealed by Ord. 1811 § 2, 10-10-06. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-64).

10.05.530 Frozen product vending – Limitation of hours.
Repealed by Ord. 1811 § 2, 10-10-06. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 7-23-74. Formerly § 17-64.1).

10.05.540 Unlawful domestic use of travel trailers, etc.
It shall be unlawful to use, or permit the use of any mobile home, motor home, house car, trailer coach, travel trailer, camp car, van, bus, truck or other vehicle for living or sleeping quarters, in any place in the City outside of a lawfully operated mobile home park except as provided in SCCC 18.60.020 and 18.60.050 or as may be authorized under Chapter 2.140 SCCC. (Ord. 1513 § 1, 11-13-84. Formerly § 17-64.2).

10.05.550 Emergency parking signs.
(a) Whenever the Chief of Police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, that officer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as that officer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the Chief of Police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

(b) When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-65).

10.05.560 Limited parking areas.
(a) Whenever the City Council determines that the parking or standing of a vehicle shall be prohibited or restricted on a City street or highway, or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs or curb markings at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) For portions of any City street or highway that is less than three hundred fifty (350) feet in length, the City Manager or designee is authorized to determine that the parking or standing of a vehicle shall be prohibited or restricted during all or certain hours of the day. The traffic engineer shall place proper signs or curb markings at such locations to give notice thereof at the direction of the City Council or the City Manager or designee.

(c) When signs or markings are in place, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for a period of time longer than is authorized by such signs or markings.

(d) When a person stops, stands, or parks a vehicle for a period of time longer than is authorized by sign or curb marking, each period of time which is longer than the authorized time shall constitute a separate overtime parking offense.

(e) In order to eliminate minor vehicular movements made to obstruct enforcement of limited parking restrictions, substantial movement of the vehicle from a particular limited parking area shall be required. The stopping, standing or parking (hereinafter collectively “parking”) of a vehicle in one block on one side of the street shall be deemed one continuous parking and shall be timed for authorized time limit parking as one parking. A car will be deemed to have been substantially moved if:

(1) The vehicle is moved to another street;

(2) The vehicle moves across at least one intersection on the same street before said vehicle is parked on the same street or reparked in the same block on the same side of the street as its initial parking position; or

(3) The vehicle moves across at least one intersection before it is parked on the other side of the street within the same block.

(f) A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1161 § 2, 5-16-67; Ord. 1167 § 1, 8-22-67; Ord. 1452 § 1, 8-3-82; Ord. 1895 §§ 3 – 5, 4-10-12; Ord. 1913 § 1, 11-12-13. Formerly § 17-68).

10.05.570 Parking prohibited on streets.
(a) Whenever the City Council determines that parking shall be prohibited upon any street, or portion thereof, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs or markings at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) For a portion of any City street or highway that is less than three hundred fifty (350) feet in length, the City Manager or designee is authorized to determine that parking shall be prohibited. The traffic engineer shall place proper signs or curb markings at such locations to give notice thereof at the direction of the City Council or the City Manager or designee.

(c) When signs or markings are in place, no person shall park a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 §§ 6, 7, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-69).

10.05.580 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
(a)  When the City Council determines that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or shall be permitted upon the left-hand side of any roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) For a portion of any City street or highway that is less than three hundred fifty (350) feet in length, the City Manager or designee is authorized to determine that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or shall be permitted upon the left-hand side of any roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways. The traffic engineer shall place proper signs or curb markings at such locations to give notice thereof at the direction of the City Council or the City Manager or designee.

(c) Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping, standing or parking. When such signs are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at such locations.

(d) In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such stopping, standing or parking. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 §§ 8, 9, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-70).

10.05.590 Diagonal parking.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee establishes a diagonal parking zone on any street, or portion thereof, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs or markings at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs or markings are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except:

(1) At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;

(2) With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb.

(c) The provisions of this section and the parallel parking requirements of SCCC 10.05.080 shall not apply to any commercial vehicle while actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-71).

10.05.600 Parking space markings.
(a) The traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

(b) When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-72).

10.05.610 No stopping zones.
(a) Whenever the City Council determines that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited on any street, or portion thereof, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) For a portion of any City street or highway that is less than three hundred fifty (350) feet in length, the City Manager or designee is authorized to determine that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited. The traffic engineer shall place proper signs or curb markings at such locations to give notice thereof at the direction of the City Council or the City Manager or designee.

(c) When signs are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 §§ 10, 11, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-73).

10.05.620 Tow away zones.
Whenever the City Manager or designee designates any established no stopping zone as a tow away zone, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such locations to give notice that any vehicle stopped or parked contrary to the directions of such signs will be removed. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-74).

10.05.630 Parking – Commercial vehicles in residential districts.
No person shall park any commercial vehicle for more than two consecutive hours within three hundred (300) feet of any building that is used primarily for residential purposes, except:

(a) While unloading or loading property and time in addition to such two-hour period is necessary to complete such work; or

(b) When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a commercial service to or on a property on a block for which such vehicle is parked and time in addition to such two-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service. For the purpose of this section, a “commercial vehicle” is defined as a vehicle with commercial license plates which is equipped with dual rear wheels, and is not used for recreational housing purposes. (Ord. 1827 § 1, 1-8-08).

10.05.640 Vehicles on City property.
(a) Whenever the City Manager determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the City’s business requires that the operation, standing, stopping or parking of any vehicles on City property and/or City-managed property shall be prohibited, limited or restricted, the traffic engineer shall place appropriate signs or markings at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs are in place, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-76).

10.05.650 Vehicles on private property.
(a) No person shall operate, drive, or leave any vehicle in, over, or upon any private property without express or implied permission of the owner thereof or the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either, except that this section shall not apply to public or private parking lots. For purposes of this section parking shall be allowed only on areas surfaced with all-weather materials, including, but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or gravel; and parking shall be prohibited in the required landscape areas.

(b) For the purpose of Section 22658 of the California Vehicle Code, a sign prohibiting public parking, indicating that vehicles will be removed at owner’s expense, and containing the telephone number of the City traffic law enforcement agency shall be rectangular and seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches, at a minimum. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1468 § 2, 3-29-83; Ord. 1665 § 4, 11-15-94. Formerly § 17-77).

10.05.660 Special purpose parking permits.
(a) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue permits for the occupancy of parking spaces without regard to parking time limitations, as herewith set forth. Permits may be so issued to persons for the purpose of occupying space in limited parking zones for and upon the following conditions and purposes:

(1) For the parking of vehicles and equipment, the use of which is necessary and incidental to and directly connected with the work and services being performed in or about a building or other establishment; for the purpose of this chapter, vehicles and equipment are necessary and incidental where the performance of work and services is dependent upon the presence of such vehicles or equipment and cannot be carried on in the absence thereof; or

(2) For the use and occupancy of parking spaces for building and construction materials and equipment incident to building and construction activities being carried on in limited parking zones, or where the use of parking space is deprived the public generally because of the nature of the construction or building activities being performed.

(b) Permits shall be issued after due application, as provided herein, only when the circumstances indicate to the Chief of Police that there is need to exempt the applicant from parking limit control for reasons of necessity and convenience. The application shall state the following information and such other information as the Chief of Police may require:

(1) Name and address of applicant;

(2) Type of business;

(3) Material and equipment or number of and identification of vehicles for which permit will be used;

(4) Statement of the need for the use of the permit;

(5) Estimated use to which the permit will be put;

(6) Number of permits desired;

(7) Length of time permit is required;

(8) Such other information as the Chief of Police may require.

(c) Permits issued under the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be of general use except in twenty-four (24)-minute and loading zones and permits issued under subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be for use of specified space. All such permits shall be in such form as the Chief of Police may prescribe.

(d) Any such permits shall be of distinctive color and shall be displayed prominently so as to be easily visible to traffic patrolmen, in a conspicuous place on the windshield of the vehicle or on the equipment for which the same is issued. Any such license shall be revocable by the Chief of Police:

(1) When permit is used for purposes other than to fulfill the need for which the permit was granted; or

(2) When the circumstances and need for which the permit was granted no longer exist.

(e) No permit shall be valid after the expiration of the period for which it is issued and in no event longer than one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-78).

10.05.670 Loading zones.
(a) Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

(b) Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-79).

10.05.680 Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.
(a) The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place and when required herein shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the markings as herein set forth.

(1) Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

(2) Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00  P.M., of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes.

(3) White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., of any day except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

(A) When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times.

(B) When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.

(4) Green shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four (24) minutes at any time between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., on any day except Sundays and holidays.

(5) Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically disabled persons.

(6) When the traffic engineer, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1329 § 7, 1-20-76. Formerly § 17-80).

10.05.690 Effect of permission to load and unload.
(a) The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, and vehicles registered to government agencies on official business.

(b) Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

(c) Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1190 § 2, 7-2-68. Formerly § 17-81).

10.05.700 Standing for loading or unloading only.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is prescribed in this chapter for such zone. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-82).

10.05.710 Standing in passenger loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is prescribed in this chapter for such zone. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-83).

10.05.720 Standing in any alley.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-84).

10.05.730 Coach and bus zones.
(a) Upon a finding of public convenience, and subject to City Manager review, the traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading and unloading of motor buses or common coach carriers of passengers at any curb within seventy-five (75) feet of any crosswalk at an intersection, and the traffic engineer shall place signs or other markings at such locations to give notice thereof. Whenever the City Manager or designee establishes motor bus zones of any length, at any curb, for the loading and unloading of buses or common coach carriers of passengers, the traffic engineer shall place signs or other markings at such locations to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs or markings are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 1118; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-85).

10.05.740 Taxicab stands.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee establishes taxicab stands, the traffic engineer shall paint the curb surface within said taxicab stands white and shall mark said white surfaces “taxicab stand” in red lettering.

(b) When markings are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire, in such taxicab stand. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-86).

10.05.750 Funeral zone.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place at any time during or within forty (40) minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or funeral service, unless the operator of said vehicle is directed by or has received permission from the Director or other person in charge of such funeral or funeral service, to park such vehicle in such place; provided, that such Director or person in charge shall have placed and maintained, prior to and during the time limit herein specified, at least two portable signs, approved by the traffic engineer, one at each extremity of such place, and with the distance between signs not to exceed fifty (50) feet, upon the sidewalk and pavement area and within two feet of the curb. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-87).

10.05.760 Advertising vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to maintain, use, operate, connect or suffer or permit to be maintained, used, operated or connected any loud speaker or sound amplifier in such manner as to cause any sound to be projected from any vehicle, for advertising or commercial purposes in the City without first obtaining a permit from the Council as prescribed in SCCC 9.05.060. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-88).

10.05.770 Truck routes.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee designates any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by traffic signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight limit of three tons. Normally, truck routes will be established on streets which, in the opinion of the traffic engineer, are structurally capable of conveying the vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight limit of three tons.

(b) When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress or egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

(1) School buses;

(2) Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or

(3) Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-89).

10.05.780 Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets.
(a) Whenever the City Manager or designee designates any street, or portion thereof, as a street on which the operation of commercial vehicles shall be prohibited, the traffic engineer shall place proper signs on such streets to give notice thereof.

(b) When signs are in place, no person shall operate a commercial vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs.

(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1895 § 1, 4-10-12. Formerly § 17-90).

10.05.790 Railway gates.
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-91).

10.05.800 Trains not to block crossings.
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicles on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel, for a period of time longer than five minutes, except this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident nor to the operation of “through” freight trains to the extent that they are excepted under the provisions of SCCC 12.05.050. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-92).

10.05.810 Changes in prima facie speed limits.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the speed permitted by State law is either less or greater than is reasonable and safe upon the following streets, or portions thereof, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on the following streets, or portions thereof, when signs are erected giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-93).

10.05.820 Twenty-five (25) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is twenty-five (25) miles per hour on all of the streets in the City, except on those streets where different prima facie limits are otherwise established herein. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1144 §§ 1, 2, 8-16-66; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-68. Formerly § 17-93.1).

10.05.830 Thirty (30) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour on the following streets, or portions thereof:

(a) Benton Street from San Tomas Expressway to Lawrence Expressway.

(b) Homestead Road from Los Olivos Drive to Woodhams Road.

(c) Repealed by Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69.

(d) Pomeroy Avenue from Calabazas Boulevard to Homestead Road.

(e) Repealed by Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69.

(f) Mission College Boulevard from the Sunnyvale city limits to Great America Parkway.

(g) Monroe Street, from Scott Boulevard to El Camino Real.

(h) Park Avenue, entire length.

(i) Lafayette Street between Poplar Street and Reed Street.

(j) Monroe Street from Newhall Street to Bellomy Street.

(k) Repealed by Ord. 1659 § 2, 7-5-94.

(l) The Alameda from El Camino Real to Market Street.

(m) Winchester Boulevard from Bellomy Street to Homestead Road.

(n) Cabrillo Avenue from Los Padres Boulevard to Bowers Avenue.

(o) Saratoga Avenue from Scott Boulevard to Bellomy Street. (Ord. 1123; Ord. 1128; Ord. 1144 § 3, 8-16-66; Ord. 1161 § 1, 5-16-67; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1-9-68; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-68; Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69; Ord. 1329 § 1, 1-20-76; Ord. 1432 § 1, 10-20-81; Ord. 1453 §1, 8-10-82; Ord. 1510 § 1, 10-23-84; Ord. 1575 § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. 1599 § 1, 5-2-89; Ord. 1631 § 1, 1-2-92; Ord. 1659 § 2, 7-5-94; Ord. 1696 § 1, 1-7-97. Formerly § 17-93.1.1).

10.05.840 Thirty-five (35) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour on the following streets, or portions thereof:

(a) Bowers Avenue from El Camino Real to Central Expressway.

(b) De La Cruz Boulevard overpass and overpass system including ramps and approaches, from Lafayette Street to Coleman Avenue, and between Trimble Road and Montague Expressway.

(c) Kiely Boulevard, from El Camino Real to Stevens Creek Boulevard.

(d) Lafayette Street from Central Expressway to Reed Street.

(e) Martin Avenue, entire length.

(f) Newhall Street from Saratoga Avenue to North Winchester Boulevard.

(g) North Winchester Boulevard, entire length.

(h) Pruneridge Avenue, entire length.

(i) Repealed by Ord. 1696 § 2, 1-7-97.

(j) Scott Boulevard from Martin Avenue to Saratoga Avenue.

(k) Stevens Creek Boulevard from the east city limits to Saratoga Avenue.

(l) Repealed by Ord. 1329 § 3, 1-20-76.

(m) Duane Avenue, entire length.

(n) Laurelwood Road between San Tomas Expressway and Lafayette Street.

(o) Repealed by Ord. 1565 § 3, 4-28-87.

(p) Walsh Avenue between Lafayette Street and Bowers Avenue.

(q) Lakeside Drive, entire length.

(r) Northwestern Parkway, entire length.

(s) Repealed by Ord. 1536 § 1, 12-23-85.

(t) Washington Street between the city limits and Lafayette Street.

(u) Yerba Buena Way, entire length.

(v) Lick Mill Boulevard, entire length.

(w) Old Mt. View-Alviso Road, entire length.

(x) Saratoga Avenue from Scott Boulevard to Stevens Creek Boulevard.

(y) Agnew Road from Lafayette Street to Montague Expressway.

(z) Hope Drive from Lafayette Street to Lick Mill Boulevard. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1123; Ord. 1144 § 1, 8-16-66; Ord. 1161 §§ 3, 4, 5-16-67; Ord. 1181 § 2, 1-9-68; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-68; Ord. 1202 § 1, 1-21-69; Ord. 1245 § 1, 8-31-71; Ord. 1260 § 2, 6-6-72; Ord. 1329 §§ 2, 3, 1-20-76; Ord. 1389 § 1, 10-16-79; Ord. 1468 § 1, 3-29-83; Ord. 1483 § 1, 10-11-83; Ord. 1495 § 1, 4-24-84; Ord. 1536 § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. 1565 §§ 1, 2, 4-28-87; Ord. 1643 § 1, 8-25-92; Ord. 1659 § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. 1676 § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. 1690 § 1, 7-9-96; Ord. 1696 § 2, 1-7-97; Ord. 1747 § 1, 2-15-00; Ord. 1796 § 1, 9-21-04. Formerly § 17-93.2).

10.05.850 Forty (40) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is forty (40) miles per hour in the following streets or portions thereof:

(a) Coleman Avenue from De La Cruz Boulevard to the east city limits.

(b) Great America Parkway, entire length.

(c) De La Cruz Boulevard from Central Expressway to Coleman Avenue.

(d) Homestead Road from Woodhams Road to Lawrence Expressway.

(e) Repealed by Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69.

(f) Kifer Road between the Sunnyvale city limits and Bowers Avenue.

(g) Lafayette Street from north city limits to Central Expressway.

(h) Repealed by Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69.

(i) Repealed by Ord. 1690 § 2, 7-9-96.

(j) Scott Boulevard from Martin Avenue to the west city limits.

(k) Stevens Creek Boulevard from Saratoga Avenue to the west city limits.

(l) Mission College Boulevard, from Great America Parkway to Montague Expressway.

(m) Tasman Drive, entire length.

(n) Repealed by Ord. 1676 § 2, 9-12-95.

(o) Bowers Avenue from State Route 101 to Central Expressway. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1123; Ord. 1144 § 1, 8-16-66; Ord. 1161 § 5, 5-16-67; Ord. 1181 § 4, 1-9-68; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-68; Ord. 1202 § 3, 1-21-69; Ord. 1245 § 2, 8-31-71; Ord. 1260 § 3, 6-6-72; Ord. 1329 § 4, 1-20-76; Ord. 1514 § 1, 11-29-84; Ord. 1565 § 3, 4-28-87; Ord. 1676 § 2, 9-12-95; Ord. 1690 § 2, 7-6-96. Formerly § 17-93.3).

10.05.860 Forty-five (45) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is forty-five (45) miles per hour on the following streets or portions thereof:

(a) Repealed by Ord. 1260 § 4, 6-6-72.

(b) San Tomas Expressway, entire length.

(c) Montague Expressway, entire length. (Ord. 1062; Ord. 1074; Ord. 1181 § 3, 1-9-68; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-86; Ord. 1202 § 2, 1-21-69; Ord. 1260 § 4, 6-6-72; Ord. 1329 § 5, 1-20-76. Formerly § 17-93.4).

10.05.870 Fifty (50) miles per hour – Streets.
The declared prima facie speed limit is fifty (50) miles per hour on the following streets or portions thereof:

(a) Central Expressway, entire length.

(b) Repealed by Ord. 1260 § 4, 6-6-72.

(c) Lawrence Expressway, entire length. (Ord. 1074; Ord. 1144 § 4, 8-16-66; Ord. 1190 § 1, 7-2-68; Ord. 1260 § 4, 6-6-72. Formerly § 17-93.5).

10.05.880 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner and speed slightly at variance from speed otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-94).

10.05.890 Use of coasters, skateboards, scooters, roller skates and similar devices restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, scooter, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway or upon the sidewalk in a zoning district zoned for business. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-95).

10.05.900 Shrubbery obstructing visibility of intersections.
Whenever the traffic engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a street right-of-way obstructs the view of any intersection or any traffic upon these streets approaching such intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. (Ord. 1062. Formerly § 17-96).

10.05.910 Enforcement generally – Penalties for parking violations set by resolution.
(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action.

(b) Although the penalty section, SCCC 1.05.070, is generally incorporated under this chapter, the bail schedule or penalties for violation of parking related provisions of this chapter shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The currently effective resolution shall be maintained and made available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 7-28-87. Formerly § 17-96.1).

Cross reference – Vehicle parking, stopping or standing violation appeal procedure, SCCC 10.25.010 et seq.

Chapter 10.07
TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES
Sections:

10.07.010  Findings and purpose.

10.07.020  Definitions.

10.07.030  Designation of additional streets.

10.07.040  Posting of temporary closure.

10.07.050  Violation of temporary closure – Exceptions.

10.07.060  Operative time.

10.07.010 Findings and purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Vehicle Code Section 21101.4 which allows local authorities to adopt rules and regulations for temporary street closures due to serious and continual criminal activity on portions of the streets recommended for closure. The Council's findings, based on the recommendations of the Chief of Police and taking into consideration Vehicle Code Section 21101.4 criteria for temporary street closures, are as follows:

(a) Serious and continuing criminal activity in the form of nighttime street racing is being conducted on the designated streets. Such street racing constitutes a nuisance, creates potential hazards to the health and safety of the public, and interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the City of Santa Clara. The illegal races occur on a regular basis in the industrial and/or commercial zones of the city. Street racers accelerate to extremely high speeds without regard to traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked nearby. The racers move quickly from street to street, racing for several heats and then often moving on to another street upon the arrival of a police unit. Calls for police service, traffic accidents, and property crimes have increased dramatically due to the street racing.

(b) In addition, serious criminal activity in the form of "sideshows" has occurred at night on certain city streets and on private property. Sideshows include drivers deliberately driving in circles at high rates of speed until the vehicles' wheels break or lose traction, frequently in the presence of other drivers and spectators. Such activity creates a serious threat to life and property, similar to the dangers of street racing.

(c) The designated streets have not been designated as through highways or arterial streets.

(d) Vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the designated streets contributes to the criminal activity of nighttime street racing. Hundreds of people have been found to form illicit "tracks" along broad and long streets. Those gathered often block the streets and sidewalks to form the racetrack area and generally encourage, aid and abet the racing process.

(e) The temporary closure of the designated streets will not substantially adversely affect traffic flow, safety on the adjacent streets or in the surrounding neighborhoods, the operation of emergency vehicles, performance of municipal or public utility services, or the delivery of freight by commercial vehicles in the area of the highway to be temporarily closed since the recommended hours for temporary closure are nights between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

10.07.020 Definitions.
(a) "Designated streets" means the following streets or sections of streets within the City of Santa Clara:

(1) Patrick Henry Drive;

(2) Old Ironsides Drive;

(3) Betsy Ross Drive;

(4) Bunker Hill Lane;

(5) Democracy Way;

(6) Yerba Buena Way;

(7) Nelo Street;

(8) Aldo Avenue beginning at a point 200 feet east of Lafayette Street and continuing east to Victor Street;

(9) Nuttman Street;

(10) Laurelwood Road;

(11) Molinaro Street;

(12) Belick Street;

(13) Gianni Street;

(14) Keller Street;

(15) Woodward Avenue;

(16) Edward Avenue;

(17) Victor Street;

(18) Calle Del Mundo;

(19) Calle De Luna between Calle Del Sol and Calle Del Mundo;

(20) Old Mountain View Road between Great America Parkway and the City of Sunnyvale;

(21) Hope Drive;

(22) Bassett Street from Laurelwood to Agnew.

Streets in addition to those listed above may be included in the list of designated streets if the City Council determines by resolution, pursuant to SCCC 10.07.030, that any such street meets the criteria identified in Vehicle Code Section 21104.4.

(b) "Median" means a paved or planted strip dividing a highway into lanes according to direction of travel.

(c) "Sideshow" means any unlawful reckless driving or exhibition of speed as defined in Vehicle Code Sections 23103 and 23109, including, but not limited to, deliberately driving in circles at high rates of speed until vehicle wheels break or lose traction with the roadway (a practice commonly known as "doughnuts").

(d) "Street race" means any unlawful speed contest, as defined by Vehicle Code Section 23109, whether or not the race is attended by persons other than the drivers of the vehicles involved in the race. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

10.07.030 Designation of additional streets.
(a) Upon the recommendation of the Police Chief, the City Council may from time to time adopt a resolution identifying additional streets where there are continuing activities that warrant closure of the street in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 21101.4.

(b) Prior to adopting a resolution identifying designated streets for temporary closure, the city council shall hold a public hearing and make the following findings consistent with SCCC 10.07.010:

(1) Serious and continuing criminal activity exists on designated streets within the City of Santa Clara recommended for temporary closure.

(2) The designated streets have not been designated as through highways or arterial streets.

(3) Vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the designated streets contributes to the criminal activity.

(4) The temporary closure of the designated streets will not substantially adversely affect traffic flow, safety down the adjacent streets or in the surrounding neighborhoods, the operation of emergency vehicles, performance of municipal or public utility services, or the delivery of freight by commercial vehicles in the area of the highway proposed to be temporarily closed. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

10.07.040 Posting of temporary closure.
Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21103 and 22651(n), signs giving notice of the temporary closure and removal of vehicles shall be posted prior to enforcement of this chapter. Such signs shall be posted at all entrances to the designated streets. Signs shall advise of the temporary street closure days and hours, that the area is a tow-away zone and that violators may be cited for a violation of the temporary street closure. Lettering on the signs shall be at least one to two inches in height. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

10.07.050 Violation of temporary closure – Exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, stand or park a vehicle on any designated street within the hours of temporary closure.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on a sidewalk or median along or in a designated street within the hours of temporary closure.

(c) In addition to any criminal, civil or administrative penalties, vehicles stopped, parked, or left standing on a designated street within the hours of temporary closure are subject to towing pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22651(n).

(d) The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to the following:

(1) Vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department; any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle.

(2) Commercial vehicles making deliveries to and from commercial properties adjacent to the designated streets and individuals having identification demonstrating their employment at a business located adjacent to the designated streets. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

10.07.060 Operative time.
Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21202.4(b), this chapter shall be operative for eighteen (18) months from adoption. However, this time is subject to extension by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1790 § 1, 4-20-04).

Chapter 10.10
VEHICLES – ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE
Sections:

10.10.010  Purpose – Definitions.

10.10.020  Exclusions from application of chapter.

10.10.030  Chapter is not exclusive regulation.

10.10.040  Administration of chapter – Authority to enter premises.

10.10.050  Administration of chapter – Authority to cause abatement.

10.10.060  City Council authority to authorize removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof.

10.10.070  Forms of notice.

10.10.080  Office of abandoned vehicle appeals officer.

10.10.090  Public hearing on abatement and removal.

10.10.100  Conduct of hearings before abandoned vehicle appeals officer.

10.10.110  Appeal from decision of abandoned vehicle appeals officer.

10.10.120  Time periods for removal of vehicle or parts thereof.

10.10.130  Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.

10.10.140  Enforcement.

10.10.150  Refusal to remove.

10.10.010 Purpose – Definitions.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council of the City of Santa Clara hereby makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

As used in this chapter:

(a) "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

(b) "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(c) "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

(d) "Public property" does not include "highway."

(e) "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-97).

10.10.020 Exclusions from application of chapter.
This chapter shall not apply to:

(a) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(b) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or junk yard; or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-98).

10.10.030 Chapter is not exclusive regulation.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-99).

10.10.040 Administration of chapter – Authority to enter premises.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or his/her authorized representative (hereinafter "City Manager" only). In the enforcement of this chapter, the City Manager may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-100).

10.10.050 Administration of chapter – Authority to cause abatement.
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the City Manager shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-101).

10.10.060 City Council authority to authorize removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof.
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-102).

10.10.070 Forms of notice.
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE
AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to SCCC 10.10.050, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to __________, license number ________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of SCCC Title 10.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 (ten) days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 (ten) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10 (ten) day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicles (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

Notice mailed----- (date)

City Manager by s/__________________

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE
AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle – notice should be given to both if different)

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle – make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to SCCC Title 10, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of SCCC Title 10.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 (ten) days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 (ten) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10-day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

Notice mailed----- (date)

City Manager by s/__________________

(Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-103).

10.10.080 Office of abandoned vehicle appeals officer.
The office of abandoned vehicle appeals officer is hereby created. The office may be filled in accordance with the City Charter by a regularly salaried City officer or employee, a member of any existing board or commission, or any citizen qualified to conduct hearings. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-104).

10.10.090 Public hearing on abatement and removal.
A public hearing shall be held by the abandoned vehicle appeals officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle upon written request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land providing said request is received by the City Manager within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove.

If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by certified mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-105).

10.10.100 Conduct of hearings before abandoned vehicle appeals officer.
The public hearings under this chapter shall be held before the abandoned vehicle appeals officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The abandoned vehicle appeals officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial.

The abandoned vehicle appeals officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the abandoned vehicle appeals officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the abandoned vehicle appeals officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-106).

10.10.110 Appeal from decision of abandoned vehicle appeals officer.
Appeals from the decision of the abandoned vehicle appeals officer are pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22650 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-107).

10.10.120 Time periods for removal of vehicle or parts thereof.
The vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal after the following time periods have elapsed: twelve (12) days after the City Manager makes his/her determination that the vehicle or parts thereof constitute a public nuisance, unless action constituting a request for a hearing is made; ten days after the order requiring removal by the abandoned vehicle appeals officer, following the public hearing, unless an appeal is filed with the City Council pursuant to this chapter; three days after the decision of the City Council authorizing removal. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-108).

10.10.130 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-109).

10.10.140 Enforcement.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard. The provisions of SCCC 1.05.070 apply to violations of this chapter.

(b) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the city, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-110).

10.10.150 Refusal to remove.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or State law where such State law is applicable. (Ord. 1281 § 2, 10-16-73. Formerly § 17-111).

Chapter 10.15
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Sections:

10.15.010  Purpose.

10.15.020  Administration, implementation, and enforcement by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.

10.15.010 Purpose.
Section 65089.3 of the California Government Code requires congestion management agencies to annually determine if the county and cities are conforming to the Congestion Management Program including, but not limited to, the adoption and implementation of a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. This ordinance will amend existing Code provisions on this subject to provide that implementation of trip reduction and travel demand requirements in the city/county shall be through the administration, implementation, and enforcement by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District of Regulation 13, Rule 1 ("Trip Reduction Requirements for Large Employers"). (Ord. 1603 § 1, 10-31-89; Ord. 1635 § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. 1656 § 2, 5-24-94. Formerly § 17-120).

10.15.020 Administration, implementation, and enforcement by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.
(a) Within the City of Santa Clara, the implementation of trip reduction and travel demand requirements pursuant to Government Code Section 65089.3 shall be satisfied through the administration, implementation, and enforcement by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District of District Regulation 13, Rule 1 ("Trip Reduction Requirements for Large Employers").

(b) The City of Santa Clara shall certify annually to the Congestion Management Agency that this chapter remains in effect. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 10-31-89; Ord. 1635 § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. 1656 § 2, 5-24-94. Formerly § 17-121).

Chapter 10.20
FUNERAL ESCORT SERVICES
Sections:

10.20.010  Purpose.

10.20.020  Permit required.

10.20.030  Authorized traffic direction.

10.20.040  Permit procedure.

10.20.050  Denial of permit.

10.20.060  Permit issuance – Nontransferability.

10.20.070  Indemnify and hold harmless.

10.20.080  Liability insurance.

10.20.090  Procedure for permit denial and revocation.

10.20.100  Traffic safety instruction program.

10.20.110  Official insignia.

10.20.120  Permissible guidelines.

10.20.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to use the power conferred to local agencies by Section 21100(e) of the California Vehicle Code to authorize the appointment of persons other than traffic officers to direct traffic in such prescribed situations and locations as may require traffic direction for orderly traffic flow. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-130).

10.20.020 Permit required.
No person shall stop traffic at intersections or otherwise violate this Code while leading or escorting a vehicular funeral procession without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-131).

10.20.030 Authorized traffic direction.
(a) Any person issued a valid funeral escort permit pursuant to this chapter and leading or otherwise escorting a vehicular funeral procession shall obey all traffic laws, including all speed laws, except that such person is authorized to stop cross-traffic to enable all vehicles in the funeral procession to proceed together as an unbroken chain through intersections controlled by:

(1) Stop signs, providing that the permittee physically remains in the intersection until all funeral procession vehicles have cleared the intersection; or

(2) Signal lights, providing that the lead vehicle in the procession enters the intersection with a green light and the permittee physically remains in the intersection at all times when the light is not green.

(b) A permittee is authorized to direct traffic in the manner specified in this section only while wearing an official insignia issued by the Chief of Police and while carrying a valid permit issued to him/her as an individual pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(c) The Chief of Police may order the revocation of a funeral escort permit, in accordance with the procedure specified in SCCC 2.115.110, if the permittee has directed traffic in a manner contrary to that specified in this section. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-132).

10.20.040 Permit procedure.
Applications for a funeral escort permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police and shall contain the following information:

(a) Name and address of applicant.

(b) Proof of insurance in compliance with the requirements for the insurance determined from time to time by the City Council by resolution.

(c) Proof of satisfactory completion of a traffic safety program of instruction, as described in SCCC 10.20.100.

(d) Proof that the applicant holds a valid California vehicle operator's license, properly endorsed for the type of vehicle the applicant intends to use while directing vehicular funeral processions.

(e) Permit and insignia fees, as established by resolution of the City Council.

(f) Such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-133).

10.20.050 Denial of permit.
Permits authorized by this chapter may be denied by the Chief of Police upon submission of the original or renewal application upon the following grounds:

(a) The application is incomplete; or

(b) Applicant has been convicted of a crime (and the time for appeal has elapsed) or an order granting probation is made, suspending the imposition of sentence (irrespective of the entry of a subsequent order under Penal Code Section 1203.4); provided, however, that the permit may be denied upon this ground only if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties associated with leading or otherwise escorting a vehicular funeral procession. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-134).

10.20.060 Permit issuance – Nontransferability.
Funeral escort permits shall be issued by the tax and license administrator and shall expire on the anniversary date of issuance in the calendar year following the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. Permits shall not be transferable. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-135).

10.20.070 Indemnify and hold harmless.
The funeral escort permittee, or his/her funeral escort service employer, shall assume all responsibility for his/her activity and operation. The funeral escort permittee, or his/her funeral escort service employer, shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its City Council, officers, employees, agents, and successors from and against all claims, injury, liability, loss, damage (including punitive damages), cost, and expense (including all costs and reasonable attorneys' fees in providing the defense to any claim or cause of action), however same may be caused or claimed to be caused, that arise directly or indirectly from his/her activity in providing escort service to a vehicular funeral procession. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-136).

10.20.080 Liability insurance.
During the term of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee, or his/her funeral escort service employer, shall maintain in full force and effect at the permittee's or his/her employer's own cost a comprehensive auto and general liability insurance policy with the following characteristics.

(a) In an amount to be set, from time to time, by resolution adopted by the City Council with restrictions on self-insured limits;

(b) Issued by an admitted insurer or insurers as defined by the California Insurance Code;

(c) Providing that the City, its City Council, its officers, employees, agents, and successors are to be "named insured" under the policy;

(d) Covering all losses and damages as specified in SCCC 10.20.070;

(e) Stipulating that the policy will operate as primary insurance and that no other insurance effected by the City or other named insured will be called on to contribute to a loss covered thereunder; and

(f) Providing that no cancellation, change in coverage, or expiration by the insurance company or the insured shall occur during the term of the funeral escort service permit without thirty (30) calendar days' written notice to the City prior to the effective date of such cancellation or change in coverage.

In the event of the failure of any permittee or his/her funeral escort service employer to maintain in effect such insurance policy, the Director of Finance shall order the cancellation of the permit. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-137).

10.20.090 Procedure for permit denial and revocation.
(a) The Chief of Police may refuse to issue or renew, or may revoke, a funeral escort service permit only after a hearing granted upon at least three calendar days' written notice given to the permittee. Such notice shall specify the specific grounds for the proposed action. At the hearing, to be held before the City Manager or his/her designee, the permittee shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and documentary evidence, to be represented by counsel, and to examine all witnesses presented. Issuance of a written notice of cancellation by an insurance company shall be conclusive proof at the hearing of the effective cancellation of an insurance policy. A decision of the City Manager or his/her designee revoking or upon denying the permit shall be effective upon the effective date of the cancellation of said insurance or upon the date when the written decision is signed by the City Manager or his/her designee, whichever is earlier. The taking or pendency of an appeal under subsection (b) shall not stay the effectiveness of such decision.

(b) If the permittee is dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager, or his/her designee, in ordering the revocation or denial of the permit, such person may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the City Clerk within five calendar days of the date of the order of the City Manager or his/her designee. The balance of the appeal hearing process will be pursuant to SCCC 2.115.110. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-138).

10.20.100 Traffic safety instruction program.
Each applicant shall submit to the Chief of Police evidence of the curriculum, including instructional materials and skills taught and practiced, of an instructional program of traffic safety that the applicant has satisfactorily completed. The Chief of Police shall review and approve each submitted instructional program if the Chief reasonably believes that the program provided the applicant sufficient training to direct traffic as specified in SCCC 10.20.030 in a safe and lawful manner. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-139).

10.20.110 Official insignia.
The Chief of Police shall approve an official insignia, which must be worn by all permittees while directing traffic in the manner specified in SCCC 10.20.030. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-140).

10.20.120 Permissible guidelines.
The Chief of Police shall prepare written guidelines for distribution to permittees. Such guidelines shall be advisory to permittees and recommend procedures to ensure safe vehicular funeral processions. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 3-27-90. Formerly § 17-141).

Chapter 10.25
VEHICLE PARKING, STOPPING,
OR STANDING VIOLATION
APPEAL PROCEDURE
Sections:

10.25.010  Violations – Civil penalties.

10.25.020  City to set penalties.

10.25.030  Collection of penalties.

10.25.040  Hearing process.

10.25.050  Required deposits.

10.25.060  Appeal process to the municipal court.

10.25.010 Violations – Civil penalties.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to implement the requirements for a civil appeal procedure for parking, stopping, or standing vehicle violations mandated by 1992 Assembly Bill AB 408 (codified into California Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq.). Vehicle parking, stopping, or standing violations of this title are civil violations to be handled by issuance of a citation followed by an administrative process provided in this chapter. Also, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 40225, an equipment violation entered on the notice of a vehicle parking, stopping, or standing violation shall be processed as provided herein. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-150).

10.25.020 City to set penalties.
Penalties for violation of vehicle parking, stopping, or standing regulations shall be set and periodically reviewed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-151).

10.25.030 Collection of penalties.
Penalties shall be collected by the City or a private agency with which the City may contract. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-152).

10.25.040 Hearing process.
Any appeal of a citation by an interested party under this chapter may be made by complying with the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq. For the convenience of interested parties, a flow chart describing the process, time for requests, and money deposits (if necessary) will be made available to the public and a copy maintained at the Police Department's and City Clerk's respective offices. Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 40215, the City Manager is delegated the authority to designate a hearing examiner. This delegated authority specifically permits the City Manager to designate the City Attorney's office as hearing examiner. The administrative hearings will comply with Vehicle Code Section 40215. Rules for the conduct of the hearing before the examiner shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-153).

10.25.050 Required deposits.
Deposits required by Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq. shall be made as directed by City policy. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-154).

10.25.060 Appeal process to the municipal court.
Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 40230, as amended, if the contestant is not satisfied with the decision rendered in the administrative hearing process, he may, after the mailing of, or personal delivery of, the final administrative decision, seek review of the decision in the municipal court. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 7-13-93. Formerly § 17-155).

Chapter 10.30
REGULATION OF OFF-STREET OPERATION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES
Sections:

10.30.010  Purpose.

10.30.020  Definition.

10.30.030  Regulation.

10.30.040  Exemptions from regulations.

10.30.050  Responsibility of parents and guardians.

10.30.060  Appeal.

10.30.010 Purpose.
The City Council of City finds that certain off-street operation of vehicles creates unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise, dust and fumes, and exposes both private and public property to the dangers of fire and soil erosion, all of which adversely affect the public peace, health, welfare and safety and all of which shall be regulated for the protection of the public. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71. Formerly § 18-27).

10.30.020 Definition.
A "vehicle" for the purpose of this chapter is a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power. "Vehicle" includes but is not limited to automobile, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and motor vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71. Formerly § 18-28).

10.30.030 Regulation.
No person shall operate a vehicle on private or public property without first having obtained a permit. Permits shall be issued by the Chief of Police upon a determination that:

(a) The owner or owners of said real property concerned, or the person or persons in lawful possession thereof, have consented in writing to the proposed operation;

(b) The property concerned as shown on the latest assessor's map is at least five hundred (500) feet from any residence, church, school or place of assemblage which has not consented in writing to the proposed operation;

(c) The Director of Planning and Inspection has certified that the proposed operation conforms to the uses permitted on subject property by the City's Zoning Ordinance;

(d) The Fire Marshal has certified that the proposed operation will not create a fire hazard; and

(e) The Director of Public Works or City Engineer has certified that the proposed operation will not adversely affect public property.

The permit shall specify the area of permitted operation and period for which it is valid. The permit shall further state that the City makes no representation as to the safety of persons or property, and that all risks are assumed by the applicant, property owner or other responsible persons. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71; Ord. 1769 § 3, 8-20-02. Formerly § 18-29).

10.30.040 Exemptions from regulations.
Exempt from the regulations of this chapter are:

(a) Operation under the State of California Vehicle Code of vehicles having valid registration driven by persons possessing valid operator's license upon the public streets and highways and for normal ingress and egress from private and public property where driveways and parking places are used in a reasonable and customary manner.

(b) Vehicles designed primarily for agricultural, horticultural or construction purposes and used in the ordinary, lawful way in such activities.

(c) Operation of publicly owned vehicles by a public employee acting within the course and scope of his/her employment. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71. Formerly § 18-30).

10.30.050 Responsibility of parents and guardians.
No parent, guardian or other adult person having control, custody or care of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall permit, allow or let such minor to violate any provision of SCCC 10.30.030. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71. Formerly § 18-31).

10.30.060 Appeal.
Any person whose application for a permit is denied may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after notification by the Chief of Police that said permit has been denied. The City Council shall thereupon conduct a hearing on said appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of filing said notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive upon all persons concerned. (Ord. 1250 § 1, 10-26-71. Formerly § 18-32).

Chapter 10.35
BICYCLES
(Repealed by Ord. 1857)

Chapter 10.40
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING
Sections:

10.40.010  Definitions.

10.40.020  Designation of residential permit parking areas.

10.40.030  Adding streets to residential permit parking areas.

10.40.040  Residential permit parking prohibitions.

10.40.050  Exceptions to residential permit parking prohibition.

10.40.060  Types of residential parking permits.

10.40.070  Issuance and renewal of residential parking permits.

10.40.080  Prohibition on sale or transfer.

10.40.090  Fees.

10.40.100  Denial or revocation of residential parking permits.

10.40.010 Definitions.
(a) "Business owner" means the owner of a business with access to a street within a residential permit parking area, and such owner's agent.

(b) "City Manager" means the City Manager or designee.

(c) "Residential permit parking area" means any area designated by resolution of the City Council where a permit is required to park on the street.

(d) "Residence" means each single-family dwelling unit, condominium dwelling unit, townhome dwelling unit, apartment dwelling unit, or other multifamily dwelling unit with access to a street within a permit parking area. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.020 Designation of residential permit parking areas.
(a) Guidelines for Designation of Residential Permit Parking Areas. City Manager shall prepare guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas setting forth process and criteria. Those guidelines, and any revisions thereto, shall be effective upon approval by the City Manager.

(b) Resolution for Designation of Residential Permit Parking Area. Residential permit parking areas may be designated or dissolved by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall, pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect, consider for designation those areas satisfying the criteria set forth in the guidelines. If the City Council determines that the criteria have been met and that the procedures have been followed, it may designate by resolution a residential permit parking area with appropriate boundaries. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.030 Adding streets to residential permit parking areas.
(a) Pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking, a street or portion of street not currently within a residential permit parking area may be added to a residential permit parking area.

(b) The City Council may designate by resolution that such street or portion of street be added to the residential permit parking area pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.040 Residential permit parking prohibitions.
(a) Posting.

(1) The City Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained on all streets and portions of streets within each residential permit parking area.

(2) The signs that the City Manager causes to be erected pursuant to this section shall provide clear notice of the days and times of the parking prohibition applicable to the street upon which the sign is erected.

(3) The parking prohibition set forth in this section shall not be effective and enforceable on any street or on any portion of street within a residential permit parking area unless the signs required by this section have been erected.

(b) Display of Permits.

(1) Parking permits shall be displayed in a manner determined by the City Manager.

(2) The City Manager shall notify each permittee of the proper manner in which to display a parking permit.

(3) The proper display on a vehicle of a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter grants only the privilege of parking the vehicle in the residential permit parking area for which the permit was issued.

(4) Each vehicle displaying a parking permit shall be parked in a manner that conforms to all other parking and vehicle regulations and laws established by this Code and by the California Vehicle Code.

(5) A valid parking permit issued under this chapter shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder an on-street parking space on any street or portion of street within the residential permit parking area for which the permit was issued.

(c) Prohibition. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, no person shall park a vehicle on any street or any portion of any street within a residential permit parking area on the days and during the times posted unless such vehicle has a properly displayed and valid parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.050 Exceptions to residential permit parking prohibition.
The following types of vehicles may park within a residential permit parking area without a parking permit:

(a) Any commercial vehicle while making a pickup or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located adjacent to any street or portion of street within a permit parking area;

(b) Any commercial vehicle while under the control of a person involved in, or while delivering materials to be used in the maintenance, repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any property that is located adjacent to any street or portion of street within a permit parking area;

(c) Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility located adjacent to any street or portion of street within a permit parking area;

(d) Any vehicle owned and operated by a government agency while engaged in government business;

(e) Any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to, an ambulance, fire engine or police vehicle, while being operated on official business; or

(f) Any vehicle that displays the identifying disabled person's license plate or the disabled person's placard issued by the department of motor vehicles. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.060 Types of residential parking permits.
(a) Residential Parking Permit. A resident may obtain a residential parking permit upon proper application pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect.

(b) Permanent Nonresident Owner Parking Permit. A nonresident owner of a residence may obtain a permanent nonresident owner parking permit upon proper application pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect. A permanent nonresident owner parking permit issued to a nonresident owner shall be for the exclusive purpose of inspecting, repairing, or maintaining the residence for which the permit was issued.

(c) Temporary Guest Permits. A resident may obtain a temporary guest permit upon proper application pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect, to accommodate guest parking. A temporary guest parking permit shall be for the exclusive use of a guest visiting the residence for which the permit was issued.

(d) Employee Parking Permits. A business owner whose business is located adjacent to a street within a permit parking area may obtain employee parking permits upon proper application pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect, based on the number of employees who require such permits. Each employee parking permit issued to a business owner shall be for the exclusive use of that business owner and his or her employees.

(e) Special Use Parking Permits. Residents may obtain a special use parking permit upon proper application pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect, for special uses not otherwise addressed in this chapter. Special use parking permits shall be issued exclusively for uses associated with residences. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.070 Issuance and renewal of residential parking permits.
Any of the parking permits provided for in this chapter may be obtained or renewed upon application to the City Manager, pursuant to the guidelines for the designation of residential permit parking areas then in effect. The City Manager shall:

(a) Promulgate regulations for the determination of the manner in which proof of eligibility for residential parking permits shall be demonstrated; and

(b) Promulgate all other regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, that the City Manager determines are necessary for governing the manner in which persons shall qualify for residential parking permits. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.080 Prohibition on sale or transfer.
(a) No person shall sell, transfer or allow another person to use a residential parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter unless authorized to do so by this chapter.

(b) No person shall purchase, transfer, acquire or obtain a residential parking permit described in this chapter unless otherwise authorized to purchase, transfer, acquire or obtain such parking permit by this chapter. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.090 Fees.
(a) The fees for obtaining, replacing and renewing a residential parking permit shall be as set forth in the guidelines for designation of a residential permit parking area.

(b) Residential parking permits that are lost by fire, vandalism, theft or accident shall be replaced upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the City Manager that such loss has occurred. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

10.40.100 Denial or revocation of residential parking permits.
(a) The City Manager may deny an application for issuance or renewal of a residential parking permit described under this chapter, or revoke a residential parking permit issued under this chapter, upon determining that the applicant or permittee has:

(1) Supplied the City Manager with incorrect information;

(2) Violated any conditions placed upon the residential parking permit; or

(3) Otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated by the City Manager pursuant to this chapter.

(b) With regard to a special use permit, the City Manager shall revoke such permit upon determining that it adversely affects the availability of parking in the neighborhood within which the special use will occur or is occurring. In determining whether the special use parking adversely impacts the availability of parking, the City Manager shall consider:

(1) Complaints by persons issued residential and employee parking permits regarding the availability of parking;

(2) Increased traffic congestion in the area resulting from motorists searching for parking; and

(3) Any other factors that the City Manager deems relevant.

(c) Appeals of Decisions on Permits to the City Manager. An applicant may appeal a decision on any permit provided for in this chapter to the City Manager or designee. The applicant must file such appeal with the City Manager or designee within ten (10) business days of the decision. The City Manager or designee shall hold a hearing within forty-five (45) business days of the filing of such appeal, at which time applicant may present any evidence relevant to the application. The City Manager or designee shall within ten (10) business days of such hearing issue a decision either affirming the denial of the application, or shall issue a permit. The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be in writing, shall specify the grounds therefore, and shall be final. (Ord. 1781 § 2, 7-15-03).

Chapter 10.45
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

10.45.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 10.

10.45.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 10.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 10 [entitled "Vehicles and Traffic"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 10 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Title 11
(RESERVED)
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.05    Obstructions, Loitering and Miscellany

12.10    Signs on Streets and Sidewalks

12.15    Parades and Processions

12.20    Reserved

12.25    Excavation and Use of City Rights-of-Way

12.30    Sidewalks

12.35    Trees and Shrubs

12.40    Underground Utility Districts

12.45    Enforcement of Title

12.50    Unpermitted Camping and Lodging on Public Streets, Publicly Owned Property, and in Public Parks and Other Prohibited Public Places

12.60    Film and Video Production

Chapter 12.05
OBSTRUCTIONS, LOITERING
AND MISCELLANY
Sections:

12.05.010  Obstructing vehicles or pedestrians prohibited generally.

12.05.020  Loitering, standing or obstructing entrance of church, hall, theater, etc., prohibited.

12.05.030  Prohibition of unauthorized presence in posted parking lots of a closed commercial business.

12.05.040  Obstructing the public right-of-way prohibited.

12.05.050  Steam, interurban or electrically driven railway trains, etc.

12.05.060  Hours of operation of public parks.

12.05.070  Bicycles or motorcycles, etc. – Prohibited on sidewalks or in public parks.

12.05.010 Obstructing vehicles or pedestrians prohibited generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand or sit in or upon any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk in the City so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same or so as to in any manner annoy or molest persons passing along the same. (Ord. 460 § 1. Formerly § 25-1).

12.05.020 Loitering, standing or obstructing entrance of church, hall, theater, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or other place of public assemblage in the City so as to in any manner obstruct such entrance. (Ord. 460. Formerly § 25-2).

12.05.030 Prohibition of unauthorized presence in posted parking lots of a closed commercial business.
(a) Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to be present in a parking lot (or in an area of a parking lot designated as prohibited to unauthorized presence) that has been posted with a sign(s) prohibiting unauthorized presence.

(b) In situations where presence in the entire parking lot is not prohibited, as when a location has multiple businesses and some businesses may remain open, physical barricades and signs shall be placed to designate the area(s) in which there is to be no vehicle parking or human presence during the prohibited hours.

(c) The hours of prohibited presence shall be posted along with the signs prohibiting the unauthorized presence. In certain circumstances, the prohibitory text and hours of prohibition shall be painted on or affixed to the barricades designating the closed area(s).

(d) When barricades are used, the text shall be in letters no less than one inch in height. When signs are used, they shall be at least one foot by one foot and the text shall be in letters no less than one inch in height. The sign(s) and/or barricades shall read substantially in either of the following two ways:

WARNING

Unauthorized presence in
parking lot after business is closed
violates SCCC 12.05.030
_____ P.M. to _____ A.M.

or,

WARNING

Unauthorized presence in
parking lot after business is
closed, or in designated areas,
violates SCCC 12.05.030
_____ P.M. to _____ A.M.

(e) Violations of this section are a misdemeanor as provided in SCCC 1.05.070. (Ord. 1407, 9-8-80; Ord. 1469 § 2, 4-12-83; Ord. 1616 § 1, 8-7-90. Formerly § 25-2.1).

12.05.040 Obstructing the public right-of-way prohibited.
Any person who, without prior written permission from the City, shall maintain, place, cause or permit to be placed upon, in, across, under, or over the public right-of-way (as used herein "public right-of-way" shall mean the paved roadway, curb, gutter, park strip, sidewalk, and any other portion of the publicly owned real property up to the private property line) of the City any obstruction and who, after being notified by the City to remove the same, shall permit any such obstruction to remain upon, across, under or over the public right-of-way for twenty-four (24) hours after such notice, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 6; Ord. 1358 § 1, 6-28-77. Formerly § 25-6).

12.05.050 Steam, interurban or electrically driven railway trains, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any steam, interurban or electrically driven railway train or similar vehicles on rails to operate the same in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of "through" freight trains when continuously operated without stopping through the City and when such freight trains consist of a series of freight cars, the overall length of which trains make it impractical to prevent the blocking of a street for such period of time. The provisions of this section shall apply to all "switching" operations of trains in the City. (Ord. 680. Formerly § 25-8).

12.05.060 Hours of operation of public parks.
(a) The public parks in the City shall be open daily to the public between the hours of 6:00 A.M. to one-half hour after sunset (dusk), except:

(1) Where there is posted conspicuously a sign limiting the hours when such facility is open to the public; and

(2) Until 10:00 P.M. if and when the facility is lighted.

(b) Any such public park or portion thereof may be declared closed to the public by the Director of Parks and Recreation at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals, as is deemed necessary in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the various divisions of the Parks and Recreation Department as set forth in Chapter 2.100 SCCC. The Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this section.

(c) Every person other than City personnel conducting City business therein, who occupies or is present in any public park in the City during the hours in which the park is not open to the public, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more that two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1953 § 1, 4-5-16; Ord. 1371 § 1, 1-10-78. Formerly § 25-8.1).

12.05.070 Bicycles or motorcycles, etc. – Prohibited on sidewalks or in public parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle or other motor vehicle upon any sidewalk or in any public park in the City. (Ord. 302 § 1. Formerly § 25-9).

Cross reference – Bicycles generally, Chapter 10.35 SCCC.

Chapter 12.10
SIGNS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sections:

12.10.010  Unlawful to erect or paint advertisements on sidewalks.

12.10.020  Consent by person in control of property.

12.10.030  Approval of Director of Public Works/City Engineer.

12.10.040  Business tax certificate required.

12.10.050  Revocation – Appeal.

12.10.060  Specific penalty.

12.10.010 Unlawful to erect or paint advertisements on sidewalks.
No person shall erect or maintain any sign or advertising device on any public street or sidewalk of the City, or paint or mark any sign, advertising or other marking upon the pavement, curb or sidewalk constituting part of a public street; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from painting or applying the street address number on the curb in front of a premises owned or controlled by him or the painting or application of numbers on curbs by persons possessing a valid business tax certificate granted for the purpose of curb painting. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 25-9.1).

12.10.020 Consent by person in control of property.
No person shall paint or otherwise apply any number on the curb of any premises not owned or controlled by him without the prior consent of the owner or a person in lawful control of said premises. No request shall be made that any payment for services rendered hereunder be made prior to completion of the work. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 25-9.2).

12.10.030 Approval of Director of Public Works or City Engineer.
No person shall paint or otherwise apply any number on the curb without the Director of Public Works or City Engineer having approved the size and form of the numbering proposed to be painted or applied and the suitability of the color and quality of the paint or material to be used. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1770 § 2, 8-20-02. Formerly § 25-9.3).

12.10.040 Business tax certificate required.
No person shall conduct the type of business referred to in this chapter until the requirements of Chapter 5.05 SCCC have been completed and approval granted and the business tax stated in SCCC 3.40.330 has been paid. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 25-9.4).

12.10.050 Revocation – Appeal.
The solicitor permit issued for painting or applying numbers on curbs may be canceled:

(a) For any reason which would have justified denial of such;

(b) For painting or permitting the painting of any curb without prior consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the premises abutting the street at the location of said curb;

(c) For failure to observe the specifications approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer; or

(d) For any violation of any State law or City ordinance or regulation by the holder of a solicitor permit in connection with curb painting activities.

Appeal from denial of a certificate may be made to the City Council in the manner provided in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98; Ord. 1770 § 3, 8-20-02. Formerly § 25-9.5).

12.10.060 Specific penalty.
Although any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in SCCC 1.05.070, a specific penalty in a form of a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby provided for each violation of the provision in SCCC 12.10.010 that no person shall paint or otherwise apply any number on the curb in front of any premises not owned or controlled by him without the prior consent of the owner or a person in lawful control of said premises. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 10-27-98. Formerly § 25-9.6).

Chapter 12.15
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Sections:

12.15.010    Permit – Required.

12.15.020    Permit – Application – Information required.

12.15.030    Permit – Number of functions covered, etc. – Transferability or assignability.

12.15.040    Permit – Findings by Police Department before issuance.

12.15.050    Permit – Issuance and revocation – Powers of Police Department.

12.15.010 Permit – Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, carry on or to cause or permit to be held, managed, conducted or carried on any parade, march or procession of any kind other than a funeral procession in or upon any public street, highway, public park or public place in the city without having first obtained from the Police Department a written permit to do so. (Ord. 1340 § 1, 11-9-76; Ord. 1848 § 1, 11-17-09. Formerly § 25-10).

12.15.020 Permit – Application – Information required.
Applications for permits required under SCCC 12.15.010 shall be made to the Police Department by such person or member of such firm, corporation or association personally or, in the case of a corporation, by the manager or officer in actual charge of such business. Such application shall specify the place or park, public highway, street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk where it is intended or proposed to carry on such act. (Ord. 1340 § 1, 11-9-76; Ord. 1848 § 2, 11-17-09. Formerly § 25-11).

12.15.030 Permit – Number of functions covered, etc. – Transferability or assignability.
Only one parade, march, or procession shall be held, conducted, carried on or engaged in under a single permit. The permits provided for under this chapter shall apply only to the person in whose name such permit is issued and to the locations, public highways, public streets, public parks or public places therein specified. Such permits shall not be transferable or assignable in any manner. (Ord. 1340 § 1, 11-9-76. Formerly § 25-12).

12.15.040 Permit – Findings by Police Department before issuance.
The Police Department shall make certain findings before the issuance of a parade or procession permit.

(a) Before approving or denying the permit, the Police Department will consider the following factors in determining whether the proposed parade presents a vehicular or pedestrian traffic safety issue:

(1) Lighting and weather conditions at the time of the march;

(2) Proposed parade or procession route;

(3) Any anticipated construction or roadway problems along the proposed route;

(4) Emergency vehicle access;

(5) Sidewalk widths;

(6) Size of proposed march;

(7) Whether the proposed march would include vehicles or floats; and

(8) Any additional factors the Police Department deems relevant to the issuance of a parade or procession permit.

(b) If the Police Department chooses to deny the permit application, then the Police Department shall set forth written reasons for such denial.

(c) In the event that the Police Department denies a permit application, the applicant may appeal the decision to City Council by filing with the City Clerk, within seven days from and after the date of denial, a written notice of appeal which shall set forth the ground for such appeal. The City Council shall act on such appeal as expeditiously as possible. (Ord. 1340 § 1, 11-9-76; Ord. 1848 § 3, 11-17-09. Formerly § 25-13).

12.15.050 Permit – Issuance and revocation – Powers of Police Department.
The Police Department may revoke a permit at any time in case of emergency, or if it is determined that any provision of this chapter or any condition of the permit has not been met or is being violated. (Ord. 1340 § 1, 11-9-76; Ord. 1848 § 4, 11-17-09. Formerly § 25-14).

Chapter 12.20
(Reserved)
Chapter 12.25
EXCAVATION AND USE OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections:

12.25.010    General rule.

12.25.020    Definitions.

12.25.030    Encroachment permit.

12.25.040    Permit application process.

12.25.050    Permit approval and issuance.

12.25.060    Permit conditions.

12.25.070    Permit valid for described and approved work only.

12.25.080    No ownership or vested right created.

12.25.090    Permittee indemnifies City.

12.25.100    Installation notice.

12.25.110    Municipal encroachments.

12.25.120    Improvement bonds.

12.25.130    Fees.

12.25.140    Construction requirements.

12.25.150    Extending permit.

12.25.160    Emergency encroachments.

12.25.170    Mitigation requirements for potentially significant archaeological impacts.

12.25.180    Ongoing use of right-of-way.

12.25.190    Abandonment or removal of equipment from right-of-way.

12.25.200    Damage to existing facilities.

12.25.210    Adherence to rules and regulations.

12.25.220    Penalties.

12.25.230    Pavement preservation.

12.25.010 General rule.
No person shall make cuts, openings or excavations in or under or use the surface of any street, curb, gutter, driveway, sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way or City easement for the installation, repair, removal, construction, operation, or maintenance of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, vault, wire, cable, utility structure, including utility cabinets, or for any other purpose without first complying with all the provisions contained herein, and obtaining all necessary permits and authorizations as set forth in this Code. All requirements and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with, and be limited by, applicable law, and applied in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner to the extent required by law. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.020 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a) “A” Definitions.

(1) “Abandon” or “abandoned equipment” means equipment or facilities not used to provide service for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or if the authorization to enter the right-of-way held by permittee is revoked, terminated or abandoned. Equipment or facilities may remain in place even if not being used if the facilities are useful in providing service, even if not actively used, and there is a definite plan for the use of the facilities.

(2) “Applicable law” means all lawfully enacted and applicable federal, State, and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders as may be amended or adopted from time to time.

(b) Reserved for future use.

(c) “C” Definitions.

(1) “City” means the City of Santa Clara, California. Any act that may be taken by the City may be taken by the City Council or any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on the City’s behalf.

(2) “City Council” means the governing body of the City of Santa Clara, California.

(3) “City Engineer” means the City Engineer or his or her designee.

(4) “City Manager” means the City Manager or any person authorized or designated by the City Manager to act on his or her behalf.

(5) “Construction,” “operation,” “maintenance” or “repair” and similar formulations of those terms mean the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, repair, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and tree trimming. The term “operation” does not encompass or regulate the provision of services, but refers to activities affecting rights-of-way and other property subject to the jurisdiction of the City.

(d) “D” Definitions.

(1) “Days” means calendar days, unless otherwise indicated.

(e) “E” Definitions.

(1) “Emergency encroachment” means an encroachment necessitated by the public good, safety, health or welfare by a person with facilities in the right-of-way.

(2) “Encroachment permit” means a permit issued pursuant to and in conformance with this chapter.

(3) “Equipment” means a component of a facility that is wholly or partially located in or under the surface of any street, curb, gutter, driveway, sidewalk or that occupies any other portion of the public way or City easement.

(f) “F” Definitions.

(1) “Facilities” means equipment, public improvements, or property installed in the right-of-way.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) Reserved for future use.

(p) “P” Definitions.

(1) “Permittee” means any person seeking and/or that has obtained an encroachment permit pursuant to this chapter.

(2) “Person” is as defined in SCCC 1.05.020. The term does not include the City.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) “R” Definitions.

(1) “Right-of-way” means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the City now or hereafter holds any property interest.

(s) Reserved for future use.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.030 Encroachment permit.
An encroachment permit (“permit”) shall be required of any person seeking to use or make cuts, openings or excavations in or under the surface of any street, curb, gutter, driveway, sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way or City easement for the repair, installation, removal, or construction of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, vault, wire, cable, utility structure, utility cabinet, or for any other purpose. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.040 Permit application process.
(a) Application Required. All persons desiring or intending to perform any work as above indicated must make an application for the permit at the office of the City Engineer. Such application must include an address (mail, facsimile or electronic) to which all notices pursuant to this chapter shall be sent.

(b) Determination of Existing Underground Installations. Prior to making such application, the permittee shall determine the existing location and depth of all underground facilities that are reasonably feasible to ascertain, such as sanitary sewer, electric, telephone, gas, communications, storm drain, water lines, conduits, manholes, traffic signal wires, conduits, interconnects and detector loops, irrigation systems and other structures situated in the street or adjoining public area where the work is to be performed. If the City’s right-of-way to be used by the permittee has existing facilities placed therein, the permittee shall notify the owner(s) of said facilities of the permittee’s proposed installation. The permittee may be required to pothole and obtain record drawings from the owner(s) of said facilities.

(c) Proposed Work and/or Construction Plans. The application shall be accompanied by plans to an appropriate scale showing the layout, location, and depth of all proposed construction, topographic layout of existing surface and known underground facilities in the immediate area of construction, construction details of proposed work, restoration work detail and such other information as the City Engineer may reasonably require related to review of the application in accordance with applicable law. Where appropriate, the permittee may make reference to City Standard Details for construction detail. The plans shall bear the signature, seal, and date of signing of a registered civil engineer where required, consistent with the City’s standard practices and/or applicable law.

(d) Completed Application. A completed application must include:

(1) Completed and signed application;

(2) Payment of all applicable fees; and

(3) Proposed work and/or construction plans that conform to City Standards: Design Criteria, Standard Specifications, Standard Details, and special permit conditions that apply, as reasonably determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.050 Permit approval and issuance.
When an application is deemed complete by the City Engineer in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable law, a permit shall be denied or approved and issued. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.060 Permit conditions.
All permittees shall abide by the following conditions:

(a) Have proof of a valid City business license;

(b) Have proof of other permits as required from agencies that are impacted by proposed construction and/or equipment installation. Some agencies that may be impacted include, but are not limited to, State of California, County of Santa Clara, City of Santa Clara Planning and Inspection Department, City and County of San Francisco (Hetch-Hetchy), Santa Clara Valley Water District, Union Pacific Railroad Co., and Peninsula Corridor Joint Powers Board. Proof that other required permits have been obtained shall be provided prior to issuance of the permit;

(c) Cooperate with the City and all other persons subject to this chapter in minimizing the impact on city streets where reasonably possible by utilizing common trenches and other techniques that will achieve this goal, and equitably share the costs of installation when two or more entities propose equipment in the same street, or when the City is planning an underground project. Persons subject to this chapter shall be required to equitably share in costs reasonably associated with their work;

(d) Underground equipment within the public right-of-way where such undergrounding may lawfully be required. Equipment for undergrounding may include, but is not limited to, splice boxes, manholes, pull boxes, and connection panels;

(e) Keep a copy of the permit and the approved set of plans on the job site at all times during the prosecution of the work;

(f) Maintain adequate insurance during construction and installation of the equipment. Insurance coverage shall protect the City from claims for injuries to persons and property which in any way relate to, arise from, or are connected with the installation or use of the permit and/or equipment;

(g) Safeguard the work site at all times to protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

(h) Notify the City a minimum of one full City working day prior to construction and any inspection;

(i) Provide adequate traffic controls where required that conform to the most recent edition of the State of California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;

(j) Employ best management practices to prevent pollutants from entering the storm drain system and to comply with the latest statutory stormwater management requirements;

(k) Store all construction materials and equipment on site or in a designated area approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.070 Permit valid for described and approved work only.
The permit issued shall not be valid for any work other than that described in the permit and as shown on the plans filed by the permittee at the time the permit is granted. By signing the permit application, the permittee acknowledges that decisions of the City Engineer related to the permit shall be final. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.080 No ownership or vested right created.
No use of any right-of-way or any other interest or property pursuant to this chapter shall create or vest in the permittee any ownership or other interest in the right-of-way, streets or other property or interest of the City. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.090 Permittee indemnifies City.
The permittee shall be liable for, and indemnify and hold the City harmless from, all harm, injuries, or damages, including attorney’s fees, including but not limited to damage to persons or property, which occur in connection with or resulting from the ongoing use of the right-of-way. The permittee’s liability under this section shall not apply to any harm, injuries or damages resulting from the City’s negligence, willful misconduct or criminal acts as adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction. Prior to issuance of the permit, the permittee shall furnish to the City evidence of insurance coverage and endorsements (including self insurance, if applicable) as designated by the City Attorney for the liability assumed by the permittee. The City shall provide reasonable notice to the permittee upon receipt of any claim of loss, action or demand and cooperate with the permittee’s defense against such claim, including providing reasonable access to information, evidence, and witnesses necessary to defend against such claim. The permittee does not waive its right to pursue any or all available legal remedies to challenge the validity or legality of any applicable federal, State or local law by its work under this chapter. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.100 Installation notice.
The permittee may be required to provide mail or hand-delivered notice of installation of any above-ground equipment to nearby property owners as directed by the City Engineer and/or the Director of Planning and Inspection. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.110 Municipal encroachments.
Encroachments made by the municipal utility departments of the City of Santa Clara shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as any other person, with the exception that the method of paying the prescribed fees will be by internal voucher transfers and separate insurance will not be required. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.120 Improvement bonds.
The City Engineer may require faithful performance bonds and/or labor and material bonds, each in a reasonable amount based on the project size and/or scope, as reasonably determined by the City Engineer. Any bond amount will be based on an estimate provided by the permittee and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.130 Fees.
(a) Processing Fee. A fee for processing the application will be charged for each permit application unless provided otherwise by an agreement with the City under a public works contract. The processing fee will be charged at the current rate adopted by the City.

(b) Engineering and Inspection Fee. An engineering and inspection fee shall be charged for each permit to recover the City’s cost of engineering review and field inspection to assure that the construction provided under the permit meets City standards and requirements. The engineering and inspection fee shall be charged at the current rate adopted by the City.

(c) Field Marking Fee. A fee for field marking the locations of sanitary sewer and storm drain pipelines in the immediate vicinity of the proposed excavation shall be charged. The field marking fee will be charged at the current rate adopted by the City.

(d) Slurry Seal Fee. A fee for slurry sealing new asphaltic pavement shall be charged. The slurry sealing fee will be charged at the current rate adopted by the City.

(e) Record Drawing Archiving Fee. A fee for record drawing archiving shall be charged for those record drawings required and kept on file by the City Engineer. The record drawing archiving fee will be charged at the current rate adopted by the City.

(f) This section shall not prevent the City from properly adopting new or different fees from time to time for services related to this chapter. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.140 Construction requirements.
(a) Standards of Construction. All work performed under the permit shall conform to applicable law and recognized standards of construction, including but not limited to the current City Standards: Design Criteria, Standard Specifications, Standard Details, and any special provisions relating thereto.

(b) Underground Service Alert (U.S.A.). Prior to commencement of any excavation, the permittee shall call U.S.A. for field marking of existing underground utilities.

(c) Inspection and Approval. All work shall be subject to monitoring, inspection, and approval by the City Engineer.

(d) Schedule of Work. The permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least one full City working day prior to start of any work. The permittee shall keep the City Engineer informed of the schedule and time of the work being performed pursuant to the permit, and any subsequent changes or interruptions to that schedule. Should the work stop for more than two full consecutive City working days, the permittee shall again notify the City Engineer as noted above prior to restarting the work. The work must be diligently prosecuted to its completion and shall be performed in such a manner as to cause minimum inconvenience and hazard to the public.

(e) Working Time Restriction. The City Engineer may specify the days or times when work occurs in order to coordinate with traffic on thoroughfares or other work occurring in the area. Hours of work will be between 7:00 AM and 5:00 PM on City workdays unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

(f) Protection of Traffic. The permittee shall place and maintain adequate signs, barricades and warning lights to protect the public, and shall maintain safe crossings for pedestrian and vehicular traffic during the entire course of the work. Warning signs, lights and safety devices shall conform to the requirements of the current State of California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(g) Making Repairs. Each permittee shall be responsible for restoring to its former condition as nearly as may be possible any portion of the right-of-way which has been excavated or otherwise disturbed or damaged by the permittee. If the right-of-way is not restored as provided herein and the City elects to make the repairs, the permittee shall bear the cost thereof. The permittee is responsible for maintaining the work area at its sole cost and expense until the City accepts the work covered by the permit. Each permittee shall repair and correct any and all defects and deficiencies due to workmanship or materials in connection with the permit which occur within one year from date of acceptance of work by the City.

(h) Notification of Work Completion. A permittee shall provide the City Engineer a notice of completion immediately upon completion of the work authorized by each permit.

(i) Acceptance of Work by City. The City Engineer shall accept the work as completed only after the permittee has fulfilled all obligations under this chapter and the permit, cleaned the site of all debris and left the site in a neat and workmanlike condition. The City Engineer shall indicate acceptance by endorsing the permit in the space provided. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.150 Extending permit.
The City Engineer may grant the permittee a time extension to a permit subject to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, provided there are no changes to the original approved construction plans since the initial issuance of the permit. The permittee shall request a time extension to a permit within seven days from the permit’s expiration date. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.160 Emergency encroachments.
(a) When City Engineer Office Is Open. Any person performing an emergency encroachment during normal City business hours shall notify the City Engineer by telephone within one hour of commencement of said emergency work. The permittee shall relay the nature and location of the emergency and make any subsequent written permit application the next business day.

(b) When City Engineer Office Is Closed. Any person performing an emergency encroachment when the office of the City Engineer is closed shall apply for a permit within four hours from the start of the next business day. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.170 Mitigation requirements for potentially significant archaeological impacts.
(a) All permittees shall comply with the appropriate Planning and Inspection Department conditions for potentially significant archaeological impacts, as adopted by the City Council or as subsequently amended and approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection.

(b) If it is determined by the City or discovered during site work that the site contains archaeological resources, the permittee shall be required to retain a qualified archaeologist to monitor all earth-moving activities. Monitoring shall include, but is not limited to, review and oversight of all subsurface work, allowing for the careful examination of vertical and horizontal soil relationships to define positive archaeological finds (prehistoric and/or historic). The archaeologist must be pre-approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection. The Planning Division must also be notified at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any grading or other subsurface work on the site, and the archaeologist must provide a written protocol which stipulates the manner in which the permittee shall comply with the monitoring requirements. The archaeologist must maintain a field log of their time and observations, carefully noting soil conditions.

(c) In the event that cultural resources are encountered, all work within fifty (50) feet of the find shall halt so that the archaeologist can examine the find and document the provenance and nature of the cultural resource (through drawings, photographs, written description, as necessary). The City shall be notified and the significance, if any, of the find shall be evaluated by the archaeologist.

(d) Once a find has been made and deemed to be significant, the archaeologist will then submit a treatment plan to the City. A treatment plan may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

(1) Planning construction to avoid archaeological sites.

(2) Deeding archaeological sites into permanent conservation easements.

(3) Capping or covering archaeological sites with a layer of soil before building on the sites.

(4) Planning parks, green space, or other open space to incorporate archaeological sites.

(5) Any other appropriate measures as required and approved by the City of Santa Clara.

(e) If Native American remains are discovered, the County Coroner shall be notified immediately pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code. The permittee shall work with the most likely descendants, as identified by the Native American Historical Commission, to ensure that the descendants’ preferences for the treatment of the remains are respected.

(f) The permittee must obtain information from the City prior to beginning work as to whether the site is an archaeologically sensitive area. The City shall in no event pay any expenses related to archaeological resources investigation, mitigation or treatment plans. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.180 Ongoing use of right-of-way.
(a) In addition to complying with all relevant requirements for obtaining a permit contained herein, a person owning facilities in, seeking to install facilities in, or using right-of-way shall comply with all requirements of this section.

(b) The design, construction, installation, operation, maintenance, relocation, and removal of the permittee’s equipment shall be at no expense to the City and shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the City Engineer to maintain the integrity and effective use of the public rights-of-way and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(c) The permittee shall remove or relocate any installation that is in conflict vertically and/or horizontally with any currently planned or future City installation that is a proper governmental use of the right-of-way. If the permittee does not complete said relocation within one hundred eighty (180) days, the City shall have equipment removed at the permittee’s expense. Before proceeding with relocation work, the permittee shall obtain appropriate permits and approvals and shall restore the area vacated to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the City Engineer.

(d) Should the City permit facility installations (not including any City-owned installations) where there are existing facilities, the permittee shall work around existing facilities. Should it prove impractical to work around existing facilities, requiring the relocation of any existing facilities, and if the owner of said existing facilities agrees to relocate them, the owner shall promptly relocate its facilities. The reasonable cost of relocating existing facilities shall be borne solely by the permittee. However, if at least one of the following applies, the owner shall promptly relocate its facilities at no cost to the permittee:

(1) Existing facilities were not properly installed;

(2) Existing facilities were installed without obtaining necessary authorizations; or

(3) Federal, State, or local law requires relocation.

(e) The permittee shall obtain franchises, other authorizations and/or agreements, if reasonably required by the City and applicable law, and shall comply with the provisions of any such franchise or other authorization, providing proof of satisfaction of any condition thereof.

(f) Equipment installed pursuant to this chapter shall at all times be maintained in accordance with the requirements of all applicable laws, franchises and authorizations. The permittee shall maintain the equipment in good repair and in a safe condition to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer.

(g) The permittee shall identify the equipment installed in each right-of-way by means of an identification method as directed by the City Engineer. Such identification shall be detectable from ground level without opening the street. The permittee shall provide the City a telephone contact number, staffed twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week, to enable the City to report any concerns regarding the equipment, including, but not limited to, the removal of any graffiti/vandalism. In the event that the City reports such concerns to the permittee, the permittee shall within seventy-two (72) hours, unless weather or emergencies prohibit timely action, respond to such call and perform the required repair or correct any adverse impact to the City’s or third party’s use or operations caused by the permittee’s equipment in the right-of-way at no cost to the City.

(h) The permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, State, or local laws, rules and regulations for clearances and siting standards, including but not limited to City noise ordinances; City/Silicon Valley Power Installation of Underground Substructures by Developers (UG 1000); and City Standards: Design Criteria, Standard Specifications, and Standard Details. Above-ground or surface-mounted facilities placed pursuant to this chapter shall where reasonably feasible:

(1) Be no larger than is reasonably necessary to contain and protect the required equipment. In the event any above-ground or surface-mounted facility exceeds seventy-two (72) inches high, fifty-nine (59) inches wide and twenty-seven (27) inches deep, an environmental review under CEQA and any other applicable laws must occur prior to permit issuance;

(2) Not obstruct pedestrians and shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and access-related regulations, including maintaining a minimum of four feet of pedestrian clearance (free of all obstacles for a clear path of travel, unobstructed pedestrian walkway) shall be maintained at all times, even when facility parts (such as doors) are open or in use;

(3) Be set back a minimum of two feet from the face of the curb;

(4) Not intrude into the vehicle visibility obstruction area at street corners or create vehicle driveway obstructions;

(5) Not be placed at street intersection corners or at the end of T-intersections reserved for traffic signal facilities;

(6) Not obstruct pedestrian, technician, or vehicle view of any traffic sign or signal;

(7) Be placed with a minimum horizontal clearance of eight feet from any sanitary sewer or storm drain facility, except where an existing cabinet is already closer than eight feet to a sanitary sewer or storm drain line, a new cabinet of the same type may be placed adjacent to the existing cabinet with a minimum horizontal clearance of five feet from the sanitary sewer or storm drain line;

(8) Be set back a minimum of five feet from any City utility facility, traffic signal facility, driveway, curb ramp, or blue zone parking space, except as noted herein;

(9) Be set back a minimum of three and one-half feet from any other entity’s above-ground or surface-mounted structure not otherwise specified herein, including but not limited to street poles, parking meters, and public art;

(10) Be located within six feet of the public right-of-way if placement on the right-of-way is prohibitive;

(11) Be set back a minimum of eight feet from any fire escape and/or fire exit;

(12) Not be placed on the property of, or immediately adjacent to, any designated local, state or national register historical landmark or structure;

(13) Not violate any City Code or policy related to City-owned trees or heritage trees, including but not limited to the provisions related to alteration, removal, or trenching affecting any City-owned tree;

(14) Be screened by landscaping where appropriate for the location. The permittee shall be fully responsible for all costs associated with removal and disposal of existing plant material, including replanting, modifications or repair of all irrigation disturbed as a result of installing, using, operating, and maintaining the facility. Replacement irrigation shall be in the same quantity, quality and of comparable size to those removed. Replacement or new landscaping shall meet the following criteria:

(A) Minimum fifteen (15) gallon for new street tree;

(B) Minimum five gallon for shrubs;

(C) Minimum twelve (12) inches on center for groundcovers;

(D) Minimum twenty-four (24) or thirty-six (36) inch box for replacement of mature trees;

(15) Be painted or coated to blend in with the surrounding environment; graffiti-proof coating that also blends shall be used if feasible;

(16) Not emit excessive heat or create any safety threat or harm to the public;

(17) Not unreasonably affect the aesthetic character of the location or neighborhood of its placement;

(18) Not be located within a three hundred (300) foot radius of more than three other above-ground utility boxes. In the event of this situation, the permittee shall co-locate the proposed above-ground utility box with an existing utility box, underground the proposed utility box, or be subject to additional environmental review.

(i) A permittee shall not install attachments to bridges and overpasses, except in special situations when approved by the City Engineer.

(j) A permittee shall generally be restricted to installing equipment to a part of the right-of-way that is within ten feet of the lip of gutter and on the side of the street opposite the water main, unless directed otherwise by the City Engineer. No facilities may be attached to any structure owned by the City, or maintained in place, without a valid contract therefor with the City.

(k) A permittee shall maintain detailed maps and record drawings of its facilities in the right-of-way, which shall be furnished to the City free of charge within twenty (20) calendar days of any request. The detailed maps and record drawings shall show the location, size, depth, description, and nature of all facilities as constructed, as well as the identification of any powered facilities, certified to within one foot of the actual location and depth.

(l) A permittee shall pothole its subsurface equipment within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a written request from the City or third party to do so, unless the permittee can certify within one foot the location and depth of its facilities where potholing is requested. The reasonable cost of the potholing shall be borne by any requesting third party. The City shall in no event pay any pothole expenses.

(m) A permittee shall, at its sole expense, maintain membership in Underground Service Alert (U.S.A.) and shall field mark, at its expense, the location of its equipment upon notification in accordance with State law, including but not limited to Government Code Section 4216 and following, as it now reads or may hereinafter be amended. Any change in State law shall not negate the duty of permittee under this subsection.

(n) A permittee shall inform the City in writing of any material change in contact information. Such written notice shall be provided to the City Engineer within sixty (60) days of the change. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.190 Abandonment or removal of equipment from right-of-way.
(a) If a permittee intends to abandon the facilities, the permittee shall either, as determined by the City Engineer, dedicate said equipment to the City for its use or remove said equipment at no cost to the City.

(b) The permittee shall send written notice of abandonment to the City Engineer within thirty (30) days of abandonment, and all equipment shall be removed or dedicated no later than one hundred eighty (180) days of abandonment.

(c) The permittee shall obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter for all facility removal from the right-of-way.

(d) If the City determines the permittee has abandoned its equipment, the City shall provide the permittee with written notice to vacate the right-of-way and dedicate or remove the equipment within one hundred eighty (180) days. Equipment removal shall be at no cost to the City. Within this one hundred eighty day (180) period, the permittee may:

(1) Provide information to the City Engineer explaining that the equipment has not been abandoned and seek the City Engineer’s reconsideration; and/or

(2) Appeal the City Engineer’s decision as to abandonment, as described herein.

(e) If the permittee takes no action within this time period, the City may elect to accept title to such equipment free and clear, or remove the equipment and charge the permittee with all reasonable costs incurred in such removal. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days of returning such equipment to the permittee or making such equipment available to the permittee for pickup within city limits.

(f) Appeal of City Engineer Decision as to Abandonment.

(1) Any permittee not in agreement with the City Engineer’s decision as to facility abandonment may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of service by mail of the City Engineer’s notice of abandonment.

(2) The City Council shall fix a time and place within thirty (30) days for the permittee to show why the facilities were not abandoned and/or why the facilities should not be removed, vacated, or dedicated to the City.

(3) The City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the permittee at his/her last-known address by depositing a notice of hearing in the United States mail with postage prepaid.

(4) No later than 12:01 P.M. on the Thursday preceding the hearing, the appealing permittee shall file with the City Clerk a written summary not to exceed five pages in length of the reason(s) the City Engineer’s decision should be amended or overturned. The appealing permittee shall have the burden of demonstrating the error of the City Engineer’s decision. The Council shall render and provide written notice of its decision within forty-five (45) days of the hearing.

(5) The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.

(6) In no event shall any final determination by the Council exceed the one hundred eighty (180) day notice period for removal, vacation or dedication of the abandoned facilities.

(7) This process shall not preclude any permittee from seeking timely judicial review of the City Council determination.

(g) This section does not apply to persons not entitled to operate within public rights-of-way pursuant to federal, State or local law. Persons operating within rights-of-way under a license agreement shall not have any vested right to remain in the right-of-way and the license may be revoked at any time. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.200 Damage to existing facilities.
(a) The permittee is responsible for any damage to City facilities and equipment, including but not limited to pavement, curb and gutters, sidewalk, landscaping, and utilities. The permittee is also responsible for damage to private property. This liability applies to activity related to installation, maintenance, repair, operation, and removal of permittee equipment in right-of-way by the permittee, its employees or agents.

(b) If the equipment owned by the permittee damages any right-of-way, equipment, facilities, or installations owned by the City in any manner, the permittee shall pay the cost of any replacements, repairs or restoration of said right-of-way, equipment, facilities, or installations to the condition such were in prior to the damage.

(c) Any premature deterioration of surface and subsurface improvements, such as pavement or concrete over any trench/excavation or adjacent thereto, or reduction in the life of improvements within or adjacent to the right-of-way as reasonably determined by the City Engineer which results from the permittee’s acts or omissions shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. The permittee shall complete all necessary repairs within thirty (30) days of notification by the City Engineer, or a longer period if agreed to in writing by the parties. If the permittee fails to make repairs within the applicable period, the City may have repairs made with the cost being billed to the permittee. If the repair cannot fully reverse the deterioration or loss of life, the City may require the permittee to pay for the damage suffered as a result. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.210 Adherence to rules and regulations.
Each person shall comply with all rules and regulations contained herein even if the work has been performed under an emergency encroachment. The City Engineer may revoke a permit issued under this chapter upon violation of any of its provisions or the provisions of any permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.220 Penalties.
(a) Pursuant to the City’s prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations of the provisions of this chapter as criminal, civil or administrative actions.

(b) Every violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the City Attorney has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading or citation that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction. Code enforcement officers, as defined by this Code, shall have the power to issue administrative and infraction citations for violations of this chapter.

(c) Each and every violation of this chapter which is deemed an infraction is punishable by:

(1) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

(2) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within a one-year period; and

(3) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision within a one-year period of the first violation.

(d) Each and every day or any part thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate offense.

(e) Each and every violation of this chapter which is deemed a misdemeanor is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months or by both penalty and imprisonment.

(f) Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be civilly liable to the City for a sum up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first day in which such violation occurs, and for each additional day thereafter.

(g) Any activities operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. (Ord. 1842 § 3, 4-21-09).

12.25.230 Pavement preservation.
(a) Any street that has been resealed shall not thereafter be cut or opened for a period of three years. This time frame shall begin immediately following the resealing work and end on December 31st of the year which is at least three years following the year of completion of the work.

(b) Any street that has been constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced shall not thereafter be cut or opened for a period of five years. This time frame shall begin immediately following the construction, reconstruction, or resurfacing work and end on December 31st of the year which is at least five years following the year of completion of the work.

(c) The Director of Public Works or City Engineer is granted the discretionary authority to authorize exemptions under the following circumstances:

(1) Emergency encroachments that are immediately necessary to preserve life or property;

(2) Work that is mandated by a county, State or federal agency;

(3) Work necessary to provide utility service for buildings or parcels where no other reasonable means of providing service exists;

(4) Repairs or modifications that are necessary to prevent the interruption of essential utility service;

(5) Other situations deemed by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer to be in the best interest of the general public.

(d) To request an exemption, the permittee shall submit a written request to the Director of Public Works. The request shall include:

(1) The location of the excavation;

(2) Description of the work to be performed;

(3) The reason(s) the work cannot be deferred;

(4) The reason(s) the work cannot be performed at another location;

(5) The reason(s) it is in the best interest of the general public to excavate the street.

(e) When authorizing an exemption, and for emergency encroachments, the Director of Public Works or City Engineer is granted the discretionary authority to impose conditions determined appropriate by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer to ensure the rapid and complete restoration of the street and the pavement. The Director of Public Works’s or City Engineer’s determination shall be final.

(f) The Director of Public Works or City Engineer is granted the discretionary authority to implement additional policies, practices, procedures, rules, regulations, and standards for excavation and use of right-of-way, as necessary, to ensure street pavements are preserved. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2-19-19).

Chapter 12.30
SIDEWALKS
Sections:

Article I. Generally

12.30.010  Obstructing or littering, defacing or damaging, etc., prohibited.

12.30.020  Width regulations.

Article II. Construction Generally

12.30.030  Definitions.

12.30.040  Duty of lot owners.

12.30.050  Notice to construct – Generally – Determination by City Council.

12.30.060  Notice to construct – Manner in which given.

12.30.070  Notice to construct – Information required – Posting.

12.30.080  Hearing.

12.30.090  Construction by City upon failure of abutting property owner to do so – Generally.

12.30.100  Report of City Engineer after completion of construction.

12.30.110  Hearing prior to assessment – Generally – Notice.

12.30.120  Hearing – Procedure – Determination by City Council deemed final.

12.30.130  Assessment against abutting property – Lien – Generally.

12.30.140  Lien – Form and recordation.

12.30.150  Lien – Notice and foreclosure.

12.30.160  Lien – Alternative method of collection.

Article III. Repairs

12.30.170  Definitions.

12.30.180  Duty of abutting property owners to maintain sidewalks.

12.30.190  Notice to repair to be given by superintendent of streets.

12.30.200  Notice to repair – Manner in which given.

12.30.210  Notice to repair – Information required posting.

12.30.220  Repairs by City upon failure of abutting property owner to do so – Generally.

12.30.230  Written request by owner for repair of other sidewalk fronting his/her property – Form – Cost of requested repairs.

12.30.240  Report by superintendent of streets after completion of repairs.

12.30.250  Completion of repairs – Notice of hearing.

12.30.260  Repairs – Hearing.

12.30.270  Assessment against abutting property – Authorized – Lien on property.

12.30.280  Lien – Form and recordation.

12.30.290  Lien – Notice and foreclosure.

12.30.300  Lien – Alternative method of collection.

Cross reference – As to maintenance of abutting sidewalks of cemeteries, see SCCC 2.135.080.

Article I. Generally

12.30.010 Obstructing or littering, defacing or damaging, etc., prohibited.
(a) No person shall place (or cause to be placed) any obstruction on any sidewalk within the city so as to impede the travel thereon or to obstruct the same in any way, either partially or wholly, by the placing of merchandise on display, piling boxes, etc., or who shall damage or deface the sidewalks by drawing, symbols, lettering or caricatures of any kind.

(b) This section shall not be construed to mean any goods, wares or merchandise when occupying the sidewalk in actual delivery or removal of such goods, wares or merchandise, provided the same be moved within twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. 114; Ord. 361. Formerly § 25-40).

12.30.020 Width regulations.
All streets in the City that are seventy (70) feet or over in width shall have a sidewalk space of eleven and one-half (11-1/2) feet, measured from the outside edge of the curb to the property line except in blocks where concrete curbs have been installed prior to the enactment of this section. (Ord. 391. Formerly § 25-42).

Article II. Construction Generally

12.30.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) "Sidewalk" shall include a park or parking strip maintained in the area between the property line and the street line and also shall include curbing, bulkheads, retaining walls, improvements to sidewalks or other works for the protection of any sidewalk or of any such parking or parking strip. The words "sidewalks and curbs" shall include "gutters."

(b) "Block" shall mean property facing one side of any street between the next intersecting street. (Ord. 855. Formerly § 25-43).

12.30.040 Duty of lot owners.
The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any public street or place shall have the duty of constructing or causing the construction of sidewalks or curbs in front of their properties upon notice to so do by the City Engineer. (Ord. 355; Ord. 1210 § 1, 6-10-69. Formerly § 25-44).

12.30.050 Notice to construct – Generally – Determination by City Council.
When the City Council finds and determines that public safety, necessity and convenience shall require the installation and construction of sidewalks in front of property in any block, the City Clerk shall, upon instruction from the City Council, notify the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on that portion of the street in such block in which no curb or sidewalk has been constructed theretofore to construct or cause to be constructed a curb or sidewalk or both in front of his/her property. (Ord. 855 § 4. Formerly § 25-45).

12.30.060 Notice to construct – Manner in which given.
Notice to construct may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property facing upon the sidewalk or curb to be constructed or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property or to the owner thereof at his/her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the City, or to the name and address of the person owning such property as shown in the records of the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 855 § 5. Formerly § 25-46).

12.30.070 Notice to construct – Information required – Posting.
The postal card provided in SCCC 12.30.060 shall contain a notice to construct the sidewalk or curb or both and the City Clerk shall, immediately upon the mailing of the notice, cause a copy thereof to be printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous space on the property.

The notice shall also specify the day, hour and place when the City Council will hear and pass upon objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner or other interested persons.

The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done and what materials shall be used in the construction and shall further specify that if the construction is not commenced within sixty (60) days after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the City Engineer shall cause the construction to be done and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property. (Ord. 855 §§ 6, 7, 8. Formerly § 25-47).

12.30.080 Hearing.
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing mentioned in SCCC 12.30.070, the City Council shall hear and pass upon such objections or protests. The decision of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearing required by SCCC 12.30.110. (Ord. 855 § 7. Formerly § 25-48).

12.30.090 Construction by City upon failure of abutting property owner to do so – Generally.
If the construction is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, as required by the notice provided for in SCCC 12.30.050 or by the City Council after the hearing required by SCCC 12.30.070, the City Engineer shall forthwith construct the sidewalk. (Ord. 855 § 9. Formerly § 25-49).

12.30.100 Report of City Engineer after completion of construction.
Upon the completion of the construction, the City Engineer shall prepare and file with the City Council a report specifying the work which has been done, the cost of construction, a description of the real property in front of which the work has been done and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. Such report may include work done in front of any number of parcels of property, whether contiguous to each other or not. (Ord. 855 § 11. Formerly § 25-50).

12.30.110 Hearing prior to assessment – Generally – Notice.
Upon the completion of the construction as provided in SCCC 12.30.100, the City Clerk shall cause notice of the cost of the construction to be given in the manner specified in this article for the giving of notice to construct, which notice shall specify the day, the hour and place when the City Council will hear and pass upon the report by the City Engineer of the cost of the construction, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such construction and any other interested persons. (Ord. 855 § 10. Formerly § 25-51).

12.30.120 Hearing – Procedure – Determination by City Council deemed final.
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing provided for in SCCC 12.30.110, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the City Engineer, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for such construction and any other interested persons. Thereupon, the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just after which, by motion or resolution, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Council on all protests or objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 855 § 12. Formerly § 25-52).

12.30.130 Assessment against abutting property – Lien – Generally.
The cost of construction by the City of sidewalks under this article may be assessed by the City Council against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk or curb so constructed and such cost so assessed, if not paid within ten days after its confirmation by the City Council, shall constitute a specific assessment against that parcel of property and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof from the time of recordation of the notice of lien, which shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid or until it is discharged of record. (Ord. 855 § 13. Formerly § 25-53).

12.30.140 Lien – Form and recordation.
The lien provided for in SCCC 12.30.130 may be filed by the City Engineer in the Office of the County Recorder and such certificate shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF LIEN

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by SCCC 12.30.030 through 12.30.160, I did, on the ________ day of ________, 20___, cause the sidewalk or curb to be constructed, and the City Council of the City of Santa Clara did, on the ________ day of ________, 20___, by Resolution No. ________ assess the cost of such construction upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the said City of Santa Clara does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the sum of ________ dollars ($________), and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the said sum, with interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, from the said ________ day of ________, 20___ (insert date of confirmation of assessment), has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, as that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Santa Clara, Santa Clara County, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

(Description of Property.)

Dated this _____ day of _______, 20___

___________________________
City Engineer

(Ord. 855 § 14. Formerly § 25-54).

12.30.150 Lien – Notice and foreclosure.
From and after the date of the recording of the notice of lien as provided in SCCC 12.30.140, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel. The statute of limitation shall not run against the right of the City to enforce the payment of the lien. If any such lien is not paid, the City may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under Division 7 (entitled "The Improvement Act of 1911"), Section 5000 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code of the State. (Ord. 855. Formerly § 25-55).

12.30.160 Lien – Alternative method of collection.
As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the City Council, after confirmation of the report of the City Engineer, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the accounting officer and the tax collector of the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of those officers to add the amount of the assessment to the net parcel of land. If City taxes are collected by the County officials, the notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the County assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the assessment book to the County board of equalization.

Thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes and County taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 855. Formerly § 25-56).

Article III. Repairs

12.30.170 Definitions.
See definitions of SCCC 12.30.030. (Ord. 1026. Formerly § 25-57).

12.30.180 Duty of abutting property owners to maintain sidewalks.
The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public street or place, when that street or place is improved or if and when the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line is maintained as a park or parking strip, shall maintain any sidewalk in such condition that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property, and maintain it in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of such walks or areas, except as to those conditions created or maintained in, upon, along or in connection with such sidewalk other than the owner, under and by virtue of any permit or right granted to him by law or by the City Council, and such persons shall be under a like duty in relation thereto. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-58).

12.30.190 Notice to repair to be given by superintendent of streets.
When any portion of a sidewalk is out of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition to endanger persons or property or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use of such sidewalk, the superintendent of streets shall notify the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on that portion of such sidewalk so out of repair to repair the sidewalk. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-59).

12.30.200 Notice to repair – Manner in which given.
Notice to repair may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property facing upon the sidewalks so out of repair, or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to the owner thereof at his/her last known address, as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City, or to the name and address of the person owning such property, as shown in the records of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1026. Formerly § 25-60).

12.30.210 Notice to repair – Information required posting.
The postal card provided for in SCCC 12.30.200 shall contain a notice to repair the sidewalk so out of repair, and the superintendent of streets shall, immediately upon the mailing of the notice, cause a copy thereof printed on a card of not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property.

The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done, what materials shall be used in the repair and shall further specify that if the repair is not commenced within two weeks after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the superintendent of streets shall make such repair, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-61).

12.30.220 Repairs by City upon failure of abutting property owner to do so – Generally.
If the repair is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, as required by the notice provided in this article, the superintendent of streets shall forthwith repair the sidewalk. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-62).

12.30.230 Written request by owner for repair of other sidewalk fronting his/her property – Form – Cost of requested repairs.
Upon the written request of the owner of the property facing the sidewalk so out of repair as ascertained from the last equalized assessment roll of the City, or as shown in the records of the office of the City Clerk, the superintendent of streets may repair any other portion of the sidewalk fronting on the property that is designated by the owner. The superintendent shall have power to prescribe the form of the written request. The cost of repair work done by request pursuant to this section shall be a part of the cost of repairs for which, pursuant to this article, subsequent notices are given, hearings held, and assessments and collection procedures are conducted. (Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-62.1).

12.30.240 Report by superintendent of streets after completion of repairs.
Upon completion of the repair, the superintendent of streets prepares and files with the City Council a report specifying the repairs which have been made, the cost of the repairs, description of real property in front of which the repairs have been made and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. Any such report may include repairs to any number of parcels of property, whether contiguous to each other or not. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-63).

12.30.250 Completion of repairs – Notice of hearing.
Upon completion of the repair, the superintendent of streets shall cause notice of the cost of the repair to be given in the manner specified in this article for the giving of notice to repair, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the City Council will hear and pass upon a report of the City Engineer of the cost of the repair, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such repair and any other interested persons. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-64).

12.30.260 Repairs – Hearing.
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the superintendent of streets together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of making such repair and any other interested persons. Thereupon, the City Council may take such revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion or resolution, the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The City Council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. The decisions of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1026. Formerly § 25-65).

12.30.270 Assessment against abutting property – Authorized – Lien on property.
The cost of the repair may be assessed by the City Council against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk upon which such repair was made, and such cost so assessed, if not paid within five days after its confirmation by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until it is discharged of record. (Ord. 1026; Ord. 1140. Formerly § 25-66).

12.30.280 Lien – Form and recordation.
The superintendent of streets may file in the Office of the County Recorder of the County in which the parcel of land is located a certificate substantially in the following form, to wit:

NOTICE OF LIEN

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by SCCC 12.30.170 through 12.30.300, I did on the ________ day of ________, 20___ cause the sidewalk, curb or park or parking strip, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works (as the case may be) in front of the real property hereinafter described, to be repaired and improved, and the City Council of the City of Santa Clara did, on the ________ day of ________, 20___ by Resolution No. ________ assess the cost of such repair upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the said City does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the sum of ________ dollars ($________), and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until said sum with interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, from the said ________ day of ________, 20___ (insert date of confirmation of assessment), has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, as that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Santa Clara, Santa Clara County, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

(Description of property.)

Dated this _____ day of ________, 20___.

_______________________________
Superintendent of Streets

(Formerly § 25-67).

12.30.290 Lien – Notice and foreclosure.
From and after the date of the recording of the notice of lien prescribed in SCCC 12.30.280, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel. The statute of limitations shall not run against the right of the City to enforce the payment of the lien. If any such lien is not paid, the City may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State. (Ord. 1026. Formerly § 25-68).

12.30.300 Lien – Alternative method of collection.
As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the City Council, after confirmation of the report of the superintendent of streets, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the assessor and the tax collector of the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of those officers to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or parcel of land. If City taxes are collected by the County officials, the notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the County assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the assessment book to the County board of equalization.

Thereafter, the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levying, collection and enforcement of City taxes and County taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 1026. Formerly § 25-69).

Chapter 12.35
TREES AND SHRUBS
Sections:

12.35.010  Planting in public places – Powers and duties of Parks and Recreation Commission generally.

12.35.020  Alteration or removal – Permit required.

12.35.030  Attaching wires, signs, posters, etc., prohibited.

12.35.040  Trees or shrubs on private property becoming hazardous or injurious to public ways – Notice to abate – Generally.

12.35.050  Failure to comply – Abatement by City.

12.35.010 Planting in public places – Powers and duties of Parks and Recreation Commission generally.
No tree or shrub shall be planted in the streets or public places of the City except under the rules and regulations of the Parks and Recreation Commission of the City, which is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the approval of the City Council, to regulate the kind and variety of such trees, plants or shrubs to be located on streets and in public places as in the judgment of such Commission may be deemed suitable and proper. (Ord. 931 § 1. Formerly § 30-1).

12.35.020 Alteration or removal – Permit required.
No tree, plant or shrub planted or growing in the streets or public places of the City shall be altered or removed without obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of streets. No person without such authorization shall trench around or alongside of any such tree, plant or shrub with the intent of cutting the roots thereof or otherwise damaging the same. (Ord. 931 § 2; Ord. 1140 § 7, 4-19-68. Formerly § 30-2).

Stat. Ref.: Injury to trees and shrubs, C.C. § 3346; C.C.P. §§ 733 and 734; Pen. C. §§ 600 and 622; Sts. & H.C.A. § 730.5.

12.35.030 Attaching wires, signs, posters, etc., prohibited.
No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster or other thing on any tree, plant or shrub planted or growing on any public place or on any street in the City. This section shall not be construed to prevent the roping, wiring or other guarding of any such tree, plant or shrub where the same may be necessary and proper to the growth and care of such tree, plant or shrub. (Ord. 931 § 3. Formerly § 30-3).

12.35.040 Trees or shrubs on private property becoming hazardous or injurious to public ways – Notice to abate – Generally.
Whenever any tree, plant or shrub in any street or public place within the city shall become hazardous to the public or injurious to any street, alley, pavement or sidewalk or any other public place in the City, the superintendent of streets shall cause to be served upon the owner, tenant or occupant of the property abutting upon a portion of the street and side thereof and upon which such tree, plant or shrub is growing, the written notice directing such owner, tenant or occupant within ten days from the date of the service of such notice upon him, under the direction and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets or his/her duly authorized agent or representative, either to remove such tree, plant or shrub or put it into such condition that it shall cease to be hazardous or injurious to such street, alley or sidewalk or other public place. (Ord. 931 § 4; Ord. 1140 § 7, 4-19-66. Formerly § 30-4).

12.35.050 Failure to comply – Abatement by City.
If any tenant, owner or occupant mentioned in SCCC 12.35.040 shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the notice served in compliance with such section, upon recommendation and report of the superintendent to the City Council, the City Council may cause the same to be done and the costs and expenses incurred therefor shall be paid by such owner, tenant or occupant and shall become a lien upon such property and may be collected in the same manner as City taxes upon real property are collected. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the City from adopting, by resolution, a plan or project for the care or removal of trees at City expense. (Ord. 931. Formerly § 30-5).

Chapter 12.40
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

Article I. Underground Districts
Created Prior to March 1, 1969

12.40.010    Definitions.

12.40.020    Council may designate underground districts.

12.40.030    Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to keep, maintain, etc.

12.40.040    Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to erect, install, etc.

12.40.050    Notice to serving companies.

12.40.060    Notice to owners, etc.

12.40.070    Failure by owner of premises to remove.

12.40.080    Exceptions – Temporary poles and overhead wires.

12.40.090    Exception – Main circuits and main communication lines.

12.40.100    Exception – Poles for street lighting, fire alarms, etc.

12.40.110    Exceptions – Council may make exceptions.

12.40.120    Findings.

12.40.130    University Project Underground District.

12.40.140    Civic Center Underground District.

12.40.150    Stevens Creek Boulevard Underground District.

12.40.160    El Camino Real Underground District.

12.40.170    Kifer Underground District.

12.40.180    Space Industrial Park Underground District.

12.40.190    Shulman Avenue Underground District.

12.40.200    Enforcement.

12.40.210    Severability.

Article II. Underground Utility Districts
Created on or after March 1, 1969

12.40.220    Alternative procedures applicable to districts created on or after March 1, 1969.

12.40.230    Definitions.

12.40.240    Commission.

12.40.250    Person.

12.40.260    Pole.

12.40.270    Property.

12.40.280    Utility.

12.40.290    Wire.

12.40.300    Creation of underground utility districts – Hearing and notice.

12.40.310    Creation of underground utility district.

12.40.320    Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to maintain.

12.40.330    Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to erect, install, etc.

12.40.340    Responsibility of owner to remove.

12.40.350    Responsibility of owner to construct.

12.40.360    Disconnection of service at request of owner or occupant.

12.40.370    Responsibility of utility to remove and construct.

12.40.380    Responsibility of City to remove.

12.40.390    Disconnection of service.

12.40.400    Notice to utilities.

12.40.410    Notice to property owners.

12.40.420    Procedure for performing work and making cost a lien on property benefited.

12.40.430    Exception – Poles for street lighting, etc.

12.40.440    Exception – Antennas, etc.

12.40.450    Exception – Facilities transmitting electric energy in excess of specified voltages and for mass transit conveyances.

12.40.460    Exception – Radio and television antennas.

12.40.470    Exception – Emergencies and hardship.

12.40.480    Exception – Transformers, etc.

12.40.490    Exception – Council may make exceptions.

12.40.500    Extension of time.

12.40.510    Severability.

Article I. Underground Districts Created
Prior to March 1, 1969

12.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this article certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

(a) “City Manager” means and includes the City Manager and such other officer or employee of the City as may be designated by the City Manager.

(b) “Main circuits” means and includes circuits operated in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts.

(c) “Main communication lines” means and includes toll lines and trunk lines.

(d) “Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, public utility, organization or business trust.

(e) “Premises” means and includes any parcel or real property, including buildings and/or other structures thereon.

(f) “Pole” means and includes any pole or other structure used for the support of wires.

(g) “Serving company” means the person supplying the electrical service for electric light, heat, power, telephone, telegraph or other purpose.

(h) “Wire” means and includes any wire, cable, conductor or other device or apparatus by, through, over or by means of which electricity is, has been or may be transmitted, conducted or conveyed for the purpose of electric light, heat, power, telephone, telegraph or other purpose. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-1).

12.40.020 Council may designate underground districts.
Whenever it finds that the public health, safety or welfare requires that poles and overhead wires be prohibited within any area of the city, and that existing poles and overhead wires, if any be removed from such area, the City Council may, by ordinance, declare such area an underground district. The Council shall, in the ordinance designating the underground district, describe the district, and if poles or overhead wires are to be removed therefrom, specify a reasonable time on or before which such existing poles and overhead wires, if any, must be removed from said district. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-2).

12.40.030 Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to keep, maintain, etc.
It shall be unlawful, after the time specified for removal of poles and overhead wires in an ordinance designating an underground district, for any person to keep, maintain, continue, use, operate or employ within such underground district, any poles or overhead wires, or to authorize or permit such action; and all such poles and all such overhead wires within such an underground district after the time specified for removal of the same shall be deemed and become public nuisances. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-3).

12.40.040 Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to erect, install, etc.
It shall be unlawful, after designation of an underground district, for any person to erect, install, extend or construct any pole or overhead wire within an underground district, or to authorize or permit such action; and any such poles or overhead wires erected, installed, extended or constructed within an underground district after the effective date of the ordinance designating the same, shall be deemed and become public nuisances. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-4).

12.40.050 Notice to serving companies.
Upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance designating any area in the City as an underground district and specifying the time on or before which poles and overhead wires must be removed from such district, the City Manager shall give to any and all serving companies owning, maintaining, operating, using or controlling any poles or overhead wires in the district, written notice to remove such poles and wires from the district on or before the time specified in the ordinance. Such notice may be given at any time after adoption of said ordinance but no later than the tenth day immediately following the effective date of said ordinance, the time on or before which said company is required to remove said poles and wires shall be automatically extended for a time equivalent to the time elapsing between the tenth day after the effective date of said ordinance and the date said notice is given. Each said notice shall be given either by delivering the same personally to the office of the serving company, or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the company. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-5).

12.40.060 Notice to owners, etc.
Upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance designating any area in the City as an underground district and specifying the time on or before which poles and overhead wires must be removed from such district, the City Manager shall give to each person who owns, possesses or is in control of any premises in such district, wherein are situated any poles or overhead wires, written notice to remove such poles and wires from such premises, or, if such poles and wires are not owned, possessed or controlled by such person, written notice to permit and cause the serving companies or other persons controlling or using said poles and wires, to remove the same, on or before the time specified by the City Council in its said ordinance. Such notices shall be given in the time and manner provided in SCCC 12.40.050 for giving of notices to serving companies. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-6).

12.40.070 Failure by owner of premises to remove.
In the event that the owner or other person in possession or control of any premises in an underground district should fail to remove or to cause or permit the removal of poles and overhead wires from such premises, as required by this article the City Manager shall order the serving company or companies to disconnect such services as they may extend to said premises by way of such poles and overhead wires, and said companies shall thereupon disconnect such service. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-7).

12.40.080 Exceptions – Temporary poles and overhead wires.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, in cases of emergency or where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, the City Manager, subject to approval by the Council, may grant special permission to any person to erect, install, maintain, use or operate in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Santa Clara Electrical Code and the applicable rules and regulations promulgated by, or filed with and approved by the California Public Utilities Commission, any pole or overhead wire within any designated underground district for such period of time as may be reasonable in the circumstances. At the expiration of the period of time specified in any such special permit, the permittee therein, if said permittee has not already done so, shall forthwith remove said poles and overhead wires. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-8).

12.40.090 Exception – Main circuits and main communication lines.
Overhead wires of main circuits and main communication lines crossing through an underground district shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, provided the poles supporting the same are not situated within an underground district. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-9).

12.40.100 Exception – Poles for street lighting, fire alarms, etc.
Poles used for street lights, fire alarm boxes, or other similar municipal equipment shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-10).

12.40.110 Exceptions – Council may make exceptions.
In any ordinance designating and declaring an underground district, the Council may, whenever it finds and determines that the public convenience and necessity so require, provide that certain existing poles and/or overhead wires within such underground district shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-11).

12.40.120 Findings.
The Council of this City of Santa Clara finds, determines, and declares that the public health, safety, and welfare require that the poles and overhead wires be prohibited within the areas hereinafter designated as underground districts, and that existing poles and wires, if any, be removed from such areas and districts on or before the dates specified in the section designating such district. (Ord. 1070; Ord. 1075. Formerly § 30A-12).

12.40.130 University Project Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the University Project Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, described as follows:

Beginning at the centerline intersection of Lafayette and Liberty streets;

Thence northwesterly along the centerline of Lafayette Street (75 feet wide) 750.60 feet more or less to its intersection with the centerline of Benton Street (70 feet wide);

Thence southwesterly along the centerline of Benton Street 1463.85 feet more or less to its intersection with the centerline of Monroe Street (70 feet wide);

Thence southeasterly along the centerline of Monroe Street 747.50 feet more or less to its intersection with the centerline of Liberty Street (70 feet wide);

Thence northeasterly along the centerline of Liberty Street 1498.80 feet more or less to its intersection with the centerline of Lafayette Street and the point of beginning.

The streets are all as shown on a map of the Town of Santa Clara, California recorded in Map Book “B,” page 103, in the Official Records of the Santa Clara County Recorder’s Office, California.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereabove described district shall be removed from said district on or before the first day of January, 1966. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-13.1).

12.40.140 Civic Center Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the Civic Center Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at a southwest corner of that certain 0.582 acre parcel of land as shown on that Record of Survey filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder, Santa Clara County, California in Book 103 of Maps at page 23, said Point of Beginning being on the northerly line of Warburton Avenue (formerly Wistar Street – 70 feet wide);

Thence S 0° 18' 50'' E, 70.00 feet to the intersection with the southerly line of said Warburton Avenue;

Thence following said southerly line of Warburton Avenue the following courses:

N 89° 41' 10'' E, 110.00 feet to a point of curvature with a 535.00 foot radius curve to the left;

Thence along the arc of said 535.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 32° 20' 04'' an arc length of 301.92 feet to a point of reverse curvature with a 465.00 foot radius curve to the right;

Thence along the arc of said 465.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 32° 28' 44'' an arc length of 263.59 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence along the tangent to last said curve N 89° 49' 50'' E, 166.13 feet to a point of curvature with a 565.00 foot radius curve to the right;

Thence along the arc of said 565.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 29° 14' 57'' an arc length of 288.43 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence following the tangent to last said curve S 60° 55' 13'' E, 8.94 feet to a point of curvature with a 30.00 foot radius curve to the right;

Thence along the arc of said 30.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 90° 00' an arc length of 47.12 feet to the point of tangency, said point of tangency being on the westerly line of Lincoln Street (90 feet wide);

Thence following said westerly line of Lincoln Street, or a prolongation thereof, the following courses:

S 29° 04' 47'' W, 20.00 feet to a point of curvature with a 585.00 foot radius curve to the left;

Thence along the arc of said 585.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 26° 00' 00'' an arc distance of 265.47 feet to a point of compound curvature with a 843.74 foot radius curve to the left;

Thence along the arc of said 843.74 foot radius curve through a central angle of 25° 50' 11'' an arc length of 380.47 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence S 22° 45' 24'' E, 268.93 feet;

Thence, leaving said prolongation of the westerly line of Lincoln Street, S 65° 40' 40'' W, 5.20 feet to the westerly line of said Lincoln Street (102 feet wide);

Thence, following last said westerly line of Lincoln Street, S 24° 19' 20'' E, 315.25 feet to a point distant 60.00 feet measured at right angles from the centerline of El Camino Real (60 feet wide) as shown on the Official Plan Line Map of El Camino Real recorded in Book 2 of Official Plan Line Maps at page 141 therein;

Thence, leaving said westerly line of Lincoln Street, N 78° 36' 52'' E, 104.66 feet to the intersection with the easterly line of said Lincoln Street (102 feet wide);

Thence following said easterly line of Lincoln Street N 24° 19' 20'' W, 193.24 feet to a point of curvature with a 40.00 foot radius curve to the right;

Thence along the arc of said 40.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 123° 30' 46'' an arc distance of 86.23 feet to a point of reverse curvature with a 788.00 foot radius curvature to the left, last said point being on the southerly line of Civic Center Drive (formerly Scott Street, 70 feet wide);

Thence along the arc of said 788.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 33° 23' 16'' an arc length of 459.18 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence along the tangent to last said curve N 65° 48' 10'' E, 0.27 feet;

Thence N 24° 18' 20'' W, 756.17 feet;

Thence N 65° 42' 30'' E, 86.84 feet to a point on a 630.00 foot radius curve;

Thence from a tangent bearing N 89° 49' 39'' E, along the arc of last said 630.00 foot radius curve to the left through a central angle of 1° 43' 41'' an arc length of 19.00 feet;

Thence N 24° 20' 25'' W, 71.03 feet to the intersection with the northerly curved line (565.00 foot radius) of said Warburton Avenue;

Thence following the said northerly curved line of Warburton Avenue to the right from a tangent bearing N 89° 08' 43'' W, through a central angle of 28° 13' 30'' an arc distance of 278.33 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence, continuing to follow the said northerly line of Warburton Avenue, the following courses:

N 60° 55' 13'' W, 232.08 feet along the tangent to last said curve to a point of curvature with a 635.00 foot radius curve to the left;

Thence along the arc of said 635.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 29° 14' 57'' an arc length of 324.16 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence along the tangent to last said curve S 89° 49' 50'' W, 166.13 feet to a point of curvature with a 535.00 foot radius curve to the left;

Thence along the arc of last said 535.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 32° 28' 44'' an arc distance of 303.27 feet to a point of reverse curvature with a 465.00 foot radius curve to the right;

Thence along the arc of last said 465.00 foot radius curve through a central angle of 32° 20' 04'' an arc length of 262.42 feet to the point of tangency;

Thence along the tangent to last said curve S 89° 41' 10'' W, 110.00 feet to the point of beginning.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed from said district on or before the first day of October, 1964. (Ord. 1075. Formerly § 30A-13.2).

12.40.150 Stevens Creek Boulevard Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the Stevens Creek Boulevard Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, hereinafter designated Parcels A, B, C, D, E and F and more particularly described as follows:

PARCEL A

Beginning at a granite monument marking the intersection of the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard with the centerline of North Winchester Boulevard; said intersection is 1/4 section corner between Sections 14 and 15, Township 7 South, Range 1 West, M. D. B. & M;

Thence northerly along said centerline of North Winchester Boulevard 93 feet, more or less, to the intersection thereof with a line parallel to and distant northerly 93.00 feet from the aforesaid monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Thence easterly following said parallel line 995 feet, more or less, to the intersection of said parallel line with the westerly boundary of that certain parcel of land conveyed to Pioneer Investors Savings and Loan Association, a corporation, by deed recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Santa Clara County, California, in Book 3472 of Official Records at page 456 therein;

Thence southerly at right angles to said parallel line, 93 feet to a point in the aforesaid monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Thence westerly along said monument line 926 feet, more or less, to the easterly line of Winchester Boulevard;

Thence southerly 60 feet, more or less, along said easterly line to the intersection with a line parallel to and distant southerly 60.00 feet from the aforesaid monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Thence westerly along last said parallel line 68 feet, more or less, to the centerline of said Winchester Boulevard;

Thence northerly along said centerline of Winchester Boulevard 60 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.

The easterly boundaries and the principal southerly boundary of the herein described Parcel A beginning coincident with westerly and northerly boundaries of that certain parcel of land designated Parcel No. 1 of the Stevens Creek Underground District created by Ordinance No. 11518 of the City of San Jose, California.

PARCEL B

A uniform strip of land 135 feet wide and 2,445 feet, more or less, in length extending northerly 75 feet and southerly 60 feet measured at right angles from the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Being bounded on the east by the centerline of Winchester Boulevard and North Winchester Boulevard, said centerline being the westerly boundary of Parcel A described above; and

Being bounded on the west by the easterly line of Tyler Avenue (and the southerly prolongation thereof) as said avenue is shown on the map of Tract No. 323, Sweethome Manor, recorded in the Office of the aforesaid County Recorder in Book 2 of Maps at page 49 therein.

The southerly boundary of the herein described Parcel B is coincident in part with the northerly boundary of that certain parcel of land designated Parcel 2 in aforesaid Ordinance No. 11518 of the City of San Jose, California.

PARCEL C

A uniform strip of land 90 feet wide and 398 feet long, more or less, extending northerly 30 feet and southerly 60 feet measured at right angles from the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Being bounded on the east by the southerly prolongation of the easterly line of Tyler Avenue described above as the westerly boundary of Parcel B; and

Being bounded on the west by the southerly prolongation of the easterly line of Cypress Avenue as said avenue is shown on the map of Tract No. 322, Bel Ayre Manor, recorded in the Office of the aforesaid County Recorder in Book 12 of Maps at page 14 therein.

The southerly boundary of the herein described Parcel C is coincident with a portion of the northerly boundary of that certain parcel of land designated Parcel 2 in the aforesaid Ordinance No. 11518 of the City of San Jose.

PARCEL D

A uniform strip of land 135 feet wide and 1,214 feet long, more or less, extending northerly 75 feet and southerly 60 feet measured at right angles from the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Being bounded on the east by the easterly line of Cypress Avenue (and the southerly prolongation thereof) described above as the westerly boundary of Parcel C; and

Being bounded on the west by the westerly boundary (and the southerly prolongation thereof) of Lot 48, Tract No. 85, West San Jose Tract, as shown on the map of said tract recorded in the Office of the aforesaid County Recorder in Book 3 of Maps at page 32 therein.

The southerly boundary of the herein described Parcel D is coincident with a portion of the northerly boundary of that certain parcel of land designated Parcel 2 in the aforesaid Ordinance No. 11518 of the City of San Jose.

PARCEL E

A uniform strip of land 90 feet wide and 110 feet long extending northerly 30 feet and southerly 60 feet from the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Being bounded on the east and west by the southerly prolongation of the easterly and westerly boundaries respectively of that certain 1.83 acre parcel of land conveyed to the County of Santa Clara, California, by deed recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of said County in Book 5128 of Official Records at page 1 therein.

The easterly boundary of the herein described Parcel E is coincident with the westerly boundary of Parcel D described above.

PARCEL F

A uniform strip of land 135 feet wide and 8,998 feet, more or less, in length extending northerly 75 feet and southerly 60 feet measured at right angles from the monument line of Stevens Creek Boulevard;

Being bounded on the east by the westerly boundary, and the southerly prolongation thereof, of that certain 1.83 acre parcel of land conveyed to the County of Santa Clara, California, by deed recorded in the Office of the aforesaid County Recorder in Book 5128 of Official Records at page 1 therein; and

Being bounded on the west by the easterly plan line of Lawrence Station Road as shown on the map of said road recorded in the Office of said County Recorder in Book 2 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 98 and 99 therein.

The easterly boundary of the herein described Parcel F is coincident with the westerly boundary of Parcel E described above; the southerly boundary of said Parcel F is coincident with the northerly boundaries of Parcels 3, 4 and 5 in the aforesaid Ordinance No. 11518 of the City of San Jose.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed from said district on or before the first day of September, 1964. (Formerly § 30A-13.3).

12.40.160 El Camino Real Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the El Camino Real Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district to wit:

All that certain tract of land, situated in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, bounded on the west by the corporate limits line coincident with the westerly boundary of those certain lands annexed on Lawrence 1-D by Ord. No. 962 of said City, bounded on the east by the westerly line (or southerly prolongation thereof) of that certain 1.815 acre parcel of land shown and delineated upon Record of Survey filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder of said County, in Book 191 of Official Records on page 47 therein, and bounded on the north and south by lines drawn parallel to and distant (one north, one south) 75 feet measured at right angles from the centerline of El Camino Real as said centerline is shown on “Official Plan Line Map, El Camino Real, from Lawrence Station Road to Scott Boulevard,” filed for record in the Office of the said County Recorder in Book 2 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 103 to 105 inclusive therein and “Official Plan Line Map, El Camino Real from Scott Boulevard to De La Cruz Overpass” filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder in Book 2 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 141 and 142 therein.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed on or before the fifteenth day of May, 1968. (Ord. 1137; Ord. 1156 § 1, 2-7-67. Formerly § 30A-13.4).

12.40.170 Kifer Underground District.
The following territory hereby named the Kifer Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, hereinafter designated Parcels A, B, and C, and more particularly described as follows:

PARCEL A

A strip of land 40 feet wide, bounded on the east by the west line of Coffin Road, as said road is mentioned in Ordinance No. 731, City of Santa Clara, California, annexing to said City those certain lands designated as Kifer N. 1A; and bounded on the west by the northerly prolongation of the east line of those certain lands annexed as Jefferson No. 32 by Ordinance No. 1061, said City; and lying contiguous to the northerly of the following described line:

Beginning in the said west line of Coffin Road at the point of intersection thereof with a south line of those certain lands annexed as Jefferson No. 2 by Ordinance No. 679, said City (coincident here with the north line of Kifer Road as said road is mentioned in said Ordinance No. 679);

Thence following said south line of lands annexed as Jefferson No. 2, 1,390 feet more or less westerly to a point in the said prolongation of the east line of lands annexed as Jefferson No. 32.

PARCEL B

A strip of land 60 feet wide and 3,924 feet more or less in length, bounded on the east by the aforementioned east line of lands annexed as Jefferson No. 32, bounded on the west by the centerline of Lawrence Station Road, as same is mentioned in last said ordinance, and lying contiguous to and northerly of the southerly boundary of said lands annexed as Jefferson No. 32.

PARCEL C

A strip of land 40 feet wide and 2,555 feet more or less in length, bounded on the east by the aforementioned center line of Lawrence Station Road, bounded on the west by the west line, or prolongation thereof, of said lands annexed as Jefferson No. 32, and lying contiguous to and northerly of the said southerly boundary of last mentioned lands.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed from said district on or before the first day of July, 1967. (Ord. 1138. Formerly § 30A-13.5).

12.40.180 Space Industrial Park Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the Space Industrial Park Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the County of Santa Clara, State of California within the following described boundaries:

Beginning at a point where the westerly line of the land of Pacific Gas and Electric Company intersects the northerly line of the frontage road on the north side of Central Expressway, said point of beginning being northerly along said westerly line 66.50 feet, more or less, from the northwesterly corner of Parcel “H” as shown on that certain Record of Survey recorded in Book 189 of Maps at Page 19 therein, in the Office of the County Recorder, Santa Clara County, California;

Thence westerly along said northerly line of the frontage road 2,271.23 feet, more or less, to the easterly line of Scott Boulevard;

Thence westerly along the extension of said northerly line of the frontage road 123.46 feet, more or less, to the westerly line of Scott Boulevard;

Thence southerly along said westerly line of Scott Boulevard 98.61 feet, more or less, to the northerly line of Central Expressway;

Thence westerly along said northerly line of Central Expressway 1,650.41 feet, more or less, to the easterly line of San Tomas Expressway;

Thence northerly along said easterly line of San Tomas Expressway and the extension thereof, 1,908 feet more or less, to the northerly line of Duane Avenue;

Thence easterly along said northerly line of Duane Avenue, 4,547.78 feet, more or less, to the northerly end of Pico Way;

Thence easterly along said northerly end of Pico Way, 39.85 feet to the easterly line of Pico Way;

Thence southerly along said easterly line of Pico Way, 299.24 feet, more or less, to the easterly extension of the northerly boundary of that certain parcel of land belonging to Pacific Gas and Electric Company known as the Kifer Substation;

Thence westerly along said easterly extension of the northerly boundary, said northerly boundary and the westerly extension of said northerly boundary 416 feet, more or less, to the first said westerly boundary of the land of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;

Thence southerly along said westerly boundary 936.32 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning;

Excepting therefrom all land lying within the Pacific Gas and Electric Company easements, 140 feet in width as described in documents recorded in Book 371 of Deeds at Page 451, Book 3098 at Page 26, Book 6024 at Page 43, Book 6047 at Page 93 and Book 6102 at Page 306, Records of the Santa Clara County Recorder.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed on or before the first day of July, 1970. (Ord. 1183 § 1, 2-20-68. Formerly § 30A-13.6).

12.40.190 Shulman Avenue Underground District.
The following territory, hereby named the Shulman Avenue Underground District, is hereby designated as an underground district, to wit:

All that real property situated in the County of Santa Clara, State of California, within the following described boundaries:

All of those certain lands situated in the City of Santa Clara, California, consisting of a certain portion of Shulman Avenue and prolongation thereof, together with a fifteen (15) foot wide strip of land adjoining both the northerly and southerly sides of said avenue and lying within the boundary more particularly described below:

Beginning at a point in a line parallel to and 15 feet southerly measured at right angles from the southerly line of Shulman Avenue as said avenue is shown on the map of Tract 1821 filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder, Santa Clara County, California in Book 73 of Maps at pages 36 and 37; distant easterly along said parallel line 8 feet from the westerly line of Lot 3 of said Tract 1821;

Thence along said parallel line N 89° 45' E, 830 feet, more or less, to the westerly line of Ronald Street as shown on said Tract 1821;

Thence S 87° 50' 28'' E, 488 feet, more or less, to a point in the Westerly line of Lot 15, Tract 412, a map of which is filed for record in said County Recorder’s Office in Book 22 of Maps at pages 2 and 3; said point lies 15 feet southerly of the northwest corner of said Lot 15;

Thence N 89° 44' 25'' E, 377 feet along a line parallel to and 15 feet southerly measured at right angles from the northerly boundary of said Tract 412 and the easterly prolongation thereof to a point in a line designated as an Official Plan Line of Lafayette Street, a map of which is filed for record in said County Recorder’s office in Book 3 of Official Plan Line Maps at pages 56 and 57; said Official Plan Line lies parallel to and 50 feet southwesterly measured at right angles from the centerline of Lafayette Street;

Thence following said Official Plan Line N 16° 42' 01'' E, 153 feet, more or less, to a point in a line parallel to and 15 feet northerly measured at right angles from the southerly line of the three parcels of land as shown on that certain Record of Survey filed for record in the Office of said County Recorder in Book 103 of Maps at page 38;

Thence S 89° 44' 25'' W, 335 feet along last said parallel line to a point in the westerly boundary of said Record of Survey; said point lies also in the easterly line of Lot 2 of aforesaid Tract 1821;

Thence S 86° 00' 20'' W, 487 feet, more or less, to a point in the westerly line of those lands conveyed to Shaw, et ux, by Deed filed in the Office of said County Recorder in Book 4229 of Official Records at page 68; last said point is the point of intersection of last said westerly line with a line parallel to and 15 feet northerly measured at right angles from the northerly line of aforesaid Shulman Avenue as shown on the map of said Tract 1821;

Thence following last said parallel line S 89° 45' W, 740 feet, more or less, to a point in the easterly line of those lands conveyed to Gass, et ux, by Deed filed in Book 7281, of said Official Records in Book 381;

Thence along the arc of a tangent 15-foot radius curve to the right through a central angle of 70° 31' 44'' an arc distance of 18.46 feet to a point of reverse curvature;

Thence along the arc of a 90 feet radius curve to the left through a central angle of 76° 55' 22'' an arc distance of 120.83 feet to a point in a line parallel to and 8 feet easterly measured at right angles from the westerly line of Lot 2 and said Tract 1821;

Thence S 0° 12' 00'' W, 134.63 feet parallel with last said westerly line to the point of beginning.

Any and all poles and overhead wires situated within the boundaries of the hereinabove described district shall be removed on or before the thirty-first day of October, 1969. (Ord. 1198 § 1, 11-12-68; Ord. 1203 § 1, 2-4-69. Formerly § 30A-13.7).

12.40.200 Enforcement.
Any person, whether acting for himself or itself or for another person, who or which shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article or with the provisions of any notice authorized by the provisions of this article, shall be subject to the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, which provides that the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this article as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Ord. 1070; Ord. 1531 § 13, 9-17-85. Formerly § 30A-14).

12.40.210 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of the article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The City Council of this City hereby declares that it would have adopted this article and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1070. Formerly § 30A-15).

Article II. Underground Utility Districts Created on or after March 1, 1969

12.40.220 Alternative procedures applicable to districts created on or after March 1, 1969.
All underground utility districts established on or after March 1, 1969, may be established pursuant to the procedures contained in this Article II, which procedures are alternative to any other procedure from time to time available under the law. Nothing herein shall be deemed to supersede or control the provisions of SCCC Titles 17 or 18, under which the installation of underground utility facilities is required without the creation of an underground utility district, nor is anything herein to be construed so as to preclude the City from establishing any such districts under any special assessment procedures, or otherwise. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1243 § 1, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-16).

12.40.230 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, certain words are defined as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-17).

12.40.240 Commission.
As used in this article, “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-18).

12.40.250 Person.
As used in this article, “person” shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization or business trust and their agents and employees. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-19).

12.40.260 Pole.
As used in this article, “pole” means and includes any pole, tower, support, guy-stub, crossarm, brace, insulator, attachment, platform or any other structure, device or apparatus used for the support of wires. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-20).

12.40.270 Property.
As used in this article, “property” means any parcel of real property, including buildings, and/or other structures thereon. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-21).

12.40.280 Utility.
As used in this article, “utility” means all persons or entities supplying the public with electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-22).

12.40.290 Wire.
As used in this article, “wire” means and includes any wire, transformer, cable, conductor, cutout, switch, communication circuit, appliance or any other device or apparatus, by, through, over or by means of which electricity has been or may be transmitted, conducted, conveyed, distributed or supplied for the purpose of providing light, heat, power, telephone, television, communication and telegraph or other similar or associated service. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-23).

12.40.300 Creation of underground utility districts – Hearing and notice.
The City Council may, from time to time, consult with the affected utilities and call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare require and it is in the general public interest for one or more of the reasons contained in SCCC 12.40.310 that existing poles and overhead wires within designated areas of the City be removed therefrom and thereafter prohibited and that wires and associated facilities for transmitting, conducting, conveying, distributing or supplying electricity to provide light, heat, power, telephone, telegraph, communication, television or other similar or associated service be installed underground.

Written notice of the time and place of any such hearing shall be given, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to all persons who own any property within the proposed underground utility district as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and all utilities who own, control or possess poles or overhead wires within the proposed underground utility district. Each such notice shall be given by the City Manager by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the owner at his/her address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or if no address is shown, addressed to the owner at the address of the property. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-24).

12.40.310 Creation of underground utility district.
If, after any such public hearing, the City Council finds and determines that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare require and it is in the general public interest for one or more of the following reasons that existing poles and overhead wires within a designated area of the City be removed therefrom and be thereafter prohibited and that wires and associated facilities for transmitting, conducting, conveying, distributing or supplying electricity for the purpose of providing light, heat, power, telephone, telegraph, communication, television or other similar or associated service be installed underground:

(a) Such removal and replacement underground will eliminate, and such prohibition will avoid, an unusually heavy concentration of poles and overhead wires within said area;

(b) The public streets or rights-of-way within said area are extensively used by the general public and carry a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and

(c) The public streets or rights-of-way within said area adjoin or pass through a civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public;

the City Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order and require such removal, prohibition and underground installation therein. Such resolution shall contain a description of the area so designated, shall fix the time within which such removal shall be completed and within which underground installation shall be completed, and within which persons owning any property within the district as shown on the last equalized assessment roll must be ready to receive light, heat, power, telephone, telegraph, communication, television or other similar or associated service by means of underground wires and facilities. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal, and for the underground installation of wires or facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-25).

12.40.320 Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to maintain.
It shall be unlawful, after the adoption of a resolution establishing an underground district, for any person or utility to keep, maintain, continue, use, operate, or employ within such district any poles or overhead wires after the time specified in the resolution for removal of poles and overhead wires in such district, or to authorize or permit such action. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-26).

12.40.330 Poles and overhead wires – Unlawful to erect, install, etc.
It shall be unlawful, after the adoption of a resolution establishing an underground district, for any person or utility to erect, install, extend or construct any poles or overhead wires within such district, or to authorize or permit such action. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-27).

12.40.340 Responsibility of owner to remove.
Each person who owns or occupies any property in such district wherein are situated any poles or overhead wires shall remove all existing overhead wires and poles on such property, except those possessed, controlled or owned by any utility, within the time provided for in the resolution creating the said district. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-28).

12.40.350 Responsibility of owner to construct.
Each person who owns or occupies any property in such district wherein are situated any poles or overhead wires shall provide, construct and install all electrical, communication and other facility changes, and all other facilities or changes, on his/her property necessary to receive service from the underground wires and facilities required to be provided by the supplying utility or utilities as soon as such service is available, and shall provide, construct and install that portion of the service connection on his/her property between the wires and facilities required to be furnished by the affected utility and termination facility on or within the property being served within the time provided for in the resolution creating the said district, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the supplying utility or utilities. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1243 § 1, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-29).

12.40.360 Disconnection of service at request of owner or occupant.
In the event that any person owning or occupying any property in such district wherein are situated any poles or overhead wires does not wish to comply with the provisions of SCCC 12.40.350, he shall forthwith request and permit the affected utility to disconnect electrical and communication service to his/her property. The affected utility shall thereupon disconnect such service. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-30).

12.40.370 Responsibility of utility to remove and construct.
Each utility who owns, possesses or controls any existing poles or overhead wires in such district shall remove such poles and overhead wires from the district on or before the time specified in the resolution creating such district. In the event underground construction is needed to provide service to the properties within the district, each utility which supplies electric, communication or similar or associated service by wires and poles to the properties within the district shall furnish and install that portion of the underground wires and associated equipment and facilities to provide such service to such properties required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs within the time provided for in the resolution creating the said district. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1243 § 1, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-31).

12.40.380 Responsibility of City to remove.
City shall remove, at its own expense, all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed by this article in sufficient time in order to enable the person or utility required to remove such poles to accomplish such removal within the time specified in the resolution creating the underground utility district within which such poles are located. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-32).

12.40.390 Disconnection of service.
In the event that the owner or occupant of any property in an underground district wherein are situated any poles and overhead wires shall fail to remove such poles and wires pursuant to SCCC 12.40.340 and/or shall fail to comply with SCCC 12.40.350, the City Manager shall notify the affected utilities of such noncompliance, in which event the affected utilities shall have the right to, and shall thereupon disconnect electrical and communication service to such property. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-33).

12.40.400 Notice to utilities.
After the adoption of a resolution designating any area in the City as an underground utility district, the City Manager shall give, on behalf of the City, to all affected utilities owning, possessing or controlling any poles or overhead wires in the district written notice of the creation of the underground utility district and of their responsibilities and obligations under this article. Such notice shall be given within twenty (20) days after the adoption of said resolution. Each said notice shall be given by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the utility. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-34).

12.40.410 Notice to property owners.
After the adoption of a resolution by the City Council designating any area in the City as an underground utility district, the City Manager shall give, on behalf of the City, to each person who owns or occupies any property in such district, wherein are situated any poles or overhead wires, written notice of the creation of such district and of his/her obligations and responsibilities under SCCC 12.40.340, 12.40.350, and 12.40.360. Said notice shall also indicate that unless each such person timely discharges such responsibilities and obligations that his/her service will be disconnected and that the property owned or occupied by such person may be assessed for certain costs pursuant to SCCC 12.40.420. Each said notice shall be given within twenty (20) days after the effective date of said resolution by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to “occupant (supply address of property),” to the address of such property and by depositing additional notices to each owner of such property to his/her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, or as known to the City Manager, or if none appears on said roll and is unknown to the City Manager to the address of the property. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1243 § 1, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-35).

12.40.420 Procedure for performing work and making cost a lien on property benefited.
In the event that any person who owns or occupies any property within the district does not comply with the provisions of SCCC 12.40.340 and/or 12.40.350 within the time provided for in the resolution creating the district, the City Council may, in the event it wishes, order the City Manager to give an additional notice to each such person guilty of such noncompliance.

Such notice may be given either by personal service or by mail. Service by mail shall be effected by depositing same in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to “occupant of (supply address of property),” to the address of such property and by depositing additional notices to each owner of such property to his/her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll of County or as known to the City Manager or if none appears on such roll and is unknown to the City Manager to the address of the property. Service by mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.

Such notice shall adequately describe what work must be done and what facilities and equipment must be provided and installed for such person to comply with SCCC 12.40.340 and 12.40.350 and shall state that if such work is not done and such facilities and equipment not provided and installed within a specified period of time, not to be less than ten days, after the mailing of such notice, the City of Santa Clara will perform such work and provide and install such facilities and equipment, in which event the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property on which such work is performed and for which such facilities and equipment were provided and installed and become a lien upon such property.

Upon completion of such work and providing and installing of such facilities and equipment, the City Manager shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that such work has been completed and such facilities and equipment provided and installed and the cost thereof together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council, upon receipt of such report, shall fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of performing such work and the providing and installing of such facilities and equipment, which said time shall not be less than ten days after the setting of such hearing.

The City Manager shall forthwith, after the time for hearing such protests has been fixed, give a notice in writing to the occupant of such property and to the owner thereof in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of notice to perform such work and provide and install said equipment and facilities, of the time and place that the Council will consider the report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall be given at least ten days before the day set for the hearing of protests. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the City Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the City Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made and the City Manager shall turn over to the County assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid. Said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the property upon which said assessment was not paid and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes against the property. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable. The amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levying, collection and enforcement of City taxes and County taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1243 § 1, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-36).

12.40.430 Exception – Poles for street lighting, etc.
Poles owned by City and used for City-owned equipment, consisting of street lights, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, remote control signal antenna, or other similar type equipment and the wires within or on said poles shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-37).

12.40.440 Exception – Antennas, etc.
Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by the utility for furnishing communications services shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1243 § 2, 7-20-71. Formerly § 30A-37.1).

12.40.450 Exception – Facilities transmitting electric energy in excess of specified voltages and for mass transit conveyances.
Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead facilities used for the transmission of electric energy with potential difference of more than fifty thousand (50,000) volts or any overhead circuit with a current carrying capacity of four hundred (400) amperes or more at twelve thousand (12,000) volts line to line or direct current facilities used for mass transit conveyances shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71; Ord. 1530 § 1, 8-27-85. Formerly § 30A-38).

12.40.460 Exception – Radio and television antennas.
Community television and radio antennas, any other television and radio antennas and supports, guys, lead-in wires, insulators and other associated structural supports for such antenna located on individual private premises, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. This does not exempt CATV systems, or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-39).

12.40.470 Exception – Emergencies and hardship.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, existing poles and overhead wires may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without approval of the City Council to provide emergency service.

Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, in cases of emergency or where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of this article, the City Council may in any resolution designating and creating an underground utility district permit exceptions or variances to the provisions of this article under such conditions as it deems proper. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-40).

12.40.480 Exception – Transformers, etc.
Surface mounted transformers and switches, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be situated above ground if they are used for the purpose of providing service within the underground utility district and are used in connection with the underground wires and associated underground facilities within said district. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-41).

12.40.490 Exception – Council may make exceptions.
In any resolution designating and declaring an underground utility district, the City Council may, whenever it finds and determines that the public convenience and necessity so requires, provide that certain existing poles and/or overhead wires within such underground utility district shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-42).

12.40.500 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this article or by resolution creating an underground utility district pursuant to this article cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act must be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-43).

12.40.510 Severability.
The Council of the City of Santa Clara hereby declares that it would have passed and does hereby pass this article phrase by phrase, sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and does hereby declare that the provisions of this article are severable and if for any reason any phrase, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 5-11-71. Formerly § 30A-45).

Chapter 12.45
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

12.45.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 12.

12.45.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 12.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 12 [entitled "Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 12 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Chapter 12.50
UNPERMITTED CAMPING AND LODGING ON PUBLIC STREETS, PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY, AND IN PUBLIC PARKS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:

12.50.010    Unpermitted camping and lodging prohibited.

12.50.020    Construction with other laws.

12.50.010 Unpermitted camping and lodging prohibited.
(a) No person shall camp or lodge on a public street (including in a vehicle parked on a public street), on publicly owned property, and other prohibited public places; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit camping in public campgrounds pursuant to a permit or license authorized under Federal, State or local statute or ordinance.

(b) “Camping” means residing in or using any public street, publicly owned property, public park, or other prohibited public place for living accommodation, lodging, or sleeping purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repeated periods of time not associated with ordinary use of the street, property, or public place, with one’s possessions or while storing one’s possessions (including, but not limited to, clothing, sleeping bags, bed rolls, blankets, sheets, hammocks, or other sleeping implements, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and food or beverages), cooking or consuming meals, or lodging in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person is using the street, property, or place as a living, lodging, or sleeping accommodation regardless of his or her intent, or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaged.

(c) “Prohibited public places” means any public place not designated as a public campground pursuant to Federal, State, or local statute or ordinance and shall include the following:

(1) Public streets, sidewalks, alleyways, passageways, and rights-of-way;

(2) Publicly owned property;

(3) Public parks;

(4) Public parking lots, whether publicly owned or privately owned;

(5) Public landscaped areas, whether publicly owned or privately owned and maintained pursuant to a public landscape easement;

(6) Private property that is readily accessible to the general public, or is otherwise open to common or general use or view;

(7) Vacant lots;

(8) Drainage culverts and basins. (Ord. 1834 § 1, 4-15-08).

12.50.020 Construction with other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect, supersede, or otherwise prevent private causes of action for trespass, or other public civil, penal, or administrative prosecution for trespass or maintaining a nuisance under State or local law. (Ord. 1834 § 1, 4-15-08).

Chapter 12.60
FILM AND VIDEO PRODUCTION
Sections:

12.60.010    Purpose.

12.60.020    Definitions.

12.60.030    Permits and exemptions.

12.60.040    Rules and regulations.

12.60.050    Applicants and issuance.

12.60.060    Liability provisions.

12.60.070    Violation and enforcement of chapter.

12.60.080    Filming regulations.

12.60.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules governing the issuance of permits for film and video production within the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that still photographers and motion picture, television, video, commercial and nontheatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public safety and the protection of property. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(a) “Charitable films” shall mean commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.

(b) “Film” shall mean and include, but is not limited to, feature motion pictures, digital video and videotape recordings, television motion pictures, commercials, and stills.

(c) “News media” shall mean the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen.

(d) “Production” shall mean the activity of making a film for commercial or noncommercial purposes on property owned by the City, or on private property within the jurisdiction of the City.

(e) “Studio” shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities, motion or still photography, are regularly conducted upon the premises.

(f) “Student filming” means all production made by a student of a public or private educational institution to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement and from which no profit is made including posting on social media Internet outlets. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.030 Permits and exemptions.
(a) No person, including students, shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of film production without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City Manager’s office or the City Manager’s designee.

(b) Exemptions.

(1) News Media. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media, publishing or broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.

(2) Family Video. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for private family use.

(3) Studio Filming. Filming activities, motion or still photography conducted at a studio.

(4) Charitable Films. Projects that qualify under Section 501(c)(3) are exempt from permit-related fees but require a permit.

(5) Student Filming. Project will be considered on a case-by-case basis as to whether permit-related fees will be waived, but a permit is always required. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.040 Rules and regulations.
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council, governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. The City Manager or her or his designee shall also provide for the issuance of permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria:

(a) The health and safety of all persons;

(b) Mitigation of disruption to all persons within the affected area;

(c) The safety of property within the city; and

(d) Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.050 Applicants and issuance.
(a) The issuing authority shall be the City Manager or her or his designee.

(b) The following information shall be included in the application:

(1) The representative of the property, the address and the place at which the activity is to be conducted;

(2) The specific location at such address or place;

(3) The inclusive hours and dates such activity will occur;

(4) A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

(5) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity (e.g., the location manager);

(6) The name, address and telephone number of the production company conducting the activity;

(7) The exact number of personnel to be involved;

(8) Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and

(9) The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved.

(c) Any fee charged for the issuance of a film and video production permit shall be assessed on a cost recovery basis, as may be set or modified from time to time by resolution of the City Council. No fee which is greater than the actual cost incurred shall be charged by the City for film production which occurs entirely on private property. The actual cost will be determined by each department involved.

(d) The production company shall reimburse the City for any personnel provided to the company (e.g., police and fire) for the purpose of assisting the production.

(e) Upon the request of the applicant, the issuing authority shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.060 Liability provisions.
(a) Before a permit is issued for film production on public property, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the City as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths and property damage. The City, its City Council, commissions, officers, employees, agents and volunteers shall be named as additional insureds. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty (30) days’ written notice to the City. A copy of the certificate will remain on file. Student applicants must conform to the provisions listed in this subsection by providing a certificate of insurance from their educational institution.

(b) Aircraft liability coverage in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) with policy number, effective and expiration dates is required in a separate aircraft insurance certificate.

(c) An applicant shall conform to all applicable Federal and State requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

(d) An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the City prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.

(e) To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to submit a refundable security deposit, amount to be determined by the City Manager or her or his designee. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City, the security deposit may be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.070 Violation and enforcement of chapter.
If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or permit issued pursuant thereto, the City may cancel the permit. The City further reserves the right to initiate criminal, civil and/or administrative penalties pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, depending upon the nature of the violation. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

12.60.080 Filming regulations.
(a) An applicant will be required to submit a permit request, along with all necessary insurance information, at least three working days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required. If such activity interferes with traffic or involves potential public safety hazards, an application may be required at least five working days in advance.

(b) The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to storage of equipment not in use and cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site.

(c) An applicant is required to obtain the property owner’s permission, consent and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the City.

(d) When filming in a flood control channel, an applicant must vacate the channel when permit indicates because of water releases. Please note that when filming in or on flood control properties, additional entities may be required to be named as additional insureds. Applicant is solely responsible for determining the identity of such agencies and their insurance and/or indemnification requirements.

(e) If the applicant must park equipment, trucks and/or cars in zones that will not permit it, temporary “No Parking” signs must be posted. The applicant must also obtain permission to string cable across sidewalks, or from generator to service point.

(f) For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant must use Santa Clara Police Department personnel to comply with all traffic control requirements deemed necessary.

(1) An applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the Manual of Traffic Controls, State of California Department of Transportation by a properly licensed/certified person. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken.

(2) Traffic may be restricted to one twelve (12)-foot lane of traffic and/or stopped intermittently. The period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the City, based on location and time of day.

(3) Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior approval of the appropriate City representative.

(4) Unless authorized by the City, camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws.

(5) Any emergency roadwork or construction by City crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the City, shall have priority over filming activities.

(g) When parking in a parking lot, an applicant may be billed according to the current rate schedule established by the City.

(h) All residents and merchants within a two hundred (200)-foot radius of the film location must receive notice of filming at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the first day of filming. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 9-21-10).

Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters:

13.05    Operation of an Electric Utility

13.10    Sewers

13.15    Water

13.20    Storm Drains and Discharges

13.25    Enforcement of Title

Chapter 13.05
OPERATION OF AN ELECTRIC UTILITY
Sections:

13.05.010    General purpose, intent and authority.

13.05.020    Definitions.

13.05.030    Electric Department rate schedules and rules and regulations.

13.05.040    Adoption and amendment of Electric Department rules and regulations rate schedules.

13.05.050    Direct access program.

13.05.060    Competition transition charge.

13.05.070    Theft of electric services – Unauthorized tampering with or modification of electric utility metering devices – Unauthorized access to electric services.

13.05.080    Reserved.

13.05.090    Enforcement

13.05.100    Violation of this chapter or rules and regulations.

13.05.110    Reserved.

13.05.120    Reserved.

13.05.130    Costs of enforcement.

13.05.010 General purpose, intent and authority.
(a) General Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide the basis for the City of Santa Clara, California (“City”), through its Electric Department, doing business as Silicon Valley Power (“SVP”), to own and operate an electric utility to provide electric power generation, transmission, and distribution services to its electric utility customers.

(b) Authority. Pursuant to the provisions of Article XI (entitled “Local Government”), of the State of California Constitution and the authority granted to the City in the City Charter of the City of Santa Clara, California, the City owns and operates an electric utility which has and will, among other things:

(1) Acquire and/or generate electric power;

(2) Arrange for the transmission and distribution of such power;

(3) Operate and maintain equipment and facilities necessary to provide electric services;

(4) Recover all costs associated with its investment in electric generation, transmission and distribution facilities, operation and maintenance costs and all other expenses related to the operation of the electric utility; and

(5) Bill for and collect electric fees, rates and charges related to the electric services provided to its electric utility customers as it deems appropriate in the ordinary course of business for the benefit of its citizens and electric utility customers. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.020 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. The following definitions are intended to be an addition to SCCC 1.05.020, Definitions and rules of construction. For convenience of reference, some of the definitions are repeated hereinbelow.

(a) “City” means the City of Santa Clara, California.

(b) “City Code” or “Code” means “The Code of the City of Santa Clara, California.”

(c) “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(d) “Customer.” See electric utility customer definition (subsection (j) of this section).

(e) “Competition transition charge” or “CTC” means a usage-based charge which shall be imposed by the City on each monthly utility bill upon each customer, whether the customer buys energy from the City or a third party energy service provider (see subsection (k) of this section), and it will be calculated to provide for full recovery of stranded costs (see subsection (p) of this section).

(f) “Direct access program” means the City approved program which allows its electric utility customers to purchase the energy component of their electric service from third party energy service providers, subject to certain conditions.

(g) “Distribution costs” means all SVP (see subsection (o) of this section) costs associated with the use of non-generation facilities related to electric service, rated at less than one hundred fifteen thousand (115,000) volts. (Note: see “Transmission costs,” subsection (q) of this section for non-generation facilities rated more than one hundred fifteen thousand (115,000) volts.)

(h) “Electric Department” or “electric utility” means the Electric Department of the City (see subsection (o) of this section, “Silicon Valley Power” or “SVP” for the fictitious business name).

(i) “Electric service” or “electric utility service” means those services, including but not limited to, distribution, transmission and generation services, provided by the City and for which fees or rates are charged by the City.

(j) “Electric utility customer” or “customer” means any person or entity in whose name electric utility service is rendered, regardless of the identity of the actual user of the electric utility service.

(k) “Energy service provider” or “ESP” means a person or entity other than SVP which provides electric energy to an electric utility customer, subject to the terms of the respective agreements between:

(1) The City and the ESP; and

(2) The City and the participating electric utility customer.

(l) “Person” means any individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, social club, fraternal organization, trust, estate, receiver, or any other entity.

(m) “Rate schedule” means one or more documents which set forth the rates, charges and conditions for a particular class or type of electric service, including but not limited to, the title, type of service, applicability, rates, conditions, and references to rules and regulations.

(n) “Rules and regulations” means a document which is the compilation of the terms, conditions, rules and regulations under which electric service is supplied by the City, but excluding the utility rate schedules, and which is adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(o) “Silicon Valley Power” or “SVP” means the fictitious business name of City’s Electric Department.

(p) “Stranded costs” means costs of the City incurred to purchase, generate, and transmit electric energy which cannot be recovered, avoided, or mitigated under competitive market conditions existing after the effective date of the commencement of a direct access program. Stranded costs include, but are not limited to:

(1) Debt service on bonds or other obligations of the City or any joint powers agency to which the City is a party (including debt service on any bonds or other obligations issued after the effective date of the direct access program to refinance such bonds or other obligations);

(2) Other financing or refinancing costs associated with generation and transmission assets; and

(3) Payment obligations on contracts (including contracts with joint powers agencies) originally acquired or incurred prior to the effective date of the direct access program.

(q) “Transmission costs” means all SVP costs associated with the use of non-generation facilities related to electric service, rated at one hundred fifteen thousand (115,000) volts or more. (Note: see “Distribution costs,” subsection (g) of this section, for non-generation facilities rated less than one hundred fifteen thousand (115,000) volts.) (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.030 Electric Department rate schedules and rules and regulations.
(a) Effect of Rate Schedules and Rules and Regulations. Unless otherwise set forth in the terms of an agreement between the City and an electric utility customer, all electric energy and power (also referred to herein as “energy”) furnished to an electric utility customer by the City shall be supplied and charged to, and paid for by, such customer according to the applicable rate schedule, and pursuant to the provisions of the rules and regulations, adopted by the City Council. A copy of the duly adopted rate schedules and rules and regulations, as such documents currently exist (and which may be subsequently amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council), shall at all times be on file in the office of the City Clerk and one copy shall be on file in the Electric Department and shall be open to public inspection during normal office hours.

(b) Responsible Parties. By receiving and accepting electric utility services, electric utility customers of the electric utility shall be considered to have given express consent to, and be bound by, the provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations or rate schedules adopted or amended pursuant to this chapter.

(c) Responsibility for Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the City Manager and/or any person the City Manager may designate.

(d) Conflicts with Other Provisions of the City Code. In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other chapter(s) of the City Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control, unless to do so would be inconsistent with the stated purpose of this chapter.

(e) Incorporation by Reference. The rules and regulations, rate schedules, or any amendments or revisions thereto which may subsequently be adopted by the City Council by resolution, shall be incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if set forth in full in this chapter. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.040 Adoption and amendment of Electric Department rules and regulations rate schedules.
(a) Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Resolution. The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time as it deems necessary for the administration or implementation of the intent of this chapter, review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended rules and regulations concerning the operation or administration of the electric utility. Such amendments may be made in response to changing facts or circumstances which affect the operation of SVP or as a result of changes to or requirements of any local ordinance or any applicable law and/or regulation implemented by the Federal or State governments, or their respective regulatory agency(ies).

(b) Adoption of Rate Schedules by Resolution. The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time as it deems necessary, review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended electric utility rate schedules which include utility rates set at a level necessary to meet the City’s contractual obligations and debt service requirements and to cover the cost of constructing, operating and maintaining the electric utility. Such amendments may be made in response to changing facts or circumstances which affect the operation of the electric utility or as a result of changes to, or requirements of any local ordinance and/or applicable law(s) and regulation(s) implemented by the Federal or State governments, or their respective regulatory agency(ies). (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.050 Direct access program.
(a) Adoption of Direct Access Program. Pursuant to the legal authority referred to in this chapter (or available to a charter city from any source of authority), the City Council hereby adopts a direct access program which provides eligible participating electric utility customers the right to purchase the energy component of their electric service from an ESP subject to the conditions set forth in agreements between the City and each participating electric utility customer and energy service providers, which agreements include express conditions regarding the payment of a CTC. The terms and conditions of this direct access program shall further the provisions of City Council Resolution No. 6620 in which the Council concluded that it is in the best interest of the City, its citizens and electric utility customers to establish and commence implementation of an electric utility direct access program as defined therein or as such terms and conditions of the direct access program may by subsequently modified by resolution of the City Council. The commencement of the direct access program is specifically subject to the condition precedent that the City is authorized to collect the CTC.

(b) Conditions for Electric Utility Customer’s Participation in the Direct Access Program. The direct access program conditions referred to in subsection (a) of this section are intended, in part, to guarantee the City’s ability to meet its financial obligations related to the construction, operation and maintenance of its electric utility system. Such condition shall include, but are not limited to the following:

(1) Each participating electric utility customer shall submit a direct access service request (“DASR”) which includes an acknowledgment of the obligation of the participating electric utility customer to pay the required CTC to the City in exchange for the right to purchase energy from an ESP; and

(2) Each ESP shall execute a separate agreement with the City for each electric utility customer which, among other things:

(A) Authorizes the ESP to sell electric energy to participating eligible electric utility customers;

(B) Acknowledges that recovery of the CTC is essential to the direct access program; and

(C) Provides that such agreement shall terminate by its own terms in the event that a court finds that the direct access program or the CTC is invalid or unenforceable.

(c) Agreement Form. The form of such DASR and ESP agreement shall be adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.060 Competition transition charge.
(a) Integral Part of the Direct Access Program. The CTC is an integral part of the City’s direct access program, and the implementation of the CTC will be subject to legal validation. The revenues generated by the CTC will provide essential security for the holders of revenue bonds, notes and related obligations issued by the City and by joint powers agencies to which the City is a party and which are payable (in whole or in part) from the revenues of the electric utility (the “obligations”). Therefore, provisions of this chapter requiring the imposition and collection of a CTC shall constitute a contract with the holders of the obligations and shall not be amended, revoked or rescinded in any manner which would materially impair the security of the holders of such obligations until such obligations are fully paid and discharged.

(b) Recovery of Stranded Cost through Collection of a Competitive Transition Charge. In order for the City to recover stranded costs, the CTC will be calculated and revised periodically in accordance with the methodology described in this chapter and shall continue to be collected from all electric utility customers, (whether or not they buy electric energy from the City), until all stranded costs are recovered. Any CTC collected in excess of current costs will be held for use to pay stranded costs. Transmission costs (which currently are not included in stranded cost) are recovered through the transmission component of the rates charged for transmission service. If a portion(s) of transmission costs becomes unrecoverable in the future, such portion(s) will be recovered through inclusion in the CTC.

(c) Allocation of Stranded Costs. Stranded costs will be allocated among rate schedules based on a cost of service study which apportions the total electric utility costs among the various rate schedules according to the characteristics of service and the customers served within each rate schedule. The CTC shall be uniformly determined and applied to all electric utility customers who receive electric service in accordance with a particular rate schedule (whether or not they buy electric energy from the City). The CTC shall be separately identified in all metered rate schedules. The CTC shall be separately identified in all unmetered rate schedules at such time as direct access service becomes available under these rate schedules.

(d) Market Value of Energy (SVP Energy Cost). For purposes of this section, SVP’s market value of energy means City-incurred costs to purchase, generate, and transmit electric energy which are not stranded costs. Such SVP market value of energy shall be referred to as “SVP Energy Cost” and shall be allocated among rate schedules based on the most recent cost of service study. Customers who purchase electric energy from SVP will pay the SVP energy cost. Customers who choose to buy their electric energy from an ESP will not pay the SVP energy cost. The SVP energy cost shall be separately identified in all metered rate schedules. The SVP energy cost shall be separately identified in all unmetered rate schedules at such time as direct access service becomes available under these rate schedules. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.070 Theft of electric services – Unauthorized tampering with or modification of electric utility metering devices – Unauthorized access to electric services.
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent of obtaining electric utility services for himself or herself or others without paying the full lawful charge therefor, or with the intent of acquiring electric utility services without the knowledge, authorization or consent of the electric utility, to do any of the following:

(a) Change the intended course or path of electric utility services by tampering with or modifying any meter or other property owned by the electric utility;

(b) Prevent any electric metering device from accurately performing its measuring function;

(c) Break, modify or tamper with a seal on any electric metering device owned or installed by the electric utility;

(d) Make, or cause to be made, any connection or reconnection to property owned by the electric utility;

(e) Attach any instrument, apparatus or device to property owned by the electric utility which is primarily designed to be used to obtain electric utility services;

(f) Alter, bypass, interfere or tamper with, rearrange, or damage an electric metering device so as to cause no measurement or inaccurate measurement of electric utility services;

(g) Disconnect electric utility services from, or connect electric utility services to, any place, dwelling, building or premises; and/or

(h) Violate any of the provisions of the electric utility Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99; Ord. 1787 § 2, 11-18-03).

13.05.080 Reserved.
(Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.090 Enforcement
The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the City Manager. The City Manager may authorize City field inspectors or other employees of the City to act as agents of the City with the authority to inspect, issue notices of violation, and write citations for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.100 Violation of this chapter or rules and regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter or the provisions contained in the Silicon Valley Power rules and regulations, as may be subsequently adopted and amended in the future. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.110 Reserved.
(Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.120 Reserved.
(Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

13.05.130 Costs of enforcement.
In any civil, criminal, or administrative hearing, appeal or action commenced by the City under this chapter, the City shall be entitled to recover from the defendant of such action reasonable attorney’s fees, costs of suit and/or any other costs of enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspection and/or repair costs. (Ord. 1742 § 3, 10-26-99).

Chapter 13.10
SEWERS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.020    Definitions.

Article II. Sewer Connection Procedures and Service Charges

13.10.030    Duty to connect premises with sewer system.

13.10.040    Maintenance and inspection of sewer connections.

13.10.050    Permit required to connect with sanitary sewer system – Generally – Fees.

13.10.060    Purpose and use of funds received.

13.10.070    Connection fee schedule.

13.10.080    Outlet charge for connection to off-site sewer trunk lines, etc.

13.10.090    Rates – Users within the city.

13.10.100    Rates exclusive of taxes.

13.10.110    Users outside the city.

13.10.120    Users obtaining water supply from other than the City to install separate meters.

13.10.130    Purpose and use of funds received.

13.10.140    Issuance of bills – Information required.

13.10.150    Delinquent accounts.

13.10.160    Notice – Disconnection from water system.

Article III. Sewer Use Regulations

Part 1. Discharge Regulations and General Prohibitions

13.10.170    Limitations on point of discharge.

13.10.180    Discharge into storm drain prohibited.

13.10.190    Regulation of trucked or hauled waste.

13.10.200    Protection from accidental discharge.

13.10.210    Pretreatment by owner.

13.10.220    Monitoring facilities.

Part 2. Prohibited Discharges, Substances

13.10.230    Storm and other waters.

13.10.240    Obstructing or injurious substances.

13.10.250    Flammable or explosive substances.

13.10.260    Hot substances.

13.10.270    Grease, oils, fats.

13.10.280    Solid or viscous matter.

13.10.290    Corrosive matter.

13.10.300    Toxic gases, vapors or fumes.

13.10.310    Interfering substances.

13.10.320    Prohibition on use of diluting waters.

13.10.330    Suspended solids – Dissolved matter.

13.10.340    Noxious or malodorous matter.

13.10.350    Radioactive matter.

13.10.360    Colored matter.

13.10.370    Garbage.

13.10.380    Oil and grease removal devices.

13.10.390    Installation and maintenance of amalgam separators.

13.10.400    Screened industrial waste.

13.10.410    Use of City’s facilities by others.

Article IV. Wastewater Discharge Permits – Reports

13.10.420    Mandatory wastewater discharge permits.

13.10.430    Permit duration and amendment.

13.10.440    Permit application.

13.10.450    Delinquent fees.

13.10.460    Signature requirements.

13.10.470    Additional information.

13.10.480    No transfer of permit.

13.10.490    Denial of permit.

13.10.500    Permit conditions.

13.10.510    Permit appeals.

13.10.520    Record keeping.

Article V. Enforcement

13.10.530    Responsibility.

13.10.540    Federal pretreatment regulations.

13.10.550    Public nuisance.

13.10.560    Falsification of information.

13.10.570    Power to inspect.

13.10.580    Discharge reports.

13.10.585    Upset – Rebuttal.

13.10.590    Termination of service.

13.10.600    Permit revocation.

13.10.610    Issuance of cease and desist orders.

13.10.620    Emergency corrections, remedial or preventative action.

13.10.630    Notice of termination of service and/or permit revocation.

13.10.640    Penalties.

13.10.650    Appeals.

13.10.660    Publication of user in significant noncompliance.

13.10.670    Waiver of pollutants not present.

Cross references – Buildings and Construction, SCCC Title 15; Storm Drains and Discharges, Chapter 13.20 SCCC; Water, Chapter 13.15 SCCC.

Article I. General Provisions

13.10.010 Purpose.
(a) Purpose.

(1) To provide for and regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the City in such manner and to such extent as is reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of the sanitary sewer system to handle and dispose of sanitary sewage;

(2) To provide for and regulate the disposal of industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system of the City in such manner and to such extent as may be reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of industrial waste without decreasing the ability of said system to handle and dispose of all sanitary sewage;

(3) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system that will pass through the treatment works of the San Jose/Santa Clara Water Pollution Control Plant (“plant”) or otherwise be incompatible with such works or interfere with the ability of the plant to treat, discharge, and recycle wastewater, or to use or dispose of plant biosolids;

(4) To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater sludge;

(5) To protect the physical structures of the sanitary sewer system and the efficient functioning of its component parts;

(6) To protect the City and its personnel;

(7) To preserve and protect the health, safety, and property of the public;

(8) To enable the City to comply with all applicable and compatible laws, rules, regulations, and orders of the State of California and of the United States;

(9) To provide for the charging and collection of various fees and other charges reasonably necessary for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the sanitary sewer system of the City;

(10) To protect the environmental health of San Francisco Bay.

(b) Conflicts with Other Chapters of This Code. In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other chapter of this Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control.

(c) Responsibility for Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the City Manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth below shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter.

(a) “A” definitions:

(1) “Amalgam separator” means a device that: employs filtration, settlement, centrifugation, or ion exchange to remove dental amalgam and its metal constituents from a dental office vacuum system before it discharges to the sanitary sewer; has been certified under the International Organization for Standardization’s standard for amalgam separators as capable of removing a minimum of ninety-five percent (95%) of dental amalgam at flow rates comparable to the flow rate of the actual vacuum suction system in operation; and does not have any automatic flow bypass.

(2) “Ammonia” means the form of nitrogen that is chemically definable as NH3.

(3) “Audit protocols” means the procedures to be followed in performing flow and pollutant audit studies.

(4) “Average concentration” means the concentration of a pollutant in an industrial user’s discharge that is calculated by adding the concentrations of the particular pollutant in all composite samples taken during a given time period, including, but not limited to, self-monitoring samples, and dividing the total by the number of samples taken.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) “Batch discharge” means the discharge of wastewater resulting from an intermittent treatment process in which an identified amount of process wastewater is collected, treated to meet discharge standards, and released to the sanitary sewer system.

(2) “Best management practices” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system that have been determined by the Director to be cost-effective for particular industry groups, business types, or specific industrial processes.

(3) “Biochemical oxygen demand” means the quantity of oxygen expressed in parts per million (ppm) by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of twenty degrees centigrade (20º C).

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “Categorical industrial user” or “CIU” means a source performing any categorical process subject to Federal pretreatment standards, as described in 40 CFR Sections 405 through 471, as amended from time to time, that has any connection to the sanitary sewer system.

(2) “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA that apply to specific categories of users and which appear in 40 CFR Sections 405 through 471, as amended from time to time.

(3) “Clean Water Act” is the 1972 amendment to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. The Act is the primary legislation concerning water pollution and its regulation. The Act establishes a permit system that must be used by point sources of pollution such as industrial facilities, government facilities, and agricultural operations. These point sources are not allowed to discharge or dispose of the pollutants they produce in surface water without a permit from the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).

(4) “Code of Federal Regulations” (or “CFR”) refers to the Code of Federal Regulations as published by the Office of the Federal Register National Archives and Records Administration. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of the CFR, or to any other Federal regulation, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions to such portion of said regulations now or hereinafter enacted.

(5) “Composite sample” means a flow-proportional or time-proportional sample, which accurately represents the average pollutant concentration discharged during a continuous time period. A composite sample may be obtained manually or automatically, and it may be taken discretely or continuously. For manual composite sampling, at least six individual samples from each sample point shall be combined and mixed to obtain one composite sample; flow-proportion may be obtained either by varying the time interval between each discrete sample or the volume of each discrete sample.

(6) “Critical user” means a discharger whose wastewater contains priority pollutants, or who discharges any waste which has the potential to cause interference in concentration above those allowed in this chapter and/or who discharges in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Diluting waters” means noncontact cooling water, boiler blowdown, domestic sewage, groundwater, stormwater, surface drainage, reverse osmosis reject, water softener regeneration, potable waters, or any other waters that are not part of an industrial process and that do not contain priority pollutants but are combined with industrial wastewater prior to the monitoring point for industrial wastewater discharge. “Diluting waters” also includes excess water used in production processes, such as rinse tanks or rinse water running when in production in excess of operational or quality requirements.

(2) “Director,” for purposes of this chapter, shall mean the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities or his/her designee.

(3) “Discharger” means any person discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system.

(4) “Domestic wastewater” means wastewater from private residences and other premises resulting from the use of water for personal washing, sanitary purposes and/or the elimination of human wastes and related matter.

(e) “E” definitions:

(1) “Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a new source.

(f) “F” definitions:

(1) “Food service establishment” means a user that prepares and/or sells food for consumption either on or off the premises or washes utensils or dishes on premises that may contribute grease to the sewer system, including, but not limited to, restaurants, sandwich shops, delicatessens, bakeries, cafeterias, markets, bed and breakfast inns, motels, hotels, meeting halls, caterers, retirement and nursing homes or pizzerias. The term, as used in this chapter, does not refer to food stores or establishments that do not prepare food on premises and do not process food in a manner which may contribute grease to the sewer system.

(g) “G” definitions:

(1) “Garbage” means wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

(2) “Grab sample” means a single discrete sample collected at a particular time and place that represents the composition of the waste stream only at that time and place.

(3) “Grease” means liquid or other waste containing floatable and/or dispersed grease, vegetable oil, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or fat, oil or grease products of animal, vegetable or mineral origin which is detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations, 40 CFR Section 136.

(4) “Grease control device” means a grease interceptor, grease trap, mechanical grease removal device or other device approved for use by the Director.

(5) “Grease interceptor” means a large tank installed underground and designed to collect and control solid food wastes and floating grease from wastewater prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease interceptors are normally installed outside the building and use gravity to separate grease from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment of the interceptor to the next.

(6) “Grease trap” means a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other fixtures likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap and hold oil and grease substances.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) “I” definitions:

(1) “Industrial user” means any nonresidential user that discharges industrial wastes to the sanitary sewer system.

(2) “Industrial wastes” means the wastes from producing, manufacturing, and processing operations of every kind and nature.

(3) Interference.

(A) “Interference” means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the processes or operation of the sanitary sewer system, including the plant, or causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, which is a permit issued to the City pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act.

(B) “Interference” also includes prevention of biosolids use or disposal by the plant in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 through 1387) or in regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. Sections 2601 through 2654), or more stringent State regulations (including those contained in any State biosolids management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the plant.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “Low flow discharger” means an industrial discharger whose average process flow, as shown on the discharger’s application to discharge and as measured as a rolling six-month average, is less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day.

(m) “M” definitions:

(1) “Maximum allowable concentration” means the highest permissible concentration or other measure of pollutant magnitude taken at a specific point in time.

(2) “Mechanical grease removal device” means a power operated device or combination of devices using electrical equipment to heat, filter, siphon, skim or otherwise separate and retain floating grease and solid food waste prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system.

(n) “N” definitions:

(1) “New source” means:

(A) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:

(i) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(ii) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(iii) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are, in the sole judgment of the Director, substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

(B) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (n)(1)(A)(ii) or (iii) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(C) Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(i) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or

b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavating, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(ii) Entered into a contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) “Owner” means any person who owns private premises that contain a source as defined in this section.

(2) “Operator” means any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises a source as defined in this section.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Pass-through” means a discharge which exits the plant into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the plant’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

(2) “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution.

(3) “Plant” means the San Jose/Santa Clara Water Pollution Control Plant.

(4) “Pollutant not present” means a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard that is not used or stored in a categorical industrial user’s facility, is not added to or created by any industrial or pretreatment process at the facility, and is not present above the background levels of the water supply.

(5) “Pretreatment standard” means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.

(6) “Priority pollutants” means all pollutants as defined by the “General Pretreatment Regulations” of the Environmental Protection Agency, found at Title 40, Chapter 1, Subchapter W, Parts 401 and 403 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(7) “Process flow” means the daily, twenty-four (24)-hour flow of wastewater from any kind or nature of production, manufacturing, or processing operation, including industrial and commercial operations where water is used for the removal of any type of waste other than sanitary sewage. Process flow does not include diluting waters.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) “R” definitions:

(1) “Reasonable control measures” means control technologies, best management practices, source control practices, and waste-minimization procedures that prevent or reduce the introduction of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system and are determined by the Director to be cost-effective for particular industry groups, business types, or specific industrial processes.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Sanitary sewage” means water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, excluding ground, surface, and stormwaters, subsurface drainage, and also excluding industrial waste.

(2) “Sanitary sewer overflow” is any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system, including overflows or releases that reach waters of the United States, overflows or releases that do not reach waters of the United States, and backups into buildings and/or private property caused by conditions within the publicly owned portion of the sewer system.

(3) “Sanitary sewer system” means all sewers, treatment plants, and other facilities owned or operated by the City for carrying, collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.

(4) “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

(5) “Sewer lateral” (same as “sewer service lateral”) means the sewer connection piping used to convey sewage from a building or facility on a parcel (private or public property) to the City-owned sewer main. Each sewer lateral is owned by the entity that owns the property or facility from which that sewer lateral serves to convey sewage.

(6) “Significant change” means any change in an industrial user’s operation that results in any of the following:

(A) An increase or decrease in annual average process flow of twenty-five percent (25%) over the standard discharger’s average process flow for the discharger’s most immediate preceding twelve (12) months.

(B) An increase or decrease in annual average process flow that results in a change from low flow discharger to standard discharger or from standard discharger to low flow discharger.

(C) An increase or decrease in annual average process flow that results in a change from nonsignificant industrial user to significant industrial user or from significant industrial user to nonsignificant industrial user.

(D) An increase or decrease in annual production rate of twenty-five percent (25%) for any industrial user subject to production-based limits over the industrial user’s production rate for the most immediate preceding twelve (12) months.

(E) Adding or deleting process discharge or sample points.

(F) Waiver of monitoring requirements for any pollutant not present.

(7) “Significant industrial user” means:

(A) An industrial user that has processes subject to categorical pretreatment standards except as provided under subsection (s)(7)(C) of this section; or

(B) An industrial user that:

(i) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the sanitary system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or

(ii) Contributes a process waste-stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the plant; or

(iii) Is designated as such by the Director on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the plant’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

(C) A significant industrial user does include an industrial user that has processed subject to categorical pretreatment standards if the industrial user:

(i) Does not discharge more than one hundred (100) gpd of total categorical process wastewater;

(ii) Has complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards;

(iii) Never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater; and

(iv) Submits annually a certificate statement pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.12(g).

(8) An industrial user is in “significant noncompliance” if it has a violation or violations meeting one or more of the following criteria:

(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Section 403.3(l);

(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Section 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(C) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Section 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of the Director, personnel or the general public);

(D) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the plant’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(E) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the scheduled due date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(F) Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90)-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and

(H) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of reasonable control measures, which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.

(9) “Slug control plan” means the document prepared pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B)(6) by a significant industrial user that describes the procedural and operational controls in place to prevent a slug load or slug discharge.

(10) “Slug load” or “slug discharge” means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through or in any other way cause a violation of the provisions of this chapter or applicable permit conditions.

(11) “Source” means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a potential as determined by the Director discharge pollutants above the local limits included in this chapter or State or Federal limits or wastewater of such volume or strength that it may cause interference, pass-through or operational problems in the sanitary sewer system or at the San Jose/Santa Clara Water Pollution Control Plant.

(12) “Standard discharger” means any industrial discharger who is not a low flow discharger.

(13) Standard Methods.

(A) “Standard methods” means the procedures set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, unless the use of another method for the analysis of industrial wastewater has been approved in writing in advance by the Director.

(B) All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the State for the specific pollutants and matrix to be analyzed, unless otherwise approved in writing, by the Director, prior to performance of a sample analysis.

(14) “Stormwaters” means the flow across any surface or in storm sewers resulting from rainfall.

(15) “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and that are removable by laboratory filtering.

(t) “T” definitions:

(1) “Total toxic organics (TTOs)” are the sum of the concentrations for each of the regulated toxic organic compounds listed at Title 40, Chapter 1, Subchapter W, Part 401, Section 401.15 CFR and are found in the discharge at a concentration greater than ten micrograms per liter. Some categorical standards (40 CFR Sections 405 through 471) list the specific toxic organic compounds that are to be included in the summation.

(2) “Trucked or hauled waste” means any waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system after being placed in a motorized vehicle for removal from the location where the waste was generated or produced.

(u) “U” definitions:

(1) “Upset” means an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

(2) “User” means any person responsible for payment of sewer service charges.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) “Y” definitions:

(1) “Yellow grease” means grease which is associated with food preparation or processing, which has not been contaminated with wash water or chemicals, or by being spilled or otherwise contaminated.

(z) “Z” definitions:

(1) “Zero discharger” or “ZDC” means an industrial facility that performs any categorical process subject to Federal pretreatment standards, as described in 40 CFR Sections 405 through 471, that has any connection to the sanitary sewer system, but does not discharge wastewater from the categorical process to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12; Ord. 1920 § 1, 2-25-14).

Article II. Sewer Connection Procedures and Service Charges

13.10.030 Duty to connect premises with sewer system.
No person owning any premises within the city, and no user of any premises within the city, where domestic or industrial waste is produced and on which premises the nearest outlet of the plumbing system is located within two hundred (200) feet from the point at which a connection can be made to the sewer system, or having no plumbing system, but in which a plumbing system could be installed with the nearest outlet located within two hundred (200) feet from the point at which a connection could be made to the sewer system, shall use any means of sewage waste disposal other than through the City sewer lines. Every person owning any premises or every use of any premises so located and upon or in which any such sewage waste is produced shall be required to connect such premises to the sewer system within sixty (60) days from the date when a main sewer or lateral sewer located within the distance specified in this section is completed and available for connection to such premises. There shall be a separate connection to the sewer system for each building or structure served. Pursuant to a written permit from the Director, any two or more buildings or structures on the same lot may be served by one sewer connection. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.040 Maintenance and inspection of sewer connections.
Each user shall keep his/her sewer connections and sewer lateral(s) in good order at his/her own expense and shall be liable for all damages resulting from failure to do so. Each owner shall maintain their sewer lateral free from displaced joints, open joints, root intrusions, substantial deterioration of pipe material, cracks, leaks, inflow or infiltration of extraneous water, grease and sediment deposits or other similar conditions, defects, or obstructions likely to cause or increase the chance of blockage. A City inspector shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to any premises connected with the sewer system, for the purpose of checking plumbing fixtures, protecting the rights of the City, and determining facts relevant to the establishment, computation, and billing of the sewer service charges provided for in this chapter, including, in the case of industrial users, examination of the users’ books for the purpose of checking the quantities of industrial waste produced. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.050 Permit required to connect with sanitary sewer system – Generally – Fees.
No person whose premises are not now connected with the sewer system shall connect any premises or cause any premises to be connected with the sewer system without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City and paying the established connection fees. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.060 Purpose and use of funds received.
All revenue collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be placed into the utilities fund as established by Section 1320 of the City Charter. Said revenue shall be used in accordance with the provisions of Section 1320 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.070 Connection fee schedule.
Wherever a property is initially connected, or requires an addition of a new connection to the sewer system, a sewage treatment plant expansion calculation fee (“sewer connection fee”) shall be charged to and paid for by the property owner in accordance with SCCC 17.15.210. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.080 Outlet charge for connection to off-site sewer trunk lines, etc.
In addition to the aforesaid sewer connection fee, each property owner or the developer of real property shall pay to the City an outlet charge as delineated in SCCC 17.15.210. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.090 Rates – Users within the city.
(a) There is hereby levied and assessed against and upon all premises having (or required by this chapter or any ordinance of the City to have) any sewer connection with or discharging (or required thereby to discharge) into or through the sanitary sewer system of City, a monthly sewer service charge.

(b) The City Council may, by resolution, establish and amend the monthly sewer service charges. Said resolution(s) shall contain the effective date of any change in the monthly sewer service charge.

(c) The resolution(s) establishing and amending the monthly sewer service charges shall be kept on file and made available to the public at the City Clerk’s office. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.100 Rates exclusive of taxes.
The rates herein are exclusive of the monthly utility excise tax prescribed in Chapter 3.30 SCCC and all other prescribed sewer-related fees and charges. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.110 Users outside the city.
(a) The City Council may, by resolution, set and fix monthly sewer service charges for various types of users located outside the city that discharge sewage and other wastes into the sanitary sewer system of the City. Such charges will be effective upon adoption of such resolution(s).

(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City Council shall have power to establish, by resolution or by agreement with the user, the monthly sewer service charges applicable to any person or any user outside the city limits, at rates different from those set forth in this chapter, as long as the charges so established are fair and equitable under the circumstances. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.120 Users obtaining water supply from other than the City to install separate meters.
Where any of the charges enumerated in SCCC 13.10.090 are based upon the consumption of water by any users, and any such water is furnished otherwise than from the City’s water system, and no approved meter is installed in the sewer service connection, then such user shall at his/her own expense install a separate water meter for measurement of such water. Said water meter installation shall be made to comply with all requirements of the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.130 Purpose and use of funds received.
All revenue collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be placed into the utilities fund as established by Section 1320 of the City Charter.

Said revenue shall be used in accordance with the provisions of Section 1320 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.140 Issuance of bills – Information required.
All bills for sewer charges shall be issued by the City’s Department of Finance. They shall be combined with bills or statements for water service rendered by the water system in all cases where the premises in question are connected to the water system. The bills shall (a) state their purpose, (b) give the name and last known address of the person responsible for payment as provided in this chapter, and (c) list separately the charge for water service, for sewer service, and the total charge for both services. Neither charge may be paid separately from the other. If premises with sewer service are not connected with the water system, a separate bill shall be rendered. All bills shall be for monthly periods or for such other period as shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.150 Delinquent accounts.
The City Manager shall ensure enforcement of this chapter by coordinating the actions of the Director of Finance, the Director, and the other City officers or departments concerned. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.160 Notice – Disconnection from water system.
In the event of a violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation established pursuant thereto, the Director, in writing, shall notify the person causing, allowing, or committing such violation, specifying the violation and, if applicable, the time after which, upon failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation, the Director will exercise his/her authority to disconnect the premises from the water system or the sewer system. Such time shall not be less than five days after the deposit of such notice in a United States Post Office in the city, addressed to the person upon whom notice is given. In the event such violation results in a public hazard or menace, the Director or other authorized representative may enter upon the premises without notice and do such things and expend such sums as may be necessary to abate such hazard. The reasonable value of the things done and the amounts expended in so doing shall be a charge upon the person in violation. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

Article III. Sewer Use Regulations

Part 1. Discharge Regulations and General Prohibitions

13.10.170 Limitations on point of discharge.
No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a City sewer, other than through a City-approved sewer connection. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.180 Discharge into storm drain prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters into any storm drain or natural outlet or channel without a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.190 Regulation of trucked or hauled waste.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit any trucked or hauled waste to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, except at a site specifically designated in a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.200 Protection from accidental discharge.
(a) Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter into either the storm sewer or the sanitary sewer system.

(b) Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user’s expense.

(c) All industrial users shall notify the City by telephone or in person within one hour of becoming aware of accidentally discharging wastes of reportable quantities as determined in Title 40, Chapter 1, Subchapter D, Part 117 CFR, or discharge of any substance which, if otherwise disposed to, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, to enable countermeasures to be taken by the City to minimize damage to the sanitary sewer system, the plant, the treatment processes, and/or the receiving waters. If hazardous waste is discharged, the industrial user shall be subject to all requirements in 40 CFR Section 403.12(p).

(d) Within five days of the date of occurrence a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences shall be provided to City.

(e) Notification to the City will not relieve industrial users of notification requirements under any other Federal, State, or local law, nor of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sanitary sewer system, plant, or treatment process or receiving waters, or for any fines or penalties imposed on the City on account thereof under applicable provisions of State or Federal law.

(f) All permitted facilities must maintain a spill control plan for protection against accidental discharges, including but not limited to berming of chemicals and waste materials. The review of such plans and procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this Code or other State or Federal regulations.

(g) This plan must be reviewed and revised as needed within thirty (30) days after an accidental discharge has occurred or as required by the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.210 Pretreatment by owner.
Each owner shall, at the owner’s expense, provide such treatment or take such other measures, as the Director may require to prevent accidental discharge, reduce objectionable characteristics, contents, or rate of discharge of waters or waste being deposited in the sanitary sewer system, to prevent damage to or interference with the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.220 Monitoring facilities.
(a) The Director may require any industrial user of the sanitary sewer system to construct, at the industrial user’s own expense and at an approved location, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems.

(b) The monitoring facilities, sampling and measurement equipment, and access thereto, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger.

(c) Any required monitoring facilities shall be specified in the wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(d) A sample box shall be designed in such a way as to retain sufficient wastewater in the sample box at all times to allow sample collection representative of the last wastewater discharge. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

Part 2. Prohibited Discharges, Substances

13.10.230 Storm and other waters.
(a) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit any stormwater, surface water, ground water, subsurface drainage or roof runoff to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof without a wastewater discharge permit.

(b) A wastewater discharge permit for the discharge of ground water, subsurface drainage, surface water, roof water or stormwater shall only be issued if there is no reasonable alternative method for disposal of such water.

(c) If permitted, discharge of ground water or subsurface drainage, surface water, roof water or stormwater shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the payment of applicable permit fees and such terms and conditions as the Director may impose in the wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.240 Obstructing or injurious substances.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged, thrown, or deposited into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, or into any plumbing fixture or private sewer or drain connected either directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system, any substance of any kind whatsoever tending to obstruct or injure the sanitary sewer system, or to cause a nuisance or hazard, or which will in any manner interfere with the proper operation or maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.250 Flammable or explosive substances.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any wastewater containing any flammable liquid, solid, vapor, or gas, or any other substance, including, but not limited to, any substance having a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius, using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Section 261.21. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.260 Hot substances.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any liquid, solid, vapor, gas, or thing having or developing a temperature of one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit or more, or that may cause the temperature at the plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.270 Grease, oils, fats.
(a) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system any liquid or other waste containing grease in excess of one hundred fifty (150) parts per million by weight.

(b) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit any grease discharge from a food service establishment into the sanitary sewer system, unless such discharge has first been processed through an approved grease control device.

(c) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged any yellow grease, or any waste or material mixed with yellow grease, into the sanitary sewer system from a food service establishment. No yellow grease from a food service establishment shall be mixed with grease trap or grease interceptor waste. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.280 Solid or viscous matter.
No person shall discharge, deposit, throw, or cause to be discharged, deposited, or thrown into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any ashes, cinders, pulp, paper, sand, cement, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, asphalt, resins, plastics, wood, animal hair, paunch manure, or any heavy solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, or that would interfere with the proper operation of the plant or the treatment of sanitary sewage or industrial waste. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.290 Corrosive matter.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any liquid, solid, vapor, gas, or thing having a pH lower than 6.0 or equal to or greater than 12.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, or to any personnel operating, maintaining, repairing, or constructing said sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, or working in or about the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.300 Toxic gases, vapors or fumes.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any substance of any kind whatsoever that results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sanitary sewer system in a quantity that may cause acute health and/or safety problems for workers in the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.310 Interfering substances.
(a) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any industrial waste containing any of the following toxic substances exceeding the concentrations set forth in Table A.

(b) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any toxic or poisonous substances or any other pollutant, including biochemical oxygen demand, in sufficient quantity to:

(1) Injure or cause an interference with the sewage treatment process;

(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals;

(3) Create a hazard for humans or aquatic life in any waters receiving effluent from the sanitary sewer system; or

(4) Create a hazard in the use or disposal of sewage sludge.

(c) All samples, both grab and composite, shall demonstrate compliance with the limits in Table A.

(d) Any industrial user that violates any of the interfering substances limits must resample and submit sample reports for all pollutants in violation of any applicable limits or any other pollutants as required by the Director within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation.

TABLE A

INTERFERING SUBSTANCES 

Toxic Substance

Standard Discharger Maximum Allowable Concentration

Low Flow Discharger Maximum Allowable Concentration

Antimony

5.0

mg/l

5.0

mg/l

Arsenic

1.0

mg/l

1.0

mg/l

Beryllium

0.75

mg/l

0.75

mg/l

Cadmium

0.7

mg/l

0.7

mg/l

Chromium, total

1.0

mg/l

1.0

mg/l

Copper

2.3

mg/l

2.7

mg/l

Cyanides

0.5

mg/l

0.5

mg/l

Lead

0.4

mg/l

0.4

mg/l

Mercury

0.010

mg/l

0.010

mg/l

Nickel

0.5

mg/l

2.6

mg/l

Phenol and derivatives

30.0

mg/l

30.0

mg/l

Selenium

1.0

mg/l

1.0

mg/l

Silver

0.7

mg/l

0.7

mg/l

Zinc

2.6

mg/l

2.6

mg/l

(Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.320 Prohibition on use of diluting waters.
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way use diluting waters as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, or to meet local limits or achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.330 Suspended solids – Dissolved matter.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any liquid containing suspended solids or dissolved matter of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle, process, or treat such matter at the plant. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.340 Noxious or malodorous matter.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any solid, liquid, vapor, gas, or thing that is so malodorous or noxious that its discharge into the sanitary sewer system would cause a public nuisance. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.350 Radioactive matter.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged any radioactive waste into the sanitary sewer system, except that:

(a) Persons authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health Services or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials may discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged such wastes; provided, that such wastes are discharged in strict conformance with the California radiation control regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Subchapter 4 (entitled “Radiation”) et seq.) and Federal regulations and recommendations for safe disposal of such radioactive wastes; and

(b) The person so acting does so in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such discharges. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.360 Colored matter.
No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.370 Garbage.
(a) No person shall discharge, deposit, throw, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged, deposited, or thrown into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, (1) any garbage, (2) any fruit, vegetable, or animal material, and/or (3) any other solid material from any food-processing plant (or any other industrial plant or retail grocery store), irrespective of whether or not it shall have been first passed through a mechanical grinder.

(b) No person shall install, operate, use, or maintain upon the premises of any food-processing plant (or any other industrial plant or retail grocery store) any mechanical grinder or waste grinder that is connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof.

(c) No person shall discharge, deposit, throw, or cause, allow, or permit to be discharged, deposited, or thrown into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any garbage, or fruit, vegetable, animal, or other solid kitchen waste material resulting from the preparation of any food or drinks in any dwelling, restaurant, or eating establishment, unless the same shall have first been passed through a mechanical garbage or waste grinder in conformance with the provisions of the Plumbing and Electrical Code of the City. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.380 Oil and grease removal devices.
(a) Any food service establishment, or other type of business or establishment where grease or other viscous, obstructing, or objectionable materials may be discharged into a public or private sewage main or disposal system, shall have a grease control device and related plumbing of a size and design approved by the Director.

(1) Grease interceptors shall meet the following minimum requirements:

(A) Designed retention time of no less than thirty (30) minutes.

(B) The effluent from the device must flow through an approved sample box.

(C) Installed per manufacturer’s specifications.

(D) At least two manholes, situated so all standpipes can be fully observed, and all internal surfaces can be reached, without confined space entry.

(E) Double-sweep cleanouts, on the interceptor inlet, and sample box outlet.

(F) Shall meet the specifications and be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 15.35 SCCC.

(2) Grease traps shall meet the following minimum requirements:

(A) No injection ports for chemicals or bacteria.

(B) Installed per manufacturer’s specifications.

(C) Appropriate flow restrictors, whether integral or external to the device, must be installed.

(D) Shall meet the specifications and be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 15.35 SCCC.

(3) Mechanical grease removal devices shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers’ specifications.

(b) Each grease control device shall be so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for visual inspection, sampling, cleaning and removal of grease and other matter from all surfaces.

(c) A grease control device shall be situated on the discharger’s premises, except when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the City may issue an encroachment permit to allow the grease control device to be installed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

(d) Waste discharged from fixtures and equipment in establishments which may contain grease or other objectionable materials including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashers, food waste disposals, soup kettles, and floor drains located in areas where such objectionable materials may exist, may be drained into the sanitary sewer through the grease control device if approved by the Director; provided, however, that toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal material shall not flow through the grease control device.

(e) Grease control devices shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. The use of chemicals, bacteria, enzymes, or other additives that have the effect of emulsifying or dissolving grease is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the Director in writing. No accumulated grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public or private sewer.

(f) Grease control devices shall be cleaned on a sufficient frequency to prevent objectionable odors, surcharge of the grease control device, or interference with the operation of the sanitary sewer system.

(1) Grease traps shall be cleaned at least once every thirty (30) days.

(2) Grease interceptors shall be cleaned once every ninety (90) days.

(3) Mechanical grease removal devices must be maintained in a manner and frequency consistent with manufacturer specifications and guidance.

(4) Grease control devices shall be cleaned when their last chamber is filled to twenty-five percent (25%) or more of capacity with grease or settled solids. Grease interceptors with a sample box shall be cleaned immediately when grease is evident in the sample box.

(5) Grease control devices shall be cleaned by being pumped dry and all accumulated sludge on all surfaces shall be removed by washing down the sides, baffles and tees. No water removed from the device during cleaning shall be returned to the grease control device.

(g) The Director may grant an exception to the requirements of subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section where the Director finds, based on evidence presented by the discharger, that a less frequent cleaning schedule will be sufficient to assure that not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the capacity of the grease control device will be filled with grease or settled solids.

(h) All dischargers shall implement best management practices in their operations to minimize the discharge of grease to the sanitary sewer system.

(i) Dischargers shall maintain records on site for a period of at least three years as follows:

(1) Dischargers with an installed grease control device shall maintain records showing that the grease control device has been properly maintained and cleaned as required by subsections (e) and (f) of this section; and

(2) Food service establishments shall maintain records showing the following related to all grease hauled off site: date and time material removed off site, volume removed, hauler name, truck license number, type of grease removed, and final destination of material collected.

(j) Abandoned grease control devices shall be emptied and filled as required for abandoned septic tanks. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.390 Installation and maintenance of amalgam separators.
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, no person shall discharge, cause, allow or permit any discharge to the sanitary sewer system from a dental vacuum system, unless such discharge has first been processed through an amalgam separator.

(b) For each dental vacuum system installed prior to July 1, 2009, an amalgam separator shall be installed on or before December 31, 2010. No dental vacuum system shall be installed on or after January 31, 2009, without an amalgam separator. Proof of certification and installation records shall be submitted to the Director within thirty (30) days of installation.

(c) A dental vacuum system may be operated without an amalgam separator; provided, that the system is not used in connection with the removal or placement of fillings that contain dental amalgam more than three days per calendar year and the system is used exclusively by the following types of dental practices: (1) orthodontics; (2) periodontics; (3) oral and maxillofacial surgery; (4) radiology; (5) oral pathology or oral medicine; and (6) endodontistry and prosthodontistry.

(d) Amalgam separators shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer recommendations. Installation, certification, and maintenance records shall be maintained for a minimum of five years and available for immediate inspection upon request therefor by the Director or designee during normal business hours. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.400 Screened industrial waste.
(a) No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any garbage, or any fruit, vegetable, animal, or other solid industrial waste resulting from the processing, packaging, or canning of fruits, vegetables, or other foods or products, unless such waste has first been passed through screens having openings not exceeding one thirty-second (1/32) of an inch in dimension.

(b) The Director may authorize, in writing, the discharge into the sanitary sewer system of such waste if it is first passed through screens having larger openings, if the Director is satisfied that such larger openings will provide screening efficiency and effectiveness equal to or better than that provided by the above-specified openings of one thirty-second (1/32) of an inch in dimension.

(c) Each person who discharges, causes, allows, or permits to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any such waste shall install and maintain in good operating order, screens as hereinabove specified and appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, all necessary conveyors and elevators, all in sufficient quantity and of sufficient size and quality to continuously and effectively screen not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the peak hydraulic and solids loading imposed on such screens and appurtenances during any processing period.

(d) No person shall discharge any such screened waste into the sanitary sewer system, or any part of the system, unless and until he/she has obtained a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this chapter granting approval to do so. Before a wastewater discharge permit is granted, the Director may require that such person provide to the Director a report prepared by a registered professional engineer verifying, to the satisfaction of the Director, that the provisions of this section have been fully complied with. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.410 Use of City’s facilities by others.
No person shall enter or remain upon any sanitary sewer manholes, cleanouts, or any appurtenances thereto, or any other property owned or controlled by the Water and Sewer Utilities Department without the consent of the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

Article IV. Wastewater Discharge Permits – Reports

13.10.420 Mandatory wastewater discharge permits.
No critical user or significant industrial user shall connect, discharge, cause, allow, or permit any discharge into the sanitary sewer system except in accordance with a discharge permit issued by the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.430 Permit duration and amendment.
(a) Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specific duration, not to exceed five years.

(b) Permits shall be subject to amendment by the City as limitations or requirements for wastewater discharge are modified and changed.

(c) The holder of a discharge permit shall be informed of any proposed amendment to its permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the amendment.

(d) The Director may include a compliance schedule in an amended permit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.440 Permit application.
(a) All persons requiring a discharge permit shall file a complete application, in the form prescribed by the Director, and accompanied by the applicable fees, as established by resolution of the City Council.

(b) For new construction, permit applications shall be filed with the Director at the time that an application for a building permit for a new building or structure is made.

(c) All persons discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system for which a wastewater discharge permit has been issued must apply for a new permit prior to making a significant change in the operations affecting their discharge. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.450 Delinquent fees.
(a) Discharge permit applications are due ninety (90) days prior to (1) commencing discharge to the sanitary sewer system, (2) commencing operation of a zero discharging categorical process, or (3) expiration of the existing discharge permit. Any person who fails to file a discharge permit application by the application due date prior to discharge shall be assessed a penalty for delinquent filing as follows:

(1) Up to and including thirty (30) days after the application due date, the penalty shall be fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee.

(2) Thirty-one (31) to ninety (90) days after the application due date, the penalty shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the permit fee.

(3) Ninety-one (91) days to one year after the application date, the penalty shall be two hundred percent (200%) of the permit fee.

(4) More than one year after the application due date, the penalty shall be one thousand percent (1,000%) of the permit fee.

(b) Such penalties shall be in addition to any other penalties or fines that may be levied, and they are in addition to any other remedies that the City may have with respect to the discharge.

(c) The Director may waive the assessment of penalty if the industrial discharger meets all of the following requirements:

(1) The industrial discharger has submitted a completed application no later than thirty (30) days from the date the application was due;

(2) The industrial discharger has applied to the Director for a waiver no later than thirty (30) days from the date the application was due;

(3) The industrial discharger submitted timely applications for (A) the five years immediately prior to the present late application, or (B) the two years immediately prior to the present late application if the industrial discharger has discharged for less than five years; and

(4) The industrial discharger can provide documentation that (A) the application was postmarked or received by the plant no later than three days after the application due date, or (B) failure to submit a timely application was due to circumstances beyond the control of the industrial discharger, and cured despite the exercise of ordinary care and the absence of willful neglect. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12; Ord. 1920 § 2, 2-25-14).

13.10.460 Signature requirements.
(a) Permit applications, discharge reports, and any other reports required by the Director to be signed shall be signed by an executive officer of the business filing the application.

(b) Such executive officer shall be at least of the level of vice president, general partner, president, or an individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility applying for said permit, or meet Federal requirements for NPDES applications as contained in Title 40 CFR.

(c) Reports subject to the requirements of Title 40 CFR shall include the certifications statement as contained in Title 40 CFR. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.470 Additional information.
(a) If the Director is not satisfied that the permit application has sufficient information to determine whether the permit should be issued, the Director may refuse to issue the permit or request that the applicant submit further information.

(b) The applicant shall have thirty (30) working days, or such longer period of time as allowed by the Director, after reviewing a request for information, to complete the application.

(c) If the returned application is not resubmitted within the specified time period, then a new application for a discharge permit must be submitted along with the application fees and any delinquent fees for a new permit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.480 No transfer of permit.
Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation at a specific location. No user shall assign, transfer, or sell a discharge permit; nor shall any user attempt to use the permit for premises, facilities, or operations not covered by the permit. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.490 Denial of permit.
The Director may deny a wastewater discharge permit if any one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) The application is not accompanied by the required fee(s).

(b) The application contains false or misleading information.

(c) The issuance of the permit would result in the discharge of industrial wastes of such quantity or strength that the public health or safety, or public or private property are endangered.

(d) The issuance of the permit would cause the plant to violate any permit conditions, laws, or regulations of the State and/or Federal government.

(e) The applicant has not provided adequate information to establish that its discharge will comply with all requirements of this chapter and with such other terms and conditions as the Director may deem necessary to include in the discharger’s permit.

(f) The applicant has not provided plans for sufficient protection from accidental discharges to the land, storm sewer system, and sanitary sewer system.

(g) If the Director refuses to issue a permit, the application fees shall not be returned to the applicant unless the Director has ascertained that a permit is not required to discharge the wastewater for which the permit application is made. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.500 Permit conditions.
(a) Discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges, discharge limitations, and fees established by the City and all applicable local, State, and Federal law and regulations.

(b) The permit may include such terms and conditions as the Director may deem necessary to implement this chapter, or any other applicable local, State, or Federal law and regulations, including, but not limited to:

(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics;

(2) Requirements for installation and maintenance of flow monitoring, inspection, and sampling facilities;

(3) Specifications and pretreatment requirements for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedule;

(4) Compliance schedules;

(5) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;

(6) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City and affording the City access thereto;

(7) Requirements for notification to the City of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater stream;

(8) Requirements and plans for protection against accidental discharges, including, but not limited to, berming of chemicals and waste materials. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user of the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this Code or other State or Federal regulations;

(9) Requirements for notification of accidental discharges;

(10) Requirements for submission of a slug control plan or specific elements thereof. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12; Ord. 1920 § 3, 2-25-14).

13.10.510 Permit appeals.
(a) Any permittee or permit applicant may appeal a notice of revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, notice of denial of a permit, any term or condition of a permit, amendment of a permit, or notice of termination of service to the Director.

(b) A request for hearing on a decision to revoke a permit or terminate service shall be filed, in writing, with the Director within ten calendar days after the date the notice of revocation or termination of service is served on the permittee. A request for hearing on a decision to revoke a permit or terminate service shall, except in the case of immediate permit revocation or suspension of service for the preservation of public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property, stay the effect of the notice of revocation or termination of service during the pendency of the appeal.

(c) A request for hearing on a decision to deny a permit, on the terms or conditions in a permit, or on an amendment to a permit, shall be filed, in writing, with the Director within thirty (30) calendar days after the date the notice of decision is served on the applicant.

(d) Failure of a permittee or applicant to request a hearing within ten calendar days shall be deemed acceptance of the Director’s decision, and the Director’s decision shall be deemed final.

(e) At the hearing before the Director, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to present witnesses and documentary and other evidence.

(f) The hearing will be conducted informally and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence that the Director deems reliable, relevant, and not unduly repetitious may be considered.

(g) The applicant may be represented at the hearing by any other person.

(h) The Director shall provide written notice of decision on the appeal to the permittee or applicant. The decision of the Director on the appeal shall be deemed final and effective three calendar days after notice of the decision on appeal is served on the permittee or applicant.

(i) Filing of a request for hearing shall not entitle any person to discharge in violation of any of the provisions of the City Code.

(j) Any permittee or permit applicant may appeal the Director’s decision on the appeal to the City Council by the procedure for revocation and permit denials and appeals therefrom as set forth in Chapter 2.115 SCCC. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.520 Record keeping.
All industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for inspections and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, and additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the industrial user independent of such requirements. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any enforcement action concerning the industrial user, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

Article V. Enforcement

13.10.530 Responsibility.
The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the Director or such agents of the City as he/she shall designate; and provided further, that field inspectors or other employees of the City are hereby authorized to act as agents of the City or of the sewage treatment plant for and on behalf of the Director, with the power to inspect and issue notices for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.540 Federal pretreatment regulations.
No industrial user shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit a discharge into the sanitary sewer system in violation of any Federal or State regulation regulating discharges by such users, including, but not limited to, the Federal pretreatment regulations found in Title 40 CFR. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.550 Public nuisance.
Waste or wastewater discharge, threatened waste or wastewater discharge, or any condition or act in violation of any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any directive or order of the Director authorized by this chapter or applicable law is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such nuisance may be abated, removed, or enjoined and damages assessed therefor, in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.560 Falsification of information.
(a) It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document; to tamper with or render inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment; or to divert flow from any monitoring device or equipment installed or operated to further the purpose of this chapter or the purpose of any permit issued under this chapter.

(b) In addition to any other punishment or remedy provided by law, any such falsification or tampering shall be grounds for revocation of any permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.570 Power to inspect.
(a) The Director and other duly authorized employees and agents of the City bearing credentials and identification shall have the right to access upon all properties for the purpose of inspecting any sewer or storm drain connection, including, but not limited to, all discharge connections of roof and surface drains and plumbing fixtures; inspecting, observing, measuring, photographing, sampling, and testing the quality, consistency, and characteristics of sewage and industrial wastewaters being discharged into any public sewer or natural outlet; and inspecting and copying any records relating to quantity and quality of wastewater discharges, including, but not limited to, water usage and effluent discharge, chemical usage, and hazardous waste records.

(b) The Director may terminate service or revoke the permit of any person who has discharged wastewater to the sanitary sewer system and/or has unreasonably refused access to the City. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.580 Discharge reports.
(a) Dischargers are subject to the reporting requirements as contained in Title 40 CFR. The Director may require that any person connected to or discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system file additional periodic discharge reports or a zero discharge report.

(b) The periodic discharge report may be required to include, but need not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, hours of operation, number of employees, hauling record, potential slug discharge, or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge and the ability of the discharger to meet applicable discharge limits.

(c) The zero discharge report shall certify that the zero discharger user does not discharge any process water to sanitary sewer system, or for a zero discharge categorical user, discharge any categorical process water or ancillary process water to the designated zero discharge categorical sample point or into the sanitary sewer system. This report may be required to include, but need not be limited to, the nature of the process, hours of operation, number of employees, hauling records, or other information that relates to the generation of wastes.

(d) The Director may also require such periodic discharge reports and zero discharge reports to include information concerning the chemical constituents and quantity of chemicals stored on site, including waste hauling records or other information, which relates to the generation of wastes even though they may not normally be discharged.

(e) In addition to discharge reports, the Director may require dischargers to submit such additional reports as may be necessary to allow the City to evaluate the discharger’s ability to comply with this chapter, including but not limited to best management practice or self-monitoring reports.

(f) It shall be unlawful for any person who has discharged wastewater to the sanitary sewer system to refuse to file any report requested by the Director or to file any report after the application due date specified by the Director.

(g) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Section 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Section 136 does not contain sampling or analytical methods for the pollutant in question, or where the Director determines that the application of 40 CFR Section 136 is inappropriate for the pollutant question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using analytical methods validated by the Director. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12; Ord. 1920 § 4, 2-25-14).

13.10.585 Upset – Rebuttal.
The following circumstances may be raised as an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards:

(a) The industrial user can demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:

(1) The industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

(2) When the upset occurred, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;

(3) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the plant:

(A) A description of the discharge to the plant and the cause of the noncompliance;

(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

(C) Steps being taken and/or planned to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

(4) The industrial user shall report the information specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, and provide written notice within five days of becoming aware of the upset.

(b) The industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset as an affirmative defense shall have the burden of proof.

(c) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. The requirement under this section applies even in a situation where the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 1920 § 4, 2-25-14).

13.10.590 Termination of service.
(a) The Director may revoke any wastewater discharge permit, and/or terminate, or cause to be terminated, wastewater service to any premises:

(1) If a discharge of wastewater from the premises causes or threatens to cause a violation of any provision of this chapter or applicable local, State, or Federal regulations; or

(2) If a discharge of wastewater from the premises causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance.

(b) This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.600 Permit revocation.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for one or more material violations of this chapter, including but not limited to:

(a) Failure to notify the City of changes to the user’s operations or systems as described in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(b) Misrepresentation of or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(c) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(d) Tampering with monitoring facilities or equipment;

(e) Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;

(f) Failure to meet the prohibitions on discharge according to applicable State, Federal and local law;

(g) Failure to meet compliance time schedules or any wastewater discharge permit conditions or requirements;

(h) Failure to pay fines and/or penalties;

(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(j) Failure to complete a wastewater discharge permit application or submit a discharge report;

(k) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.610 Issuance of cease and desist orders.
When the Director finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter or the provisions of any wastewater discharge permit, the Director may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions to:

(a) Comply immediately; or

(b) Comply in accordance with a time schedule; and/or

(c) Take appropriate remedial or preventative action. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.620 Emergency corrections, remedial or preventative action.
In the event cleanup, repairs, construction, or other work is performed on any premises pursuant to any provision of law relating to an emergency or that authorizes public work on private property to correct, eliminate or abate a condition that threatens to cause, causes, or has caused a violation of any provision of this chapter or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the user or persons responsible for the occurrence or condition giving rise to such work and/or the owner and/or occupant of the premises shall be liable, jointly and severally, to the City for such public expenditures, and subject to all enforcement and administrative penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.630 Notice of termination of service and/or permit revocation.
(a) Written notice of the permit revocation or service termination, and a statement of the grounds therefor, shall be delivered to the discharger. The notice shall be effective ten calendar days after it is served on the discharger unless the Director determines that immediate permit revocation or suspension of service is necessary for the preservation of public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property. If the Director determines that immediate permit revocation or suspension of service is necessary, the Director may act to revoke the permit or suspend service immediately after written notice is delivered to the discharger.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any material into the sanitary sewer system from any premises for which the permit has been revoked or wastewater service has been suspended or terminated. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.640 Penalties.
(a) Pursuant to Chapters 1.05 and 1.10 SCCC, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violations of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. All penalties and citations pursuant to applicable law, including but not limited to Government Code Section 54740.5 and Chapters 1.05 and 1.10 SCCC, shall apply to violations of this chapter.

(b) In addition to the provisions of Chapters 1.05 and 1.10 SCCC, and due to the significant potential harm caused to the environment by violation of provisions of this chapter, any person who intentionally, accidentally, or negligently violates any provisions of this chapter or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who intentionally, accidentally, or negligently discharges waste or wastewater that causes pollution or violates any effluent limitation, standard of performance, or pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be civilly liable to the City in a sum up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the first day in which such violation occurs, up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the second day in which such violation occurs, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each additional day. The City may petition a court of appropriate jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s environmental compliance fee account.

(c) Any assessed penalty shall be paid within ten days from the date of notice of such penalty. Interest shall accrue at the rate of the United States government T-Bills sold at the latest sale prior to the date of the delinquency plus three percent prorated per month or fraction thereof on the amount of penalty from the date of delinquency.

(d) The amount of any penalties imposed under this chapter which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the violation occurred resulting in imposition of the penalty. The Director shall cause the amount of uncollected penalty to be recorded with the County Recorder, in accordance with Government Code Section 54740.5.

(e) Any and all remedies for violations of this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under State and Federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s environmental compliance fee account. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.650 Appeals.
(a) Any user, permittee, applicant or other person aggrieved by any decision, action, finding, determination, order or directive of the Director, made or authorized pursuant to this chapter, or relating to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or interpreting or implementing the same, may file a written request with the Director for reconsideration thereof within ten days of such decision, action, finding, determination, order or directive. Such request for reconsideration must set forth in detail all supporting facts. No meeting or hearing shall be convened for such request for reconsideration. The Director shall render a final written decision within ten days of the receipt of such request.

(b) Any user, permittee, applicant or other person aggrieved by any final determination of the Director may appeal such decision to the City Manager within ten days of the Director’s final determination. Written notice of such appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within that ten-day period, and shall set forth all supporting facts. The appeal shall be heard by the City Manager within thirty (30) days from the filing of the notice of appeal. The appellant, the Director, and such other persons as the Director and/or the City Manager may deem appropriate shall be heard at the hearing on such appeal. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager may affirm, reverse or modify the final determination of the Director in furtherance of the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager’s determination on the appeal shall be final.

(c) Any decision, action, finding, determination, order or directive of the Director which is subject to a request for reconsideration or appeal shall remain in effect during the pendency of any request for reconsideration and/or appeal.

(d) All monetary penalties shall be due and payable during the pendency of any request for reconsideration or appeal. If a determination is not affirmed and the penalty is modified, the Director shall cause any overpayment of penalty to be reimbursed to the payor within thirty (30) days of the final determination.

(e) Any administrative citation issued for any violation shall be appealed pursuant to Chapters 1.05 and 1.10 SCCC. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.660 Publication of user in significant noncompliance.
The Director is authorized to publish annually a list of the significant industrial users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” is defined in 40 CFR Section 403.8. (Ord. 1901 § 2, 11-27-12).

13.10.670 Waiver of pollutants not present.
(a) A categorical industrial user seeking to request a waiver of monitoring requirements for pollutants not present must submit the following with its permit application:

(1) Data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment that is representative of all wastewater from all processes;

(2) Signature in compliance with SCCC 13.10.460;

(3) Certification statement as specified under 40 CFR Section 403.6(a)(2)(ii); and

(4) Other technical factors as may be required by the Director to demonstrate that the pollutant is not present in the industrial user’s discharge.

(b) If approved, the waiver shall be included as part of the categorical industrial user’s discharge permit. The categorical industrial user must certify in each self monitoring report with the statement set forth in 40 CFR Section 403.12(e)(2)(v) that there has been no increase in the wastestream due to the activities of the user of the pollutant that was waived.

(c) The waiver shall only be valid for the term of the permit, and a new request for waiver must be submitted for each new permit. (Ord. 1920 § 5, 2-25-14).

Chapter 13.15
WATER
Sections:

Article I. In General

13.15.010    Purpose and intent.

13.15.020    Water rates to be determined by City Council.

13.15.030    Definitions.

13.15.040    Connections to City water mains – Entry upon City facilities – Written consent required.

13.15.050    Use of water for other than normal purposes.

13.15.060    Termination or discontinuance, etc., of service – Authority required to restore service.

13.15.070    Tampering with a disconnected meter.

13.15.080    Rules and regulations for water service and use.

Article II. Water from Fire Hydrants

13.15.090    Permit required to extract water.

13.15.100    Reading of water meters and rendering of accounts – Water drawn for use outside City.

13.15.110    Right to deny or revoke permit.

13.15.120    Return of equipment to City – Final billing.

Article III. Regulation of Water Usage, Water Shortage Emergency Condition

13.15.130    Water use restrictions and prohibitions.

13.15.140    Water shortage emergency condition.

Article IV. Regulation of RecycledWater Service and Use

13.15.150    Recycled water regulations.

13.15.160    Purpose and intent of regulation of recycled water service and use.

Article V. Backflow Prevention

13.15.170    Incorporation of California Code of Regulations, Title 17.

Article VI. Landscape Water Efficiency

13.15.180    Landscape water efficiency regulations.

Article VII. Enforcement

13.15.190    Responsibility.

13.15.200     Violation of this chapter or rules and regulations – Payment of funds to account.

13.15.210    Emergency cleanup.

13.15.220    Administrative penalties.

Cross references – Water and Sewer Department, Ch. 2.70 SCCC; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 13.10 SCCC.

Stat. Ref.:    Water and water systems generally, H. & S.C.A. §§ 4010 to 4038; pollution of waters, H. & S.C.A. §§ 4400 to 4485.

Article I. In General

13.15.010 Purpose and intent.
(a) Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds and determines that the necessity for the provisions contained in the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use and enacted by this chapter are declared as a matter of the City Council’s determination to be for the purpose and intent of:

(1) Providing water for the benefit of the City;

(2) Securing and promoting the public health, safety, and welfare of its present and future residents;

(3) Conserving the water supplies of the City;

(4) Facilitating the enforcement of the City’s water use restrictions and prohibitions and best management practices;

(5) Recognizing that the State of California has declared that the use of recycled water is in the public’s interest and that a substantial portion of the future water requirements of the State may be met by the utilization of recycled water; and

(6) Providing an orderly and adequate means of protecting the City’s water system from backflow.

(b) Amendments to the City’s Rules and Regulations for Water Service and Use. It is anticipated that the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use will be amended from time to time by the City Council in response to any regulations imposed by the State and any other Federal, or regulatory agency, or local ordinance, after complying with the notice and publishing requirements of the California Water Code, Sections 375 and 376.

(c) Conflicts with Other Provisions of the City Code. In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter or with the provisions of any other chapter(s) of the City Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control, unless to do so would be inconsistent with the stated purpose and intent of this chapter.

(d) Responsible Parties. Every property owner, tenant, person or organization (herein “customer”) supplied with water service by the City shall be considered as having given express consent to be bound by this chapter and the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use.

(e) Responsibility for Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities or agents of the City as the City Manager shall designate. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-1).

13.15.020 Water rates to be determined by City Council.
Pursuant to the authority of the Charter of the City of Santa Clara, the rates and fees charged, the sale and distribution of water through the water distribution system of the City and the rules and regulations therefor shall be determined from time to time by the City Council by resolution to properly reflect adjustments as it deems necessary. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-2).

13.15.030 Definitions.
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter:

(a) Reserved for future use.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) “Backflow” means the reverse flow of water or any other fluid or substance or any combination or mixture thereof from the customer’s system into the City’s water distribution system.

(2) “Backflow prevention device” means a City-approved device that prevents backflow into the City’s water distribution system.

(3) “Best management practice (BMP)” means a policy, program, practice or rule aimed at more efficient use or conservation of the water resources of the City and State.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “City Manager” means the City of Santa Clara’s City Manager and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(2) “City’s water system” means the water supply and distribution system and all appurtenances thereto owned and operated by the City, including all service connections to the City’s water mains.

(3) “Cross-connection” means an unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

(4) “Customer” means a person, business or agency in whose name water service from the City is rendered, regardless of the identity of the actual user of water service.

(5) “Customer’s system” means the water piping system located immediately downstream from the City’s water meter or backflow prevention device on any premises.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Director or Director of Water and Sewer Utilities” means the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “Landscape water efficiency regulations” means a set of rules and regulations contained in the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use which govern water-efficient landscaping.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) Reserved for future use.

(o) Reserved for future use.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, including adjacent streets, sidewalks, pathways and parking strips.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) “R” definitions:

(1) “Recycled water” means water that has been produced by the treatment of wastewater and is approved by the State of California for specified nonpotable applications.

(2) “Recycled water regulations” means a set of regulations contained in the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use which governs: (i) the use of recycled water, (ii) the design, installation and inspection of systems for use of recycled water and (iii) the operations and maintenance of systems for use of recycled water.

(3) “Rules and regulations for water service and use” means a set of rules and regulations promulgated, adopted or amended from time to time by a resolution of the City Council as necessary to govern the water service furnished by the City.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Service connection” means all or any portion of the water pipe and appurtenances, including meter, between the City distribution line and an individual customer’s system.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) “W” definitions:

(1) “Water use prohibitions and restrictions” means a set of regulations adopted or amended from time to time by a resolution of the City Council as necessary to prevent the waste or unnecessary uses of water within the city for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety and welfare of all persons in the City.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-3).

13.15.040 Connections to City water mains – Entry upon City facilities – Written consent required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to attach to or detach from or divert from any water main, service pipe or other connection through which water is supplied by the City to water consumers of the City or to interfere in any manner with such pipes, connections, or appurtenances thereto without having first obtained written consent from the Director.

(b) It shall be the duty of the Director to give his/her written consent for each such attachment or detachment and, within a reasonable time, cause such attachment or detachment to be made; provided, that all charges and costs therefor are fully paid to the City, and the attachment or detachment comply with the City’s rules and regulations.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, upon, uncover, disturb, or alter any City property or facility, including, but not limited to water meters, water valves, backflow valves, water wells, water production or storage facilities, backflow prevention devices, or any other appurtenance thereof, without prior written permission from the Director. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-4).

13.15.050 Use of water for other than normal purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water for any purpose other than that for which they are charged according to any schedule of rates adopted by the City Council without written notification to the City’s water and sewer utilities. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-5).

13.15.060 Termination or discontinuance, etc., of service – Authority required to restore service.
Whenever any water service from the water distribution system of the City to any place, dwelling, building, or premises has been terminated, discontinued, disconnected, or shut off because of the nonpayment of any charge, bill, rate or fee owing to the City or because of any violation of any rule or regulation of the City relating to the furnishing of such service, it shall be unlawful for any person to restore such service to such place, dwelling, building, or premises who has not been authorized to do so by the Director. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-6).

13.15.070 Tampering with a disconnected meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter which has been disconnected from the water distribution system of the City by reason of the nonpayment of any bill, charge, fee, or rate owing to the City for water services or by reason of the violation of any rule or regulation of the City applicable to the furnishing of such service without the prior consent or authorization of the Director. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-7).

13.15.080 Rules and regulations for water service and use.
The requirements contained in the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use are incorporated by this reference. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-8).

Article II. Water from Fire Hydrants

13.15.090 Permit required to extract water.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the City’s Fire Department, to take water from any City fire hydrant, without first obtaining a permit and complying with the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-9).

13.15.100 Reading of water meters and rendering of accounts – Water drawn for use outside City.
Meters shall be read and reported by the permittee to the City monthly or at a schedule determined by the Director. Accounts whose meters are not read and reported during this period shall be billed the monthly minimum. Water drawn for use in projects outside the city limits shall be billed and paid for at one and one-half the established City rates.

The City shall have the right to require the periodic return of the water meter for purposes of inspection, testing or replacement. The permittee shall immediately deliver the water meter to the City’s water and sewer utilities when requested to do so. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-10).

13.15.110 Right to deny or revoke permit.
The City shall have the right to refuse or revoke any permit when it has been determined by the Director that the use of the permit results in surging or pressure complaints due to careless operation of the fire hydrant valve, or for any other cause determined by the Director to be detrimental to the performance of the City’s water and sewer facilities, equipment, or causes inefficient use or waste of water. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-11).

13.15.120 Return of equipment to City – Final billing.
When water is no longer required, the water meter shall be returned to the City’s water and sewer utilities and checked in for the final billing accounting or determination of costs. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-12).

Article III. Regulation of Water Usage, Water Shortage Emergency Condition

13.15.130 Water use restrictions and prohibitions.
(a) The requirements contained in the water use restrictions and prohibitions are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and made a part of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use.

(b) The list of water use restrictions and prohibitions are contained in the rules and regulations for water service and use and are specific measures which will achieve reasonable, yet substantial, reductions in water use by all persons utilizing the City’s water as consumers. If a water shortage emergency condition is declared, the list of water use restrictions and prohibitions may be amended.

(c) Water use prohibitions and restrictions will not prevent the City’s Fire Department from requiring contractors and property owners to “flow” water through fire systems for the purpose of testing or justifying that the fire system is installed and/or operating correctly. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-13).

13.15.140 Water shortage emergency condition.
(a) The City will exercise reasonable diligence and care to furnish and deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer, but does not guarantee the continuity or sufficiency of supply. The City will not be liable for any damage resulting from any interruption, shortage or insufficiency of the supply of water to the customer.

(b) The City shall have the right to declare a water shortage emergency condition according to conditions specified in Section 350 et seq., of the California Water Code.

(c) In case of a water shortage emergency condition and during the period of such condition, the City shall apportion the City’s available supply of water among all customers in the most reasonable manner possible and the rules and regulations for water service and use may be amended. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-14).

Article IV. Regulation of Recycled Water Service and Use

13.15.150 Recycled water regulations.
The requirements contained in the City’s recycled water regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and made a part of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-15).

13.15.160 Purpose and intent of regulation of recycled water service and use.
(a) It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to prohibit the use of potable water for landscape irrigation where recycled water is made available and meets all applicable standards.

(b) It is also the purpose and intent of the City Council to require the use of recycled water for all other nonpotable uses where recycled water is made available, meets all applicable standards for those uses and is determined to be suitable and economically feasible therefor. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-16).

Article V. Backflow Prevention

13.15.170 Incorporation of California Code of Regulations, Title 17.
The requirements contained in Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 6, Subchapter 1, Group 4 (entitled “Drinking Water Supplies), Section 7583 et seq., of the California Code of Regulations, entitled “Regulations Pertaining to Cross-Connections,” which sets forth the rules and regulations governing cross-connections are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and made a part of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use insofar as the same rules and regulations are applicable to the protection of the City’s water distribution system. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-17).

Article VI. Landscape Water Efficiency

13.15.180 Landscape water efficiency regulations.
Pursuant to the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act, Government Code Section 65591 et seq., as amended, the rules, regulations or standards for landscape water efficiency in the city contained in the City’s landscape water efficiency regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and made a part of the City’s rules and regulations of water service and use. (Ord. 1871 § 3, 1-11-11).

Article VII. Enforcement

13.15.190 Responsibility.
The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including any provisions of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use, shall be vested in the Director or agents of the City as the City Manager shall designate; and provided further, that field inspectors or other employees of the City are hereby authorized to act as agents of the City with the power to inspect and issue notices for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-19).

13.15.200 Violation of this chapter or rules and regulations – Payment of funds to account.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use.

(b) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action.

(c) Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s rules and regulations for water service and use compliance fee account. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-20).

13.15.210 Emergency cleanup.
In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including any provisions of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use, when the Director or designee find and determine that the severity of the violation warrants immediate action, he/she shall cause the cleanup or abate the violation thereof. The cost of such cleanup or abatement may be recovered by the City in a civil action. Such emergency cleanup or abatement will not relieve the person liable for any violations of this chapter, or any other applicable provisions of State or Federal laws, or local ordinances. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-21).

13.15.220 Administrative penalties.
Whenever the Director or designee find that any person has violated any provision of this chapter, including any provisions of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use, he/she may assess an administrative penalty in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, excluding inspection costs or cleanup costs.

Whenever the Director or designee find that any person has violated any provision of this chapter, including any provisions of the City’s rules and regulations for water service and use, which includes, but is not limited to interference, tampering, theft of water, or disconnection of service, the Director may require a security deposit at an amount to be determined by the Director.

The remedies provided in this section shall be pursuant to administrative procedures and are cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under State and Federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s rules and regulations for water service and use compliance fee account. (Ord. 1705 § 2, 10-21-97. Formerly § 31-22).

Chapter 13.20
STORM DRAINS AND DISCHARGES
Sections:

Article I. Purpose of Chapter and Definitions

13.20.010    Purpose.

13.20.020    Definitions.

Article II. Storm Drain Discharge, Procedure, Use Regulations, and Prohibited Substances

13.20.030    Discharge into the storm drain prohibited.

13.20.040    Suspension of service.

13.20.050    Monitoring of discharge into the storm drain system.

13.20.060    Public nuisance.

13.20.070    Protection from accidental discharge – Accidental discharge notification.

13.20.080    Discharge pursuant to City and/or NPDES permit.

Article III. Enforcement

13.20.090    Criminal or civil penalty for violation, payment of funds to account.

13.20.100    Emergency cleanup or abatement.

13.20.110    Administrative penalties.

13.20.120    Costs of enforcement.

Article IV. Storm Drain Environmental Compliance Fee

13.20.130    Definitions.

13.20.140    Rates – Users within the city.

13.20.150    Rates – Issuance of bills – Information required.

Article V. Polystyrene Foam Disposable Service Ware

13.20.160    Definitions.

13.20.170    Polystyrene foam disposable food service ware prohibited.

13.20.180    Exemptions to the polystyrene foam disposable food service ware prohibition.

Article VI. Single-Use Carry-Out Plastic Bags

13.20.190    Definitions.

13.20.200    Single-use carry-out bags prohibited.

13.20.210    Administrative fine.

Article I. Purpose of Chapter and Definitions

13.20.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the protection of health, life, resources, and property through prevention and control of unauthorized discharges into watercourses, pursuant to a Federal mandate under (i) what is commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and in accord with (ii) the California Water Code, Division 7 (entitled “Water Quality” – Section 13020 et seq. and commonly referred to as the “Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act”), and (iii) the City’s National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region. The primary goal of this chapter is the cleanup of stormwater pollution from urban runoff that flows to creeks and channels, eventually discharging into the South San Francisco Bay. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-1).

13.20.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section, unless the context or the provision clearly requires otherwise.

(a) Reserved for future use.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) “Best management practice (BMP)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge, or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “City” means and includes all the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the City of Santa Clara, as presently existing, plus all territory which may be added thereto during the effective term of the ordinance codified herein.

(2) “City Code” means the municipal code of the City of Santa Clara, California.

(3) “City Manager” means the City of Santa Clara’s City Manager and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Director of Public Works” means the Director of Public Works and his/her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(2) “Discharger” means any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of industrial waste into a City sewer or storm drain.

(e) “E” definitions:

(1) “Environmental compliance fee” means a program established by the City to assess the fees necessary to cover the costs of the City’s federally mandated nonpoint source control and stormwater management program pursuant to City’s NPDES permit, such fees shall be paid to the City’s storm drain environmental compliance fee account.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) “I” definitions:

(1) “Illicit connection” means the unauthorized connection of a wastewater stream to storm drains or storm sewers.

(2) “Illegal discharge” means any discharge to a City storm drain or storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges authorized by a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the City’s separate storm drain or storm sewer) and discharges resulting from firefighting emergencies and activities.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) Reserved for future use.

(m) Reserved for future use.

(n) “N” definitions:

(1) “Nonpoint source pollution discharge” means any discharge from land that results or likely will result in a discharge into watercourses. Nonpoint source pollution originates from aerial diffuse sources that are mostly related to land use. Nonpoint discharges represent a process whereby pollutants, debris, and chemicals generated from various land uses accumulate on streets, construction sites, parking lots, and other exposed surfaces and are washed off and carried away by stormwater runoff into watercourses. The major pollutants of concern in these discharges are heavy metals, sediments, petroleum hydrocarbons, organochlorine, pesticides, toxins, or any other substance or material deleterious to fish, plant life, or bird life.

(2) “NPDES permit” means a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region.

(o) Reserved for future use.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, joint venture, corporation, or company, and includes the United States, the State of California, the County of Santa Clara, special purpose districts, and any officer or agency thereof.

(2) “Process wastewater” means wastewater that has been used in one or more industrial processes.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Stormwater” means rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, and drainage from natural sources, and excludes infiltration.

(2) “Storm drain system,” sometimes termed “storm sewer,” means any pipe, conduit (including but not limited to streets, curbs, and gutters), or sewer of the City, designed or used for the disposal of stormwaters, surface waters, and natural drainage, including expressly authorized unpolluted water, but excluding any community sanitary sewer system.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) “U” definitions:

(1) “Unpolluted water” means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, that would render such water unacceptable for disposal to storm systems, natural drainage, or directly to surface waters.

(2) “Urban runoff pollution prevention” means prevention of nonpoint source pollution.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) “W” definitions:

(1) “Waste” includes sewage and soil from erosion and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.

(2) “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

(3) “Wastewater” means water that contains any waste.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94; Ord. 1771 § 2, 8-20-02. Formerly § 24-2).

Article II. Storm Drain Discharge, Procedure, Use Regulations, and Prohibited Substances

13.20.030 Discharge into the storm drain prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge, or cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into any storm drain, storm sewer, or natural outlet or channel any waste, including, but not limited to, sewage, industrial wastes, petroleum products, coal tar, or any refuse substance arising from the manufacture of gas from coal or petroleum, chemicals, detergents, solvents, paints, contaminated water, or chlorinated swimming pool water, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, or other process wastewater.

(b) No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a City storm drain or storm sewer other than through a City-approved storm drain connection.

(c) Upon permit application and approval by the Director of Streets and Automotive Services, unpolluted water may be discharged into the City’s storm drain system or into a natural outlet. No discharge other than rainfall runoff shall be allowed, except for such discharge as is expressly permitted by the City’s permit and the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and will not cause any impairment in the beneficial uses or quality of water of the State as defined in the California Water Code, or any special requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region, or injure or interfere with the City’s storm drain system or the operation of the State’s watercourses.

(d) The City may, from time to time, by resolution of the City council, adopt supplementary rules and regulations on discharge into any storm drain or natural outlet or channel that shall have the same force and effect as if set forth herein and for which the remedies herein for violation shall be applicable. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94; Ord. 1771 § 3, 8-20-02. Formerly § 24-3).

13.20.040 Suspension of service.
When found necessary by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives to prevent violation of, or nonconformance with, any provision of this chapter or resolution adopted pursuant thereto, he/she shall refuse to allow, and shall suspend service connections with, the storm drain system to any person not complying with allowable storm drain discharges or regulations. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-4).

13.20.050 Monitoring of discharge into the storm drain system.
(a) When deemed necessary by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives, he/she shall require any person to monitor their storm drain discharges to ensure compliance with allowable discharges.

(b) Where BMP guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any Federal, State, regional, County, or local agency, for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, discharges of non-stormwater to the stormwater system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-5).

13.20.060 Public nuisance.
The discharge of unscreened garbage, fruit, vegetable, animal, or other solid industrial wastes into any storm drain or natural outlet or channel, in violation of any provision of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives may order cleanup of the waste or abatement of the effects of the waste. In the case of threatened pollution or nuisance as determined by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives, the City may take other remedial action, including, but not limited to, the overseeing of the cleanup and abatement efforts, or the City may seek the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate, restraining any person from the continued violation of this chapter. Any person who violates the cleanup or abatement may be civilly, criminally, or administratively liable pursuant to SCCC 13.20.090. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-6).

13.20.070 Protection from accidental discharge – Accidental discharge notification.
(a) Each person shall provide protection from accidental or negligent discharge of prohibited substances, materials, or other wastes regulated by this chapter into any storm drain, storm sewer, natural outlet, or channel. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and equipment and facilities used to prevent accidental or negligent discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense.

(b) All persons shall notify the City of Santa Clara Public Works Department by telephone immediately upon negligent or accidental discharge of nonpermitted substances or wastes to enable mitigation or countermeasures to be taken by the City to minimize damage to storm drains and the receiving waters.

(c) This notification shall be followed, within five days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the negligent or accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve the person of liability for violations of this chapter or for any fines or penalties imposed on the City on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water Code, or for violation of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code, or any other applicable provisions of State or Federal laws, or local ordinances. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-7).

13.20.080 Discharge pursuant to City and/or NPDES permit.
(a) Subject to review and approval under SCCC 13.20.020, the provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit any discharge in compliance with a valid NPDES permit issued to the discharger.

(b) Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the City-issued permit and the City’s NPDES permit (this permit is available for viewing at the City of Santa Clara, Office of the City Clerk, 1500 Warburton Avenue, Santa Clara, California) and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such action. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-8).

Article III. Enforcement

13.20.090 Criminal or civil penalty for violation, payment of funds to account.
(a) Enforcement. See SCCC 13.25.010.

(b) Citation Authority. The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this chapter by issuance of citations. Persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The designated employee positions are the City Manager, or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94; Ord. 1771 § 4, 8-20-02. Formerly § 24-9).

13.20.100 Emergency cleanup or abatement.
In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, when the City Manager (or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives) finds and determines that the severity of the violation warrants immediate action, he/she shall clean up or abate violation thereof. The cost of such cleanup or abatement shall be recovered by the City in a civil action. Such emergency cleanup or abatement will not relieve the person of further action, which may be taken by the City Manager (or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives), including but not limited to, suspension, revocation, or modification of the discharger’s permit, liability for any violations of this chapter, or any other applicable provisions of State or Federal laws, or local ordinances. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-10).

13.20.110 Administrative penalties.
Whenever the City Manager (or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives) finds that any person has violated any notice of violation requiring compliance with any provision of this chapter, or has violated any provision of this chapter, he/she may assess an administrative penalty in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, excluding inspection costs, or cleanup or abatement costs. The remedy provided in this section shall be pursuant to administrative procedures and is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under State and Federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s storm drain environmental compliance fee account. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-11).

13.20.120 Costs of enforcement.
In any civil, criminal, or administrative appeal, hearing, or action commenced by the City under this chapter, the City shall be entitled to recover from the defendant of such action reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs of suit, and any other costs of enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspection costs and cleanup or abatement costs. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-12).

Article IV. Storm Drain Environmental Compliance Fee

13.20.130 Definitions.
(a) “Commercial, industrial, or miscellaneous premises” means a premises designed, improved, or used for a commercial or industrial purpose, other than multifamily or single-family residential purpose, and includes, but is not limited to, private schools and churches.

(b) “Multifamily residential premises” means a premises designed, improved, or used as a residence for five or more families, including apartments and condominiums, and that is not designed, improved, or used for a commercial, industrial, or miscellaneous purpose.

(c) “Premises” means a separate lot or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, which is connected to, or benefits from, directly or indirectly, the storm drain system, or any portion thereof, or from which any water runoff is discharged directly or indirectly into the City’s storm drain system.

(d) “Single-family residential premises” means a premises that is designed, improved, or used as a residence for one family only, which includes but is not limited to, individual duplex, triplex, and fourplex residential dwelling units, and that is not designed, improved, or used for a commercial, industrial, multifamily residential, or miscellaneous purpose. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-13).

13.20.140 Rates – Users within the city.
There is hereby levied and assessed against and upon all premises having storm drain discharges into or through the storm drain system a monthly storm drain service charge. The City may, by resolution, establish and amend the monthly storm drain charge and define how such charge will be applied to various types of premises within the city. Said resolution shall contain the effective date of any change in the monthly storm drain charge. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-14).

13.20.150 Rates – Issuance of bills – Information required.
All bills for storm drain charges shall be issued by the City Department of Finance. Storm drain charge amounts shall be combined with bills or statements for water and sewer service provided by the City. Storm drain charges shall be assessed in all cases where the premises in question is connected to the City’s water system, sewer system, or storm drain system.

The bills shall state their purpose and the name and last known address of the person responsible for payment, and list separately each charge for water service, sewer service, and storm drain service. None of these charges shall be paid separately from the other. All bills shall be for monthly periods or for such other period as shall be determined by resolution of the City. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 4-26-94. Formerly § 24-15).

Article V. Polystyrene Foam Disposable Service Ware

13.20.160 Definitions.
(a) “Disposable food service ware” means single-use disposable products used in the restaurant and food industry for serving prepared food and includes, but is not limited to, plates, trays, cups, bowls and hinged or lidded containers (clamshells). “Disposable food service ware” does not include straws, utensils, drink lids or ice chests.

(b) “Food vendor” means any establishment located in the City of Santa Clara that sells or otherwise provides prepared food for consumption on or off its premises, and includes, but is not limited to, any shop, sales outlet, restaurant, bar, pub, coffee shop, cafeteria, caterer, convenience store, liquor store, grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, mobile food truck, vehicle or cart, or roadside stand. A “food vendor” does not include a food service provider that is associated with either a nonprofit organization with Section 501(c)(3) status under the Internal Revenue Code or a public agency sponsored program.

(c) “National food vendor” means a food vendor that is a chain of franchised or corporate owned establishments located in more than one state.

(d) “Polystyrene foam” means a thermoplastic petrochemical material made from a styrene monomer and expanded or blown using a gaseous agent (expanded polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). “Polystyrene foam” is commonly made into disposable food service ware products. “Polystyrene foam” does not include clear or solid polystyrene (oriented polystyrene).

(e) “Prepared food” means food or beverages that are packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared on the premises. “Prepared food” does not include: (1) any raw, uncooked meat products or fruits or vegetables unless it can be consumed without further preparation; or (2) prepackaged food that is delivered to the food vendor wholly encased, contained or packaged in a container or wrapper, and sold or otherwise provided by the food vendor in the same container or packaging. (Ord. 1925 § 3, 5-20-14).

13.20.170 Polystyrene foam disposable food service ware prohibited.
(a) No national food vendor shall sell or otherwise provide prepared food in polystyrene foam disposable food service ware on or after September 1, 2014.

(b) No food vendor shall sell or otherwise provide prepared food in polystyrene foam disposable food service ware on or after January 1, 2015. (Ord. 1925 § 3, 5-20-14).

13.20.180 Exemptions to the polystyrene foam disposable food service ware prohibition.
(a) A national food vendor or food vendor may seek an exemption from the prohibition under SCCC 13.20.170 due to a “unique packaging hardship” under subsection (b) of this section or a “financial hardship” under subsection (c) of this section.

(b) The national food vendor or food vendor must demonstrate that no reasonably feasible alternative exists to a specific and necessary polystyrene foam disposable food service ware to qualify for a “unique packaging hardship” exemption.

(c) The national food vendor or food vendor must demonstrate both the following to qualify for a “financial hardship” exemption: (1) a gross income under three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on its annual income tax filing for the most recent tax year, and (2) with respect to each specific and necessary polystyrene foam disposable food service ware, that there is no feasible alternative that would cost the same or less than the polystyrene foam disposable food service ware.

(d) The national food vendor or food vendor may submit a written application for an exemption on a form provided by the Public Works Department. The Director of Public Works or designee may require the applicant to submit additional information or documentation to make a determination regarding the exemption request. A request for exemption shall be with or without condition, for a period of twelve (12) months. The national food vendor or food vendor must apply for a new exemption period no later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the then current exemption period to preserve a continuous exemption status. Each application shall be reviewed anew and will be based on the most current information available. The determination of the Director or designee shall be final and is not subject to appeal. (Ord. 1925 § 3, 5-20-14).

Article VI. Single-Use Carry-Out Plastic Bags

13.20.190 Definitions.
(a) “Customer” means any person obtaining goods from a retail establishment.

(b) “Nonprofit charitable organization” means a charitable organization, as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

(c) “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization or group however organized.

(d) “Prepared food” means food or beverage which is prepared on the premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing or squeezing, and which requires no further preparation to be consumed. “Prepared food” does not include any produce, bulk food or meat department within a retail establishment.

(e) “Public eating establishment” means a:

(1) Restaurant, take-out food establishment or any other business that receives ninety percent (90%) or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises; or

(2) Department, unit or section located within and operated by a retail establishment that generates ninety percent (90%) or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises, and the department, unit or section does not engage in the sale of perishable or nonperishable goods from another department, unit or section within the same retail establishment.

(f) “Recycled paper bag” means a paper bag provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment that contains no old growth fiber and a minimum of forty percent (40%) post-consumer recycled content; is one hundred percent (100%) recyclable; and has printed in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag the word “Recyclable,” the name and location of the manufacturer, and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content.

(g) “Retail establishment” means any commercial establishment that sells perishable or nonperishable goods including, but not limited to, clothing, food and personal items directly to the customer; and is located within or doing business within the geographical limits of the city of Santa Clara. “Retail establishment” does not include public eating places, nonprofit charitable organizations, or farmer’s markets.

(h) “Reusable bag” means either a bag made of cloth or machine washable fabric that has handles, or a durable plastic bag with handles that is at least 2.25 mil thick and is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse.

(i) “Single-use carry-out bag” means a bag other than a reusable bag provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment. “Single-use carry-out bags” do not include bags without handles provided to the customer: (1) to transport produce, prepared food, bulk food or meat from a produce, deli, bulk food or meat department within a store to the point of sale; (2) to hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; (3) to segregate food or merchandise that could damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag or recycled paper bag; (4) to protect clothing or garments after cleaning; or (5) to place personal items for the purpose of security requirements. (Ord. 1930 § 4, 9-23-14).

13.20.200 Single-use carry-out bags prohibited.
(a) No retail establishment shall provide a single-use carry-out bag to a customer, at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment effective December 1, 2014.

(b) On or before December 1, 2014, a retail establishment may make available for sale to a customer a recycled paper bag or a reusable bag for a minimum charge of ten cents ($0.10).

(c) Notwithstanding this section, no retail establishment may make available for sale a recycled paper bag unless the amount of the sale of the recycled paper bag is separately itemized on the sale receipt.

(d) A retail establishment may provide a customer participating in the California Special Supplement Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code; and a customer participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code; with one or more recycled paper bags at no cost. (Ord. 1930 § 4, 9-23-14).

13.20.210 Administrative fine.
(a) A fine may be imposed upon findings made by the City Manager, his or her designee, or a code enforcement officer that any retail establishment has provided a single-use carry-out bag to a customer in violation of this chapter.

(b) Upon findings made under subsection (a) of this section, the retail establishment shall be subject to an administrative fine as follows:

(1) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

(2) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation;

(3) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third and subsequent violations;

(4) Each instance that a retail establishment has provided single-use carry-out bags to a customer constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 1930 § 4, 9-23-14).

Chapter 13.25
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

13.25.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 13.

13.25.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 13.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 13 [entitled "Public Services"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 13 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Title 14
(RESERVED)
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

15.05    Administrative Code

15.10    Moving Buildings

15.15    Building Code

15.17    Residential Code

15.20    Electrical Code

15.25    Housing Code

15.30    Mechanical Code

15.35    Plumbing Code

15.36    Energy Code

15.37    Historical Building Code

15.38    Green Building Standards Code

15.40    Dangerous Building Code

15.45    Prevention of Flood Damage Code

15.50    Uniform Building Security Code

15.55    Seismic Hazard Identification

15.60    Municipal Fire and Environmental Code

15.65    Wood Burning Appliances

15.70    Numbering of Buildings

15.75    Existing Building Code

15.80    Enforcement of Title

15.90    Solar Permits

Chapter 15.05
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Sections:

15.05.010  Uniform Administrative Code adopted by reference.

15.05.020  Enforcement and penalties.

15.05.030  Authority to issue citations.

15.05.010 Uniform Administrative Code adopted by reference.
Except as (a) expressly excluded from adoption or (b) modified by amendment as contained in Exhibit A (and explained in Exhibit A-1), which exhibits are attached to Resolution No. 07-7472 and which exhibits are respectively incorporated and adopted by this reference, the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition (hereinafter termed "Administrative Code"), as published by the International Code Council ("ICC") is hereby adopted. It will control administration of the respective Model Codes contained in this title. A copy of the Administrative Code, as amended by resolution, is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Santa Clara for examination and use by the public. (Ord. 1737 § 2, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 2, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 1, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 1, 12-18-07).

15.05.020 Enforcement and penalties.
(a) Abatement Hazards by Building Official. If any person fails to comply with the orders of the Building Official, or if the Building Official is unable to locate the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible within a reasonable time, the Building Official or any authorized representative may take such steps as are necessary to abate the hazards for the protection of the public safety. In no event is notice necessary before abatement, when the hazard is a clear and present danger to the public welfare, constitutes a fire and life safety hazard, or a threat to emergency responders. All costs related to such abatement shall become a lien on the subject property.

(b) Criminal or Civil Penalty for Violation – Payment of Funds to Account. Pursuant to the City's prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations of the provisions of this code in any manner authorized by this section or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, referral to the District Attorney, referral to other appropriate agencies, administrative actions and civil actions. Funds received by the City for criminal or civil penalties shall be paid into the City's Model Code enforcement account.

(c) Infractions/Misdemeanors. Any person who, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, does any one or more of the following acts shall, upon conviction, be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor:

(1) Violates, causes the violation of, or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the Model Codes, as adopted and amended;

(2) Violates or fails to comply with an order made thereunder;

(3) Builds any structure in violation of any detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken;

(4) Fails to comply, within the time affixed herein, or required in the order with an order pursuant to the Model Codes, as adopted and amended;

(5) Violates any of the provisions of this title, any of the provisions of any written authority of the City Manager, the Director of Planning and Inspection, the Building Official or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives;

(6) Violates or fails to comply with any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this title; or

(7) Erects, installs, constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs, moves, improves, removes, replaces, converts, equips, uses, occupies, maintains or demolishes any building, structure or equipment therein, regulated by the Model Codes adopted by this title, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of said Model Codes.

Each and every day, or any part thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate offense.

(d) Prosecution. Every violation of this title shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the City Attorney or his or her duly authorized agent has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading, citation or amendment thereto that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction.

(e) Penalty for Infraction. Each and every violation of this title which is deemed an infraction is punishable by:

(1) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

(2) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within a one-year period; or

(3) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision of this title within a one-year period of the first violation.

(f) Penalty for Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this title which is deemed a misdemeanor is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six months, or, by both penalty and imprisonment.

(g) Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently violates any provision of this title, any written authority of the City Manager, the Director of Planning and Inspection, the Building Official or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code may be civilly liable to the City in the sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day in which such violation occurs or continues. The City may petition the municipal or superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. The civil penalty provided in this section excludes inspection costs and abatement costs, is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under state and federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City's Model Code Enforcement account. (Ord. 1737 § 2, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 2, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 1, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 1, 12-18-07).

15.05.030 Authority to issue citations.
The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this title by issuance of citations. The designated employee positions are the City Manager or his/her duly authorized agents and representatives, the Director of Planning and Inspection and the Building Official or his or her designee. Peace officers and persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this title. (Ord. 1737 § 2, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 2, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 1, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 1, 12-18-07).

Chapter 15.10
MOVING BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.10.010  Definitions.

15.10.020  Building moving approval and moving permit – Requirement.

15.10.030  Application.

15.10.040  Public hearing – Planning Commission – Authorization of building inspector.

15.10.050  Notice of public hearing.

15.10.060  Building moving approval – Action by Planning Commission.

15.10.070  Moving permit – Action by building inspector.

15.10.080  Appeal.

15.10.090  Permit conditions – General.

15.10.100  Rollers.

15.10.110  Truck.

15.10.120  Protection of sidewalk.

15.10.130  Duties of person in charge.

15.10.140  Timely completion and performance bond.

15.10.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning respectively prescribed to them by this section:

(a) "Building" shall mean a structure built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, agricultural, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. A structure containing less than 100 square feet of floor space shall not fall within this definition.

(b) "Building inspector" shall mean the superintendent of building inspection of the City.

(c) "Temporary structure" shall mean any temporary sales office or construction shack necessary for the proper completion of a major construction project used or occupied on a parcel or tract of land for a period of time pending the completion of construction of said major construction on that parcel or tract of land. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-9).

15.10.020 Building moving approval and moving permit – Requirement.
No person shall move any building or part thereof, over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the City, without first obtaining a building moving approval for all such buildings or parts thereof to be moved. The building moving approval shall be obtained from the Planning Commission and before a moving permit shall issue, with the exception that for those buildings which are to be moved to a site which is located more than three hundred (300) feet outside the City boundaries, or in the situation where the building is a temporary structure, the applicant shall directly obtain a moving permit from the building inspector. The building moving approval is in addition to and not in lieu of any permit required from the City building inspector by SCCC 15.10.090(a) and (b) or the City Engineer by SCCC 10.05.400. No person shall move any building, or part thereof, over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the City without first obtaining a separate moving permit for each such building, or part thereof, moved separately. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-10).

15.10.030 Application.
A person seeking building moving approval shall file a verified application or applications for such approval with the Planning Commission; except, where such building, buildings, and parts thereof are to be moved to a site or sites more than 300 feet outside of the City boundaries or in the situation where the building is a temporary structure each application in these instances shall be filed with the building inspector.

(a) Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the Planning Commission, and where more than one building will be located on the same parcel or lot, each moving approval sought in a single application must indicate the same parcel or lot to which it is proposed that each building or part thereof is to be moved. Such application shall be accompanied by a posting and processing fee, as from time to time set by City Council resolution, which posting and processing fee shall be in addition to any moving permit fee and deposit as provided in SCCC 15.10.090(a) and (b).

(b) Contents. Application shall set forth:

(1) A description of the building, buildings and parts thereof proposed to be moved, giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior;

(2) A legal description including the lot, block and tract number, or street address, of the lot from which the building, buildings and parts thereof are to be moved;

(3) A legal description including lot, block and tract number, or street address, of the single lot to which it is proposed any such building, buildings and parts thereof be moved;

(4) A dimensioned plot plan of the site in the City or within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the City to which the building, buildings and parts thereof are to be moved showing all existing and proposed structures, landscaped area, parking spaces, driveways and prominent features;

(5) The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building, buildings and parts thereof are proposed to be moved;

(6) The proposed moving date or dates and hour;

(7) Facts from which it can be ascertained that the building, buildings and parts thereof proposed to be moved are comparable in size, quality, design and appearance of the buildings or structures in the area to which each is to be moved; if to be located in the city or outside the city within three hundred (300) feet of the city boundaries; or if it is a temporary structure;

(8) Facts from which it can be ascertained that the building, buildings and parts thereof will not be detrimental to nor diminish the value of property in the city within three hundred (300) feet of the site to which the building, buildings and parts thereof are to be moved; if to be located in the city or outside the city but within three hundred (300) feet of the city boundaries, or if it is a temporary structure;

(9) A statement of ownership of the building or authorization by applicant to move the building;

(10) Any additional information which the Planning Director or Building Superintendent or Planning Commission shall require.

(c) Fee. The application shall be accompanied by any posting and processing fee prescribed in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66; Ord. 1568 § 1, 5-12-87. Formerly § 5-11).

15.10.040 Public hearing – Planning Commission – Authorization of building inspector.
(a) On each application for the issuance of a building moving approval to move a building, buildings or parts thereof, other than a temporary structure, on City streets to any site within the city or within three hundred (300) feet of the City boundaries, a public hearing by the Planning Commission shall be held after the filing of the application for the issuance of said building moving approval.

(b) On each application to move a building, buildings or parts thereof on City streets to a site more than three hundred (300) feet outside the City boundaries, or to move a temporary structure on City streets, the building inspector may issue a moving permit subject to all the provisions of this chapter, and a public hearing thereon is not a prerequisite to such action by the building inspector. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-12).

15.10.050 Notice of public hearing.
(a) Notice of the required public hearing shall be given by posting a public notice on the front of each building, or part thereof, to be moved and in at least three conspicuous places in the city within three hundred (300) feet of the property to which it is proposed that the same be moved, not less than ten days prior to said hearing. Each such notice shall be headed by words: "MOVING NOTICE" in letters not less than one inch in height. In addition thereto, each notice shall contain the location of the building, buildings and parts thereof by street and number and address of the applicant desiring a permit to move such, a brief description of the property to which it is proposed the same be moved, and the time and place at which the public hearing will be held. The Planning Commission shall cause notices to be posted for hearings to be held before it, by a person designated by it; and, the City Clerk shall cause notice to be posted for hearings to be held before the City Council. The person posting said notice shall file a certificate of such posting together with a copy of such notice with the City Clerk.

(b) Any defect or error appearing in any said notice shall not divest the Planning Commission or City Council of jurisdiction nor invalidate any proceedings.

(c) In addition to the posting of notices required to be posted above, the Planning Commission at least five days prior to the hearings to be held before it, shall cause to be mailed, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of such hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the County of Santa Clara, or as known to the City Clerk as owning property in the City within three hundred (300) feet from the exterior boundaries of the area to be occupied by the building, buildings or parts thereof to be moved and which are the subject of the hearing. Unless the context of an applicable State law provides to the contrary, the failure to mail such notice to all of said persons shall not operate to divest the Planning Commission or the City Council of jurisdiction to conduct any hearing required to be held. The City Council hereby declares that the purpose of providing that said notice be mailed is to give said property owners within three hundred (300) feet information as to any proposed change or modification of the use of said property upon which the building, buildings or parts thereof are to be moved, and the City Council hereby declares that jurisdiction to conduct such hearing shall be obtained upon the posting of notices required in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-13).

15.10.060 Building moving approval – Action by Planning Commission.
(a) In order for the Planning Commission to grant any building moving approval, the findings of the Planning Commission shall be:

(1) That the proposal is consistent with and will not violate any law of the State of California or City ordinance, rule or regulation;

(2) That the building, buildings, and parts thereof proposed to be moved shall be comparable in value, size, quality, design and appearance to buildings and structures in the city in the area of the site to which the same are to be moved;

(3) That it will not be materially detrimental to nor diminish the value of property or improvements in the area in the city within three hundred (300) feet of the site to which the building, buildings and parts thereof are to be moved; and

(4) That the building, buildings and parts thereof can be safely moved with only reasonable inconvenience to traffic and the public.

The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in connection with each building moving approval as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this chapter and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with by the applicant.

(b) The Planning Commission shall render its decision on any application for building moving approval within thirty-five (35) days following close of the public hearing. Failure of the Commission to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be a denial of the application. The granting of any building moving approval, when conforming to the provisions of this section, is hereby declared to be an administrative function, the authority and responsibility for performing which is imposed upon the Planning Commission and the action thereon by said Commission shall be final and conclusive, except in the event of an appeal as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-14).

15.10.070 Moving permit – Action by building inspector.
(a) In order for the Building Official to grant any moving permit, the findings of the Building Official shall be:

(1) That the proposal is consistent with and will not violate any law of the State of California or City ordinance, rule or regulation; and

(2) That the building, buildings and parts thereof can be safely moved with only reasonable inconvenience to traffic and the public; and

(3) That there is adequate assurance that the building, buildings and parts thereof shall be removed from the proposed parcel of property to which the applicant seeks to move same and in accordance with a plan for removal or demolition in those instances in which the application for moving permit was filed with the building inspector upon grounds that the building to be moved is a temporary structure.

The building inspector may designate such conditions in connection with each moving permit as he deems necessary to secure the purposes of this chapter and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with by the applicant.

(b) The building inspector shall render his/her decision on any moving permit and inform the applicant thereof within thirty-five (35) days of the receipt of the application for the permit. Failure of the building inspector to render his/her opinion and so inform the applicant within said period shall be deemed to be a denial of the application. The granting of any moving permit, when conforming to the provisions of the section is hereby declared to be an administrative function, the authority and responsibility for performing which is imposed upon the building inspector and the action thereon by said building inspector shall be final and conclusive, except in the event of a denial of the application by the building inspector an appeal is authorized as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-14.1).

15.10.080 Appeal.
(a) In the case the applicant or others affected are not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission or a denial of an application by the building inspector, they may, within seven calendar days after rendition thereon of a decision by the Commission or the date upon which the building inspector informed the applicant of his/her decision, appeal in writing to the City Council. The City Council on its own motion, made within seven days of the Planning Commission decision, may consider the action of the Planning Commission the same as if an appeal had been taken therefrom.

(b) Said appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk, and when the appeal is taken by a person other than the original applicant, by the payment of an appeal fee set by resolution of the City Council. At its regular meeting held at least three days after the filing of said notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date for hearing of said appeal, and the notice thereof shall be given to the applicant and to the Planning Commission or building inspector, as appropriate, and by posting as provided in SCCC 15.10.050. The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council all maps, records, papers and files which constitute the record in the Planning Commission action from which an appeal was taken. When the appeal is from a decision of the building inspector the building inspector shall transmit to the City Council all maps, records, papers and files which constitute the record in the action from which such appeal was taken.

(c) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing, and the City Council in its decision may reverse, set aside, affirm, amend or modify the action of the Planning Commission or building inspector or it may remand said matter to the Planning Commission or building inspector for further study or action. Failure of the Council to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be an affirmance of the action of the Planning Commission and building inspector.

(d) No building moving approval shall be effective in any case until after the granting of such building moving approval by the Planning Commission and after the period allowed for appeal, if any. In the event of an appeal, no such permit shall be effective until the matter has been finally acted upon by the City Council and said building moving approval has been finally approved by the City Council. Each and every moving permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the terms and conditions of any building moving approval and moving permit granted and as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-15).

15.10.090 Permit conditions – General.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:

(a) Moving Permit Fee. Moving permit fees shall be established, and amended, from time to time, by Council resolution. The fee will reimburse the City for costs incurred to assist the move in City rights-of-way and streets. This permit fee is in addition to and not in lieu of any prescribed fees for permits involving remodeling or alteration of any building.

(b) Deposit Permit Fee. No permit shall be used by any person unless there is previously placed on deposit with the Director of Finance five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) from which deposit there shall be deducted the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each hour or fraction thereof, during which the building or portion thereof, moved separately, is being moved over any portion of a public street in excess of the first twenty-four (24) hours, together with the cost of the service rendered by any employee of the City or by any company or corporation in protecting, trimming or cutting trees or removing and replacing wires or poles; and from which shall also be deducted such sums as will be necessary to cover any damage done to the property of any person along the route of the removal. Any dispute between the holder of a permit and the City as to the cost of any service rendered by any person or the amount of damage done to the property of any person shall be referred to the City Manager, building inspector and the City Attorney, and their decision shall be final.

(c) Accordance With Law. The proposal is consistent with and will not violate any law of the State of California, or City ordinance, rule or regulation, and that the building at its destination will be brought into conformity with all applicable building laws and zoning ordinances.

(d) Conditions of any building moving approval which are prerequisite to obtaining moving permit. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-16).

15.10.100 Rollers.
No building or part thereof shall be moved upon rollers unless planks are placed under said rollers of such width and in such manner as to protect the surface of the street from damage. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-17).

15.10.110 Truck.
No building or part thereof shall be moved unless moved on rollers or upon a truck having wheels equipped with pneumatic or solid rubber tires. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-18).

15.10.120 Protection of sidewalk.
The provisions of SCCC 10.05.340 shall be complied with by the permittee. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-19).

15.10.130 Duties of person in charge.
Every person in charge of the moving of any building, or part thereof, on or over the streets of the City shall:

(a) Notify the Fire Department of the City within one-half hour after sunset of the location of the building or part thereof, and the route over which the building or part thereof, is to be moved during the night.

(b) Give twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to any person responsible for trimming trees, removing wires or the doing of other things necessary to permit the moving of the building, or part thereof, over the route designated.

(c) Maintain red lights at each corner of the building, or part thereof, from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise.

(d) Provide the building inspector with evidence of applicant's public liability and property damage insurance in such maximum amounts as the building inspector may prescribe and provide the building inspector with such undertaking or other security as the building inspector, with the concurrence of the City Engineer, may deem necessary to protect the streets and other public property from injury.

(e) Give twenty (20) hours' written notice to the Chief of Police of the City of the time of moving and the route over which said building, or part thereof, is to be moved. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-20).

15.10.140 Timely completion and performance bond.
(a) No owner or lessee of property upon which any building, or part thereof, is to be located shall move, or cause to be moved, said building, or part thereof, unless the same shall be permanently placed, structurally completed and finished all in accordance with general condition SCCC 15.10.090(c) and any special condition of the particular moving permit and within ninety (90) days following the date such building, or part thereof, is moved to its new site.

(b) The owner or lessee of the property upon which a building, or parts thereof, is to be moved, shall, before a permit is issued under the provisions of this chapter, agree to so complete each such building, or part thereof, at its new location and post a bond for each such building, or part thereof, with and suitable to the building inspector to assure such performance. Each of such bonds shall be in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the renovation and remodeling of the building to be moved, as such cost is estimated by the building inspector. (Ord. 1096; Ord. 1142 § 1, 7-5-66. Formerly § 5-21).

Chapter 15.15
BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.15.010    Adoption of Building Code.

15.15.010 Adoption of Building Code.
The 2016 California Building Code, published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The adoption includes Appendix J. The 2016 California Building Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Building Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 1, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.17
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:

15.17.010    Adoption of Residential Code.

15.17.010 Adoption of Residential Code.
The 2016 California Residential Code, published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Residential Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Residential Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 2, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.20
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

15.20.010    Adoption of Electrical Code.

15.20.010 Adoption of Electrical Code.
The 2016 California Electrical Code, published and copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 3 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Electrical Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Electrical Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 3, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.25
HOUSING CODE
Sections:

15.25.010    Uniform Housing Code adopted by reference.

15.25.020    Administration of Housing Code.

15.25.010 Uniform Housing Code adopted by reference.
Except as (a) expressly excluded from adoption or (b) modified by printed amendment contained in Exhibit D (and explained in Exhibit D-1), which exhibits are attached to Resolution No. 07-7472 and which exhibits are respectively incorporated by this reference, the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Code Council (hereinafter termed “Housing Code”) is hereby adopted. A copy of the Housing Code shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for examination and use by the public.

Expressly excluded from adoption are Chapters 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 and Section 701 inclusive, of the Housing Code.

A copy of the Housing Code, as amended by resolution, is on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City for examination and use by the public. (Ord. 1737 § 5, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 5, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 4, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 4, 12-18-07).

15.25.020 Administration of Housing Code.
Chapter 15.05 SCCC adopts the Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. Administration of the Housing Code will be pursuant to the Administrative Code, as amended. (Ord. 1737 § 5, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 5, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 4, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 4, 12-18-07).

Chapter 15.30
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

15.30.010    Adoption of Mechanical Code.

15.30.010 Adoption of Mechanical Code.
The 2016 California Mechanical Code, published and copyrighted by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Mechanical Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Mechanical Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 4, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.35
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:

15.35.010    Adoption of Plumbing Code.

Cross references – Water and Sewer Department, Ch. 2.70 SCCC; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 13.10 SCCC; duty of plumbers to make written reports of water connection and attachments, SCCC 13.15.040.

15.35.010 Adoption of Plumbing Code.
The 2016 California Plumbing Code, published and copyrighted by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The adoption includes Appendices A, B, C, D, G, H, I, and J. The 2016 California Plumbing Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Plumbing Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 5, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.36
ENERGY CODE
Sections:

15.36.010    Adoption of Energy Code.

15.36.010 Adoption of Energy Code.
The 2016 California Energy Code, published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Energy Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Energy Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 6, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.37
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.37.010    Adoption of Historical Building Code.

15.37.010 Adoption of Historical Building Code.
The 2016 California Historical Building Code, published and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission in Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Historical Building Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Historical Building Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 7, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.38
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.38.010    Adoption of Green Building Standards Code.

15.38.010 Adoption of Green Building Standards Code.
The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, published and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission in Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Green Building Standards Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 8, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.40
DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.40.010    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted by reference.

15.40.020    Administration of Dangerous Building Code.

15.40.010 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted by reference.
Except as (a) expressly excluded from adoption or (b) modified by printed amendment contained in Exhibit G (and explained in Exhibit G-1), which exhibits are attached to Resolution No. 07-7472 and which exhibits are respectively incorporated by this reference, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Code Council (hereinafter termed “Dangerous Building Code”) is hereby adopted.

Expressly excluded from adoption are Sections 203 through 205.2, inclusive, of the Dangerous Building Code.

A copy of the Dangerous Building Code, as amended by resolution, is on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City for examination and use by the public. (Ord. 1737 § 8, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 8, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 7, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 7, 12-18-07).

15.40.020 Administration of Dangerous Building Code.
Chapter 15.05 SCCC adopts the Administrative Code. Administration of the Dangerous Building Code will be pursuant to the Administrative Code, as amended. (Ord. 1737 § 8, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 8, 10-15-02; Ord. 1828 § 7, 12-18-07; Ord. 1829 § 7, 12-18-07).

Chapter 15.45
PREVENTION OF FLOOD DAMAGE CODE
Sections:

15.45.010  Flood Damage Prevention Code adopted by reference.

15.45.010 Flood Damage Prevention Code adopted by reference.
The Flood Damage Prevention Code, 1987 Edition, is hereby adopted pursuant to Section 814 of the City Charter.

A copy of the Flood Damage Prevention Code, 1987 Edition, is on file in the office of the City Clerk for examination and use by the public. (Ord. 1404 § 1, 5-13-80; Ord. 1576 § 1, 9-15-87. Formerly § 5-90).

Chapter 15.50
UNIFORM BUILDING SECURITY CODE
Sections:

15.50.010  Uniform Building Security Code adopted by reference.

15.50.020  Administration of Building Security Code.

15.50.010 Uniform Building Security Code adopted by reference.
Except as modified by printed amendment, the Uniform Building Security Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials (hereinafter termed "Building Security Code") is hereby adopted.

A copy of the Building Security Code, as amended by resolution, is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City for examination and use by the public. (Ord. 1737 § 9, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 9, 10-15-02).

15.50.020 Administration of Building Security Code.
Chapter 15.05 SCCC adopts the most current edition of the Administrative Code, as amended. Administration of the Building Security Code will be pursuant to the Administrative Code, as amended. (Ord. 1737 § 9, 6-1-99; Ord. 1777 § 9, 10-15-02).

Chapter 15.55
SEISMIC HAZARD IDENTIFICATION
Sections:

15.55.010  Purpose.

15.55.020  Definitions.

15.55.030  Scope.

15.55.040  Exempt buildings.

15.55.050  Compliance.

15.55.060  Engineering standards.

15.55.070  Engineering reports.

15.55.080  Building owner notification.

15.55.090  Recordation.

15.55.100  Building tenant notification.

15.55.110  Notice.

15.55.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with State law and to promote public safety and welfare by identifying those buildings that exhibit structural deficiencies in their capacities for earthquake resistance and determining the severity and extent of those deficiencies in relation to their potential for causing injury or loss of life. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-110).

15.55.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

(a) "Civil engineer or structural engineer" means a licensed civil or structural engineer registered by the State of California pursuant to the rules and regulations of Title 16, Division 5 (entitled "Board for Professional Engineers and Surveyors"), Section 404 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations.

(b) "Uniform Building Code (UBC)" refers to the publication published by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California, as adopted and amended by the City.

(c) "Unreinforced masonry building" or "URM" means any building containing walls and/or columns constructed wholly or partially of masonry without at least fifty percent (50%) of the reinforcement required by the 1988 Edition of the UBC, and includes:

(1) Unreinforced brick masonry.

(2) Unreinforced concrete masonry.

(3) Hollow clay tile.

(4) Adobe or unburned clay masonry.

(5) Stone masonry.

(d) Such other terms as are defined in the 1988 edition of the UBC.

(e) "Uniform Administrative Code (UAC)" refers to the publication published by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California, as adopted and amended by the City. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-111).

15.55.030 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing URM buildings in the City of Santa Clara, except as exempted in SCCC 15.55.040. The owners of such buildings shall, upon service of a notice and order and within time limits set forth in SCCC 15.55.050, cause an engineering report to be submitted to the City's Building Official to determine the existence, nature, extent, and severity of structural deficiencies in their buildings' capacity to resist earthquakes. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-112).

15.55.040 Exempt buildings.
The following buildings are exempted from complying with this chapter:

(a) Detached one- or two-family dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes.

(b) Warehouses or similar structures not used for human habitation, except for warehouses or structures housing emergency-services equipment or supplies.

(c) Buildings that have already been structurally upgraded in substantial accordance with the 1973, or later, edition of the UBC.

(d) Registered historical buildings; however, a registered historical building shall be strengthened to comply with the provisions of Title 24, Part 8 (entitled "California Historical Building Code") of the California Code of Regulations (CCR). See explanation of Title 24's origin and authority in SCCC 1.05.020(c)(2), "California Code of Regulations." (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-113).

15.55.050 Compliance.
The owner of a building subject to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of this chapter by submitting an engineering report to the Building Official for review within one year after service of the notice and order from the City. For buildings constructed of concrete masonry, an engineering report will not be required if it can be demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Building Official, that the building is reinforced with at least fifty percent (50%) of the reinforcement required by the 1988 edition of the UBC. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-114).

15.55.060 Engineering standards.
The engineering standards to be used in preparation of engineering reports and compliance with this chapter shall be in accordance with the 1988 edition of the UBC and as established by resolution of the City. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-115).

15.55.070 Engineering reports.
Owners of URM buildings shall submit engineering reports to the Building Official as follows:

(a) Purpose. The purpose of each such engineering report shall be to investigate, in a thorough and unambiguous fashion, a building's structural systems that resist earthquake forces and to evaluate their adequacy to resist the seismic design forces as specified herein.

(b) Authorized Preparers. Engineering reports shall be prepared by civil or structural engineers, as previously defined herein, who are familiar with seismic analysis and design.

(c) Format. The format for engineering reports shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council, or other equivalent format approved in writing by the Building Official. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-116).

15.55.080 Building owner notification.
The Building Official shall issue a written notice to all owners of URM buildings within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter that their building has been included in the City's list of potentially hazardous URM buildings, and is required to have an engineering report submitted to the Building Official.

The owner of the building may appeal the Building Official's initial determination that the building is within the scope of this chapter to the board of appeals ("board") established by Section 204 of the UAC. Such appeal shall be filed with the Board within sixty (60) days from the service date of the notice as described above. Any such appeal shall be decided by the board no later than ninety (90) days after filing of the appeal and the board shall state clearly and concisely in writing the findings in support of its determination. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-117).

15.55.090 Recordation.
At the time that the Building Official serves the notice, the Building Official shall also file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter and is potentially an earthquake-hazardous building. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to provide an engineering report for the building.

If the building is demolished, is found not to be within the scope of this chapter, or is structurally capable of resisting the minimum seismic forces required by this chapter as a result of structural analysis, the Building Official shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a form terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this chapter. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-118).

15.55.100 Building tenant notification.
The owner of each identified building shall provide to each of his/her tenants written notification that a seismic investigation of the building has taken place and that the engineering report documenting the investigation is available for review at the building inspection division of the City. Such notification shall occur within ninety (90) days of submittal of each engineering report to the Building Official. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-120).

15.55.110 Notice.
The notice and order authorized by this chapter shall be given or served upon the owner by (1) personal service, (2) delivery of the same to a person of suitable age and discretion upon the building premises, or (3) posting a copy in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the building premises and by mailing a copy thereof to the owner by registered or certified mail to the address on record with the County assessor. The selected form and time of notice shall be verified by a declaration of the person performing such service. (Ord. 1626 § 1, 8-27-91. Formerly § 5-121).

Chapter 15.60
MUNICIPAL FIRE AND ENVIRONMENTAL CODE
Sections:

15.60.010    Title.

15.60.020    Adoption by reference.

15.60.030    Enforcement and penalties.

15.60.040    Referenced codes.

15.60.050    Scope and administration.

15.60.060    Permits.

15.60.070    Inspections.

15.60.080    Board of Appeals.

15.60.090    Violations.

15.60.100    Fees.

15.60.110    General definitions.

15.60.120    Hazards to firefighters.

15.60.130    Fire apparatus access roads.

15.60.140    Access to building openings and roofs.

15.60.150    Premises identification.

15.60.160    Building service and systems.

15.60.170    Emergency and standby power systems.

15.60.180    Electrical equipment, wiring, and hazards.

15.60.190    Mechanical refrigeration.

15.60.200    Decorative vegetation in new and existing buildings.

15.60.210    Automatic sprinkler systems.

15.60.220    Repair garages.

15.60.230    Fire safety during construction and demolition.

15.60.240    Means of egress.

15.60.250    Hazardous materials – General provisions.

15.60.260    Hazardous materials – General requirements.

15.60.270    Storage.

15.60.280    Explosives and fireworks.

15.60.290    Flammable and combustible liquids.

15.60.300    On-demand mobile fueling.

15.60.310    Flammable gases and flammable cryogenic fluids.

15.60.320    Highly toxic and toxic compressed gases.

15.60.330    Pyrophoric materials.

15.60.340    Reference standards.

15.60.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Municipal Fire and Environmental Code for the City of Santa Clara.” (Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.020 Adoption by reference.
(a) The “2015 International Fire Code” in its entirety, along with Appendices B, C, D, F, H, I and N as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and amendments to sections of the 2015 International Fire Code adopted by the State Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 24, Part 9, known as the California Fire Code;

(b) Pursuant to the approval by the State of California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA) of Santa Clara’s application to serve as the certified unified program agency (CUPA) for the City, the City of Santa Clara assumes authority and responsibility within the City for the California Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory Program (Unified Program) established by Health and Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.11, Section 25404 et seq. It is the purpose of this chapter to consolidate to the extent feasible all the administration and enforcement of six hazardous materials management programs and ensure the coordination and consistency of any regulations adopted pursuant to such program requirements;

(c) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 25502, Subdivision (b), of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, the City does hereby assume responsibility for the implementation of the provisions of Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code and shall have exclusive jurisdiction within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Santa Clara for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of said chapter. The City also specifically adopts the penalty provisions specified in Section 25515 of the California Health and Safety Code and specifically requires that any person who violates Section 25507 of the California Health and Safety Code shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 25515 of the Health and Safety Code;

(d) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the Hazardous Waste Generator Program, Onsite Hazardous Waste Treatment, and Tiered Permitting Program and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.5, Section 25100 et seq. and Section 25404 et seq.;

(e) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the Aboveground Petroleum Storage Act (APSA) and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.67, Section 25270 et seq., and 25404 et seq.;

(f) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the Underground Storage Tank (UST) Permit Program, and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.7, Section 25280 et seq., and Section 25404 et seq.;

(g) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans and Inventories (Business Plans) Program, and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.95, Article 1, Section 25500 et seq., and Section 25404 et seq.;

(h) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the Hazardous Materials Area Plan Program, and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.95, Article 1, Section 25500 et seq. and Section 25404 et seq.; and

(i) The City does hereby assume responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the California Accidental Release Prevention (CalARP) Program, and does hereby adopt by reference Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.95, Article 2, Section 25531 et seq. and Section 25404 et seq.

The foregoing are hereby adopted by reference, with changes and modifications as hereinafter set forth, as the Municipal Fire and Environmental Code of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.030 Enforcement and penalties.
(a) Peace Officers. The Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshals, and Deputy Fire Marshals – Hazardous Materials shall have the powers of a peace officer, pursuant to Penal Code Section 830.37. Other members of the Fire Department, as designated by the Fire Chief, may issue citations for violations of fire-related laws and ordinances, pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5.

(b) Abatement of Fire, Life Safety and Environmental Hazards by Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal. If any person fails to comply with the orders of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal, or if the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal is unable to locate the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible within a reasonable time, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal or any authorized representative may take such steps as are necessary to abate the hazard for the protection of the public health, safety or the environment. Abatement may include the closure of a facility or a part of a facility. In no event is notice necessary before abatement when the hazard is a clear and present danger to the public welfare, constitutes a fire and life safety hazard, a threat to emergency responders or a threat to the environment. All costs related to such abatement shall become a lien on the subject property. All costs related to such abatement may also be collected from the party responsible for the hazard, whether an owner, occupant, manager or officer of an entity which is an owner, occupant or manager.

(c) Criminal or Civil Penalty for Violation – Payment of Funds to Account. Pursuant to the City’s prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations of the provisions of this Code in any manner authorized by this section or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citation, referral to the District Attorney, referral to other appropriate agencies, administrative actions, and civil actions. Funds received by the City for criminal or civil penalties shall be paid into the City’s Fire Code and environmental enforcement account.

(d) Infractions/Misdemeanors. Any person who, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, does any one or more of the following acts shall, upon conviction, be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor:

Violates, causes the violation of, or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the 2015 International Fire Code, as amended; or

(1) Violates or fails to comply with an order made thereunder; or

(2) Builds any structure in violation of any detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or

(3) Fails to comply, within the time affixed herein, or required in the order with an order pursuant to the International Fire Code (2015 Edition), as amended; or

(4) Violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any of the provisions of any written authority of the City Manager, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, the Hazardous Materials Administrator, or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives; or

(5) Violates or fails to comply with any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(6) Each and every day, or any part thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate offense.

(e) Prosecution. Every violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the City Attorney or his or her duly authorized agent has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading, citation or amendment thereto that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction.

(f) Penalty for Infraction. Each and every violation of this chapter, which is deemed an infraction, is punishable by:

(1) A fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first violation;

(2) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within a one-year period;

(3) A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision of this chapter within a one-year period of the first violation.

(g) Penalty for Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this chapter, which is deemed a misdemeanor, is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both penalty and imprisonment.

(h) Enforcement Authority. The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this chapter by issuance of citations. Peace officers and persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The designated employee positions are the City Manager, or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal and the Assistant Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives.

(i) Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any written authority of the City Manager, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, the Assistant Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this Code may be civilly liable to the City in the sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day in which such violation occurs or continues. The City may petition the Superior Court to impose, assess and recover such sums. The civil penalty provided in this section excludes inspection costs and abatement costs, is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under State and Federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to City’s Fire Code and environmental enforcement account.

(j) Penalties Authorized by the Health and Safety Code and Related Regulations. Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any written authority of the City Manager, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal or the Assistant Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code shall be liable to the City for any and all penalties, fines, fees and other sanctions which may be authorized by the Health and Safety Code, adopted by reference in this chapter and the regulations related thereto. (Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.040 Referenced codes.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 1.1.5.1 to read:

1.1.5.1. Referenced codes. Whenever reference is made in this code to a building, mechanical, plumbing, or electrical code, such reference shall mean the version of such code as amended and adopted by the City of Santa Clara.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.050 Scope and administration.
California Fire Code Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Municipal Fire and Environmental Code of the City of Santa Clara, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 104.13 to read:

104.13 Standby fire personnel and fire watch personnel. The fire code official has the authority to require, at no cost to the jurisdiction, standby fire personnel and/or fire watch personnel if in the opinion of the fire code official potentially hazardous conditions or reductions in a life safety feature exist. The owner, agent, or lessee shall provide one or more qualified persons, as required and approved, to be on duty. Such standby fire personnel or fire watch personnel shall be subject to the fire code official’s orders at all times and remain on duty during the times such places are open to the public, when such activity is being conducted, or as required by the fire code official. Fire watch personnel are not employees or agents of the city.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.060 Permits.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.1.4 to read:

105.1.4 Annual Operational Fire Permits. All fees for annual operational fire permits under the provisions of Sec. 105.6 of this Chapter shall be due and payable at the time of commencement of occupancy and said permit shall expire no later than twelve (12) months after the date of issuance. Fees for the renewal of such permits shall be due and payable upon the expiration of the prior permit. No permit fee paid hereunder shall be refundable by reason of the cessation of occupancy during the permit period. Every annual permit fee that is not paid within a period of thirty (30) days from the time the same became due is hereby declared to be delinquent, and a penalty of 100% or a maximum fine of five-hundred (500) dollars shall be added to said fee.

California Fire Code Section 105.2 is hereby amended to read:

105.2 Application. Applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount listed in the City of Santa Clara Municipal Fee Schedule.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.4.5 to read:

105.4.5 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. One (1) set of as built drawings (hard-copy) and one (1) electronic format. Electronic submittals shall comply with electronic format submittal guidelines.

California Fire Code Section 105.6.17 is hereby amended to read:

105.6.17 Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational permit is required:

1. To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within facilities of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement shall not apply to the offsite transportation in pipelines regulated by the Department of Transportation (DOT) nor does it apply to piping systems.

2. To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons (19 L) in a building or in excess of 10 gallons (37.9 L) outside of a building, except that a permit is not required for the following:

2.1 The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the fire code official, would cause an unsafe condition.

2.2 The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.

3. To store, handle or use Class II or Class IlIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil burning equipment.

4. To store, handle or use Class IIIB liquids in tanks or portable tanks for fueling motor vehicles at motor fuel-dispensing facilities or where connected to fuel-burning equipment.

Exception: Fuel oil and used motor oil used for space heating or water heating.

5. To remove Class I or II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.

6. To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used.

7. To place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) an underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank.

8. To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material that poses a greater hazard than that for which the tank was designed and constructed.

9. To manufacture, process, blend or refine flammable or combustible liquids.

10. To engage in the dispensing of liquid fuels into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments in accordance with Section 5706.5.4 or to engage in on-demand mobile fueling operations in accordance with Section 5707.

11. To utilize a site for the dispensing of liquid fuels from tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, marine craft and other special equipment at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments in accordance with Section 5706.5.4 or to utilize a site for on-demand mobile fueling operations in accordance with Section 5707.

California Fire Code Table 105.6.9 is hereby amended to read:

TABLE 105.6.9

PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR COMPRESSED GASES

TYPE OF GAS

AMOUNT
(cubic feet at NTP)

Corrosive

200

Flammable (except cryogenic fluids and liquefied petroleum gases)

200

Highly toxic

Any amount

Inert and simple asphyxiatea

6,000

Irritant

200

Moderately toxic

20

Other health hazards

650

Oxidizing (including oxygen)

504

Pyrophoric

Any amount

Radioactive

Any amount

Sensitizer

200

Toxic

Any amount

Unstable (reactive)

Any amount

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.02832m3.

a. For carbon dioxide used in beverage dispensing applications, see Section 105.6.4.

California Fire Code Table 105.6.21 is hereby amended to read:

TABLE 105.6.21

PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

TYPE OF MATERIAL

AMOUNT

Combustible liquids

See Section 105.6.17

Corrosive materials:

 

 

Gases

200 cubic feet

 

Liquids

55 gallons

 

Solids

500 pounds

Explosive materials

See Section 105.6.15

Flammable materials:

 

 

Gases

See Section 105.6.9

 

Liquids

See Section 105.6.17

 

Solids

10-pounds

Highly toxic materials:

 

 

Gases

Any Amount

 

Liquids

Any Amount

 

Solids

Any Amount

Moderately toxic gas

20 cubic feet

Oxidizing materials

 

 

Gases

504 cubic feet

 

Liquids

 

 

 

Class 4

Any Amount

 

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

 

Class 1

No Permit Required

Solids

 

 

Class 4

Any Amount

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

Class 1

No Permit Required

Organic Peroxides

 

 

Liquids

 

 

 

Class I

Any Amount

 

 

Class II

Any Amount

 

 

Class III

Any Amount

 

 

Class IV

Any Amount

 

 

Class V

No Permit Required

 

Solids

 

 

 

Class I

Any Amount

 

 

Class II

Any Amount

 

 

Class III

Any Amount

 

 

Class IV

Any Amount

 

 

Class V

No Permit Required

Other health hazard

 

Gases

650 cubic feet

 

Liquids

55 gallons

 

Solids

500 pounds

Pyrophoric materials

 

 

Gases

Any Amount

 

Liquids

Any Amount

 

Solids

Any Amount

Radioactive materials

 

 

Gases

Any Amount

 

Liquids

See Section 105.6.50

 

Solids

See Section 105.6.50

Toxic materials

 

 

Gases

Any Amount

 

Liquids

Any Amount

 

Solids

Any Amount

Unstable (reactive) materials

 

 

Gases

 

 

Liquids

 

 

 

Class 4

Any Amount

 

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

 

Class 1

Any Amount

 

Solids

 

 

 

Class 4

Any Amount

 

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

 

Class 1

Any Amount

Water reactive materials

 

 

Liquids

 

 

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

 

Class 1

Any Amount

 

Solids

 

 

 

Class 3

Any Amount

 

 

Class 2

Any Amount

 

 

Class 1

Any Amount

For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454kg.

a. 20 gallons when Table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard identification signs in accordance with Section 5003.5.5 are provided for quantities of 20 gallons or less.

b. 200 pounds when Table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard identification signs in accordance with Section 5003.5 are provided for quantities of 200 pounds or less.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.6.50 to read:

105.6.50 Radioactive Materials. To store or handle at any installation more than one microcurie (37,000 becquerel) of radioactive material not contained in a sealed source or more than 1 millicurie (37,000,000 becquerel) of radioactive material in a sealed source or sources, or any amount of radioactive material for which a specific license from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is required.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.6.51 to read:

105.6.51 Stationary Battery System Serving Fire/Life Safety Systems. An operational permit is required for stationary storage battery systems providing power to fire and life safety systems.

California Fire Code Section 105 is hereby amended by adding Section 105.6.52 as follows:

105.6.52 Emergency responder radio coverage system. An operational permit is required to maintain an emergency responder radio coverage system in accordance with Section 510.

California Fire Code Section 105 is hereby amended by adding Section 105.6.53 as follows:

105.6.53 Outdoor assembly event. A temporary operational permit is required to operate an outdoor assembly event.

California Fire Code Section 105 is hereby amended by adding Section 105.6.54 as follows:

105.6.54 Christmas Tree Lots or Sale Areas at Retail Businesses. A temporary operational permit is required to operate a Christmas Tree Lot or Sales Areas at Retail Businesses.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.8 to read:

105.8 Annual Fire Department Inspection Fees Required. An annual fire inspection fee shall be paid to the City of Santa Clara for each A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-3.1, and S occupancies in the City and for any R-3 occupancy in the City wherein a home occupation is conducted except for small family day care operations.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.9 to read:

105.9 Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) Fees. Pursuant to the appointment of the City of Santa Clara as a Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) by the California Environmental Protection Agency, the Fire Department is authorized to collect fees associated with the CUPA programs. The CUPA fees will be collected on an annual basis or as specified in the Santa Clara Municipal Fee Schedule.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.10.1 to read:

105.10.1 Review of Building Plans. The Building Inspection Division shall transmit to the Fire Department a copy of each plan submitted for the construction or alteration of those occupancies classified as A, E, H, I, R-1, R-2 and all buildings classified as a high-rise as defined in the International Building Code as well as other plans when determined by the Fire code official that review by the Fire Department is necessary to ensure and maintain a reasonable degree of fire and life safety.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.10.2 to read:

105.10.2 Building Inspection Division. In addition to the foregoing, the Building Inspection Division shall review each application for a building permit for all other occupancies and shall transmit to the Fire Department each such application and its accompanying plans if it is determined that one or more of the following facts exist:

1. All new commercial buildings.

2. Building permit plans including tenant improvements shall be routed to the Fire Department for the following occupancy groups and classifications:

1) Group A: A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5

2) Group E

3) Group F: F-1

4) Group H: H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5

5) Group I: I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4

6) Group R: R-1, R-2, R-3.1, R-4

7) Group S; S-1

3. Building Permit plans for tenant improvements for all other occupancies with the exception of R-3 occupancies when the tenant improvements exceed 500 square feet in area.

4. Building Permit plans for spray rooms, spray booth and spraying space as regulated by Chapter 24 of the Santa Clara Municipal Fire and Environmental Code.

5. Fire Department Access shall be reviewed for the following:

1) New buildings when any portion of the building is situated more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street.

2) Parking lot layout changes.

3) Vehicle gate installations.

4) Plan developments which include private streets.

6. Hazardous Materials: Building Permit plans including tenant improvements for projects intended for the use, storage or handling of hazardous materials (includes soil remediation utilizing hazardous materials) when the quantities exceed the quantities set forth in Tables 105.6.9, 105.6.11 and 105.6.21.

7. Storage: Building Permit plans which includes storage that may exceed ten (10) feet or includes storage of any height containing: aerosols, plastics, idle pallets, plastic pallets, rubber tires, baled cotton, rolled paper, flammable liquids or similar commodities.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.10.3 to read:

105.10.3 Transmittal. When any plans are transmitted under Section 105.10 above, the Fire code official shall review the same and determine what fire and life safety requirements are applicable. The Fire code official shall transmit the results of the plan review to the Building Inspection Division in writing.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 105.10.4 to read:

105.10.4 Final Approval. No final inspection under this code, as to all or any portion of the development, shall be deemed completed and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the requirements imposed by this code have been completed and the final approval thereof, by the Fire Department, has been given as provided herein and all inspection fees paid.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.070 Inspections.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 106.5 to read:

106.5 Documents. Any person or party who prevents or attempts to prevent any representative of the Fire Department from examining any relevant books or records in the conduct of his or her official duties under this code shall be in violation of this code.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 106.6 to read:

106.6 Evidence. Any person or party who prevents or interferes with the preservation of evidence of any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this code or any other Federal, State, or local law, rule, or regulation shall be in violation of this code.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 106.7 to read:

106.7 Interference. Any person or party who willfully prevents, interferes with, or attempts to hinder in any way the work of any authorized representative of the Fire Department in the lawful enforcement of any provision of this code, or fails to promptly permit entry for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code shall be in violation of this code.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.080 Board of Appeals.
California Fire Code Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read:

108.1 Appeals. Whenever the Fire Chief of the City of Santa Clara or any authorized designee disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for under the provisions of this Code, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Code do not apply or that the true intent of meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief to the City Manager of the City of Santa Clara within seven (7) business days from the date of the decision or interpretation.

California Fire Code Section 108.2 is hereby amended to read:

108.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is proposed. The City Manager shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.090 Violations.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.1 to read:

109.1.1 Abatement of Fire and Life Safety Hazards by Fire Code Official. If any person fails to comply with the orders of the fire code official, or if the fire code official is unable to locate the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible within a reasonable time, the fire code official or any authorized representative may take such steps as are necessary to abate the hazard for the protection of the public safety. In no event is notice necessary before abatement, when the hazard is a clear and present danger to the public welfare. All costs related to such abatement shall become a lien on the subject property.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.2 to read:

109.1.2 Criminal or Civil Penalty for Violation; Payment of Funds To Account. Pursuant to the City’s prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations of the provisions of this code in any manner authorized by this section or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, referral to the District Attorney, referral to other appropriate agencies, administrative actions and civil actions.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.3 to read:

109.1.3 Infractions/Misdemeanors. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code, any of the provisions of any written authority of the City Manager or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code shall be guilty of an infraction/misdemeanor. Each and every day, or any part thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate offense.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.4 to read:

109.1.4 Prosecution. Every violation of this code shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the City Attorney or his or her duly authorized agents has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading, citation or amendment thereto that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.5 to read:

109.1.5 Penalty for Infraction. Each and every violation of this code, which is deemed an infraction, is punishable by:

1) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

2) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within one year period; or,

3) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision of this Chapter within a one year period of the first violation.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.6 to read:

109.1.6 Penalty for Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this code, which is deemed a misdemeanor, is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or, by both penalty and imprisonment.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.7 to read:

109.1.7 Enforcement Authority. The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this code by issuance of citations. Peace officers and persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this code. The designated employee positions are: the City Manager or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 109.1.8 to read:

109.1.8 Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently violates any provision of this code, any written authority of the City Manager or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code may be civilly liable to the City in the sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day in which such violation occurs or continues. The City may petition the municipal or superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. The civil penalty provided in this Section excludes inspection costs and abatement costs, is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under state and federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this Section shall be paid to the Fire Prevention and Hazardous Materials Enforcement Fund.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.100 Fees.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 113.6 to read:

113.6. Re-inspection Fees. A re-inspection fee as set forth from time to time by City Council resolution may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required corrections have not been completed. This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees upon initial rejection of work for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before work is ready for the inspection or re-inspections, or if hazards are not abated in the required timeframe.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 113.7 to read:

113.7. Subsequent Review Fees. When additional reviews of construction drawings are required, either caused by field changes or revisions, or when multiple reviews are needed in order to approve construction drawings, a subsequent review fee may be assessed as set forth from time to time by City Council resolution.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.110 General definitions.
California Fire Code Section 202 is hereby amended by adding and amending the following definitions:

CONTINUOUS GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. A gas detection system where the analytical instrument is maintained in continuous operation and sampling is performed without interruption. Analysis is allowed to be performed on a cyclical basis at intervals not to exceed 30 minutes. In occupied areas where air is re-circulated and not exhausted to a treatment system (e.g. breathing zone), the fire code official may require a cyclical basis at intervals not to exceed 5 minutes. The gas detection system shall be able to detect the presence of a gas at or below the permissible exposure limit in occupiable areas and at or below 1/2 IDLH (or 0.05 LC 50 if no established IDLH) in unoccupiable areas.

CORROSIVE LIQUID. Corrosive liquid is:

1) any liquid which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause destruction irreversible alteration of such tissue by chemical action; or

2) any liquid having a pH of 2 or less or 12.5 or more; or

3) any liquid classified as corrosive by the U.S. Department of Transportation; or

4) any material exhibiting the characteristics of corrosivity in accordance with Title 22, California Code of Regulations §66261.22.

MODERATELY TOXIC GAS. A chemical or substance that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air more than 2000 parts per million but not more than 5000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

MAXIMUM THRESHOLD QUANTITY (MAX TQ). Maximum Threshold Quantity (Max TQ) is the maximum quantity of a moderately toxic or toxic gas, which may be stored in a single vessel before a more stringent category of regulation is applied.

MINIMUM THRESHOLD QUANTITY. Minimum threshold quantity is the aggregate quantity of highly toxic, toxic or moderately toxic gas in a control area which, due to the minimum aggregate quantities, need only comply with the requirements set forth in Section 6004.1.

OTHER HEALTH HAZARD MATERIAL. A hazardous material which affects target organs of the body, including but not limited to, those materials which produce liver damage, kidney damage, damage to the nervous system, act on the blood to decrease hemoglobin function, deprive the body tissue of oxygen or affect reproductive capabilities, including mutations (chromosomal damage), sensitizers or teratogens (effect on fetuses).

SECONDARY CONTAINMENT. Secondary containment is that level of containment that is external to and separate from primary containment and is capable of safely and securely containing the material, without discharge, for a period of time reasonably necessary to ensure detection and remedy of the primary containment failure.

SPILL CONTROL. That level of containment that is external to and separate from the primary containment and is capable of safely and securely containing the contents of the largest container and prevents the materials from spreading to other parts of the room.

WORKSTATION. A defined space or an independent principal piece of equipment using hazardous materials with a hazard rating of 3 or higher as ranked by NFPA 704 where a specific function, laboratory procedure or research activity occurs. Approved or listed hazardous materials storage cabinets, flammable liquid storage cabinets or gas cabinets serving a work station are included as part of the work station. A work station is allowed to contain ventilation equipment, fire protection devices, detection devices, electrical devices and other processing and scientific equipment.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.120 Hazards to firefighters.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 316.7 to read:

316.7 Roof Guardrails at Interior Courts. Roof openings into interior courts that are bounded on all sides by building walls shall be protected with guardrails. The top of the guardrail shall not be less than 42 inches in height above the adjacent roof surface that can be walked on. Intermediate rails shall be designed and spaced such that a 12-inch diameter sphere cannot pass through.

Exception: Where the roof opening is greater than 600 square feet in area.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.130 Fire apparatus access roads.
California Fire Code Section 503.1 is hereby amended to read:

503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3 and as per Fire Department Access Road Standards.

California Fire Code Section 503.2.1 is hereby amended to read:

503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) exclusive of shoulders, or as required by Appendix D, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.140 Access to building openings and roofs.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 504.5 to read:

504.5 Access Control Devices. When access control devices including bars, grates, gates, electric or magnetic locks or similar devices, which would inhibit rapid fire department emergency access to within and throughout the building, are installed, such devices shall be approved by the fire code official. All electrically powered access control devices shall be provided with an approved means for deactivation or unlocking from a single location or otherwise approved by the fire code official or his/her designee. Access control devices shall also comply with Chapter 10 Egress.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.150 Premises identification.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 505.3 to read:

505.3 Site directories. When required by the fire code official, approved site directories, illustrating and identifying buildings, important site features and access roads shall be installed and maintained at multi-building complexes.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.160 Building service and systems.
California Fire Code Section 601.2 is hereby amended to read:

601.2 Permits. Permits shall be obtained for refrigeration systems, battery systems, fuel tanks connected to emergency or standby power systems, emergency responder radio systems, and solar photovoltaic power systems as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.170 Emergency and standby power systems.
California Fire Code Section 604 is hereby amended by adding Section 604.2.17 to read:

604.2.17 Refrigeration systems. Where treatment, detection, mechanical ventilation, alarm or other electrically operated systems are required for refrigeration systems, such systems shall be provided with an approved standby source of power in accordance with the California Electrical Code.

California Fire Code Section 604 is hereby amended by adding Section 604.2.18 to read:

604.2.18 Repair garages. Where mechanical ventilation, treatments systems, alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems are required in repair garages for lighter than air fuels, such systems shall be provided with an approved standby source of power in accordance with the California Electrical Code.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.180 Electrical equipment, wiring, and hazards.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 605.13 to read:

605.13 Immersion Heaters. All electrical immersion heaters used in dip tanks, sinks, vats and similar operations shall be provided with approved over-temperature controls and low liquid level electrical disconnects. Manual reset of required protection devices shall be provided.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.190 Mechanical refrigeration.
California Fire Code Section 606 is hereby amended by adding Section 606.17 to read:

606.17 Standby power. Where mechanical ventilation, treatment systems, temperature control, alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems are required, such systems shall be provided with an approved standby source of power in accordance with the California Electrical Code.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.200 Decorative vegetation in new and existing buildings.
California Fire Code Section 806.1.1 is hereby amended to read:

806.1.1 Display inside buildings. The display of Christmas trees and other decorative vegetation shall be in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, §3.08 and Sections 806.1 through 806.5.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.210 Automatic sprinkler systems.
California Fire Code Section 903.2 is hereby amended to read:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this Section or in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 whichever is the more restrictive.

For the purposes of this section, firewalls and fire barriers used to separate building areas shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code and shall be without openings or penetrations.

1. In other than residential buildings which require the installation of fire sprinklers for all new buildings according to the California Residential Code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new buildings and structures greater than 1,000 square feet.

Exception: Group S-2 or U occupancies used exclusively for vehicle parking and which meet all of the following:

1. Noncombustible construction;

2. Maximum building area not to exceed 5,000 square feet;

3. Structure is open on three (3) or more side;

4. Minimum of 10 feet separation from existing buildings unless area is separated by fire walls complying with California Building Code, Section 706.

2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing Group A, B, E, F, I L, M, S and U buildings and structures, when additions are made that increase the building area to more than 3,600 square feet or that create conditions described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19.

3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing Group R occupancies when additions are made and the building area is greater than 3,600 square feet.

4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new basements regardless of size and throughout existing basements that are expanded by more than 50%.

5. Any change in the character of occupancy or in use of any building with a building area equal to or greater than 3,600 square feet which, in the opinion of the fire code official or building official, would place the building into a more hazardous division of the same occupancy group or into a different group of occupancies and constitutes a greater degree of life safety1 or increased fire risk2, shall require the installation of an approved fire automatic fire sprinkler system.

1 Life Safety – Increased occupant load, public assembly areas, public meeting areas, churches, indoor amusement attractions, buildings with complex exiting systems due to increased occupant loads, large schools/day-care facilities, large residential care facilities with non-ambulatory.

2 Fire Risks – High-piled combustible storage, woodworking operations, hazardous operations using hazardous materials, increased fuel loads (storage of moderate to highly combustible materials), increased sources of ignition (welding, automotive repair with the use of flammable liquids and open flames).

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.220 Repair garages.
California Fire Code Section 2311 is hereby amended by adding Section 2311.7.2.4 to read:

2311.7.2.4 Supervision and monitoring. Required gas detection and mechanical ventilation systems shall be electrically supervised and monitored in accordance with Section 5004.10.

California Fire Code Section 2311 is hereby amended by adding Section 2311.7.2.5 to read:

2311.7.2.5 Standby power. The gas detection system shall have a battery backup or an approved alternate source of power in accordance with NFPA 72.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.230 Fire safety during construction and demolition.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 3304.8 to read:

3304.8 Fire Walls. When firewalls are required in combustible construction, the wall construction shall be completed (with all openings protected) immediately after the building is sufficiently weather-protected at the location of the wall(s).

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.240 Means of egress.
California Fire Code Section 3311.1 is hereby amended to read:

3311.1 Stairways Required. Each level above the first story in multi-story buildings that require two exit stairways shall be provided with at least two usable exit stairways after the floor decking is installed. The stairways shall be continuous and discharge to grade level. Stairways serving more than two floor levels shall be enclosed (with openings adequately protected) after exterior walls/windows are in place. Exit stairs in new and in existing, occupied buildings shall be lighted and maintained clear of debris and construction materials at all times.

Exception: For multi-story buildings, one of the required exit stairs may be obstructed on not more than two contiguous floor levels for the purposes of stairway construction (i.e., installation of gypsum board, painting, flooring, etc.).

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 3311.1.1 to read:

Section 3311.1.1 Required Means of Egress. All buildings under construction shall have at least one unobstructed means of egress. All means of egress shall be identified in the prefire plan see Section 3308.2.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.250 Hazardous materials – General provisions.
California Fire Code Section 5001.2.2.2 is hereby amended to read:

5001.2.2.2 Health Hazards The material categories listed in this section are classified as health hazards. A material with a primary classification as a health hazard can also pose a physical hazard.

1. Highly toxic and toxic materials.

2. Corrosive materials.

3. Moderately toxic gas.

4. Other health hazards.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.260 Hazardous materials – General requirements.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.1.5 to read:

5003.1.5 Toxic, Highly Toxic, Moderately Toxic Gases and Similarly Used or Handled Materials. The storage, use and handling of toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding Table 6004.2 or 6004.3 shall be in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 60. Any toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic material that is used or handled as a gas or vapor shall be in accordance with the requirements for toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic gases.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.1.6 to read:

5003.1.6 Other Health Hazards. The storage, use and handling of materials classified as other health hazards including carcinogens, irritants and sensitizers in amounts exceeding 810 cubic feet for gases, 55 gallons for liquids and 5,000 pounds for solids shall be in accordance with Section 5003.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.1.7 to read:

5003.1.7 Additional Spill Control and Secondary Containment Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 5004.2. An approved containment system is required for any quantity of hazardous materials that are liquids or solids at normal temperature, and pressure (NTP) where a spill is determined to be a plausible event and where such an event would endanger people, property or the environment. The approved containment system may be required to include a combination of spill control and secondary containment meeting the design and construction requirements set forth in Section 5004.2.

California Fire Code Section 5003.2.2.1 is hereby amended to read:

5003.2.2.1 Design and Construction. Piping, tubing, valves, fittings and related components used for hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the following:

1. Piping, tubing, valves, fittings and related components shall be designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be contained and shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the pressure, structural and seismic stress, and exposure to which they are subject.

2. Piping and tubing shall be identified in accordance with ASME A13.1 and the Santa Clara County Fire Chiefs Marking Requirements and Guidelines for Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste to indicate the material conveyed.

3. Readily accessible manual valves or automatic remotely activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall be installed on supply piping and tubing at the following locations:

1. The point of use.

2. The tank, cylinder or bulk use.

4. Manual emergency shutoff valves and controls for remotely activated emergency shutoff valves shall be identified and the location shall be clearly visible accessible and indicated by means of a sign.

5. Backflow prevention or check valves shall be provided when the backflow of hazardous materials could create a hazardous condition or cause the unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials.

6. Where gases or liquids having a hazard ranking of:

1. Health Class 3 or 4

2. Flammability Class 4

3. Instability Class 4

in accordance with NFPA 704 are carried in pressurized piping above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig)(103 Kpa), an approved means of leak detection, emergency shutoff or excess flow control shall be provided. Where the piping originates from within a hazardous material storage room or area, the excess flow control shall be located within the storage room or area. Where the piping originates from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located as close to the bulk source as practical.

Exceptions:

1. Piping for inlet connections designed to prevent backflow.

2. Piping for pressure relief devices.

7. Secondary containment or equivalent protection from spills or leaks shall be provided for piping for liquid hazardous materials and for highly toxic and toxic corrosive gases above threshold quantities listed in Tables 6004.2 and 6004.3. Secondary containment includes, but is not limited to double-walled piping.

Exceptions:

1. Secondary containment is not required for toxic corrosive gases if the piping is constructed of inter materials.

2. Piping under sub-atmospheric conditions if the piping is equipped with an alarm and fail-safe-to-close valve activated by a loss of vacuum.

8. Expansion chambers shall be provided between valves whenever the regulated gas may be subjected to thermal expansion. Chambers shall be sized to provide protection for piping and instrumentation and to accommodate the expansion of regulated materials.

California Fire Code Section 5003.2.2.2 is hereby amended to read:

5003.2.2.2 Additional Regulation for Supply Piping for Health Hazard Materials. Supply piping and tubing for gases and liquids having a health hazard ranking of 3 or 4 shall be in accordance with ASME B31.3 and the following:

1. Piping and tubing utilized for the transmission of toxic, highly toxic, or highly volatile corrosive liquids and gases shall have welded or brazed connections throughout except for connections within an exhausted enclosure if the material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage or containment is provided for connections if the material is a liquid.

2. Piping and tubing shall not be located within corridors, within any portion of a means of egress required to be enclosed in fire-resistance-rated construction or in concealed spaces in areas not classified as Group H Occupancies.

Exception: Piping and tubing within the space defined by the walls of corridors and the floor or roof above or in concealed space above other occupancies when installed in accordance with Section 415.8.6.3 of the California Building Code as required for Group H, Division 5 Occupancies.

3. All primary piping for toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases shall pass a helium leak test of 1x10-9 cubic centimeters/second where practical, or shall pass testing in accordance with an approved, nationally recognized standard. Tests shall be conducted by a qualified “third party” not involved with the construction of the piping and control systems.

California Fire Code Section 5003.3.1 is hereby amended to read:

5003.3.1 Unauthorized Discharges. When hazardous materials are released in quantities reportable under state, federal or local regulations or when there is release or a threatened release that presents a threat to health, property or the environment, the fire code official shall be notified immediately in an approved manner and the following procedures required in accordance with Sections 5003.3.1.1 through 5003.3.1.4.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.5.2 to read:

5003.5.2 Ventilation Ducting. Product conveying ducts for venting hazardous materials operations shall be labeled with the hazard class of the material being vented and the direction of flow.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.5.3 to read:

5003.5.3 “H” Occupancies. In “H” occupancies, all piping and tubing may be required to be identified when there is any possibility of confusion with hazardous materials transport tubing or piping. Flow direction indicators are required.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5003.9.11 to read:

5003.9.11 Fire Extinguishing Systems for Workstations Dispensing, Handling or Using Hazardous Materials. Combustible and non-combustible workstations, which dispense, handle or use hazardous materials, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2703.10, unless otherwise approved.

Exception: Internal fire protection is not required for Biological Safety Cabinets that carry NSF/ANSI certification where quantities of flammable liquids in use or storage within the cabinet do not exceed 500 ml.

California Fire Code Section 5003.10.4 is hereby amended to read:

5003.10.4 Elevators utilized to transport hazardous materials.

5003.10.4.1 When transporting hazardous materials, elevators shall have no other passengers other than the individual(s) handling the chemical transport cart.

5003.10.4.2 Hazardous materials liquid containers shall have a maximum capacity of 20 liters (5.28 gal).

5003.10.4.3 Toxic, moderately toxic, highly toxic, asphyxiate gases, and corrosive gases shall be limited to a container of a maximum water capacity of 1 lb.

5003.10.4.4 Means shall be provided to prevent the elevator from being summoned to other floors.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.270 Storage.
California Fire Code Section 5004.2.1 is hereby amended to read:

5004.2.1 Spill Control for Hazardous Material Liquids. Rooms, buildings or areas used for storage of hazardous material liquids in individual vessels having a capacity of more than 55 gallons (208 L) or in which aggregate capacity of multiple vessels exceeds 1,000 gallons (3785 L), shall be provided with spill control to prevent the flow of liquids to adjoining areas. Floors in indoor locations and similar surfaces in outdoor locations shall be constructed to contain a spill from the largest single vessel by one of the following methods:

1. Liquid-tight sloped or recessed floors in indoor locations or similar areas in outdoor locations.

2. Liquid-tight floors in indoor locations or similar areas provided with liquid-tight raised or recessed sills or dikes.

3. Sumps and collection systems, including containment pallets in accordance with Section 5004.2.3.

4. Other approved engineered systems.

Except for surfacing, the floors, sills, dikes, sumps and collection systems shall be constructed of noncombustible material, and the liquid-tight seal shall be compatible with the material stored. When liquid-tight sills or dikes are provided, they are not required at perimeter openings having an open-grate trench across the opening that connects to an approved collection system.

California Fire Code Section 5004.2.2.2 is hereby amended to read:

5004.2.2.2 Incompatible Materials. Incompatible materials shall be separated from each other in independent secondary containment systems.

California Fire Code Section 5004.2.3 is hereby amended to read:

5004.2.3 Containment pallets. Combustible containment pallets shall not be used inside buildings to comply with Section 5004.2 where the individual container capacity exceeds 55 gallons (208 L) or an aggregate capacity of multiple containers exceeds 1,000 gallons (3785 L) for liquids or where the individual container capacity exceeds 550 pounds (250 kg) or an aggregate of multiple containers exceeds 10,000 pounds (4540 kg) for solids.

Where used as an alternative to spill control and secondary containment for outdoor storage in accordance, with the exception in Section 5004.2, containment pallets shall comply with all of the following:

1. A liquid-tight sump accessible for visual inspection shall be provided;

2. The sump shall be designed to contain not less than 66 gallons (250L);

3. Exposed surfaces shall be compatible with material stored;

4. Containment pallets shall be protected to prevent collection of rainwater within the sump of the containment pallet.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.280 Explosives and fireworks.
California Fire Code Section 5601.1.3 is hereby amended to read:

5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, and use of fireworks, including those fireworks classified as Safe and Sane by the California State Fire Marshal, are prohibited.

Exceptions:

1. The storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604.

2. Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as allowed in Section 5605 and Health and Safety Code Division 11.

3. The use of fireworks for fireworks displays, pyrotechnics before a proximate audience and pyrotechnic special effects in motion pictures television, theatrical or group entertainment productions as allowed in Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 6 Fireworks reprinted in Section 5608 and Health and Safety Code Division 11.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.290 Flammable and combustible liquids.
California Fire Code Section 5704.2.7.5.8 is hereby amended to read:

5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill Prevention. An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.5 shall be provided to prevent the overfill of all Class I, II and IIIA liquid storage tanks. Storage tanks in refineries, bulk plants or terminals regulated by Sections 5706.4 or 5706.7 shall have overfill protection in accordance with API 2350.

An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.6 shall be provided to prevent the overfilling of Class IIIB liquid storage tanks connected to fuel-burning equipment inside buildings.

Exception: Outside aboveground tanks with a capacity of 1320 gallons (5000 L) or less need only comply with Section 5704.2.9.7.5 Item 1 sub-item (1.1).

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5704.2.7.5.9 to read:

5704.2.7.5.9 Automatic Filling of Tanks. Systems that automatically fill flammable or combustible liquid tanks shall be equipped with overfill protection, approved by the fire code official that sends an alarm signal to a constantly attended location and immediately stops the filling of the tank. The alarm signal and automatic shutoff shall be tested on an annual basis and records of such testing shall be maintained on-site for a period of five (5) years.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.300 On-demand mobile fueling.
California Fire Code Chapter 57 is hereby amended by adding Section 5707 to read:

5707 On-Demand Mobile Fueling.

5707.1 General. On-demand mobile fueling operations that dispense Class I, II, and III liquids into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall comply with Sections 5707.1 through 5707.7.

Exception: Fueling from an approved portable container in cases of an emergency or for personal use.

5707.1.1 Approval required. Mobile fueling operations shall not be conducted without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official. Mobile fueling operations shall occur only at approved locations.

5707.2 Mobile fueling vehicle. An on-demand mobile fueling vehicle shall be one of the following:

1. A tank vehicle complying with NFPA 385 that has chassis-mounted tanks or containers where the aggregate cargo capacity does not exceed 1200 gallons (4542 L).

2. A vehicle with one or more chassis-mounted tanks or containers that do not exceed 110 gallons (415 L) individual capacity and having an aggregate capacity that does not exceed 1200 gallons (4542 L).

3. A vehicle that carries a maximum of 60 gallons (227 L) of motor fuel in metal safety cans listed in accordance with UL 30 or other approved metal containers each not to exceed 5 gallons (19 L) in capacity.

The mobile fueling vehicle shall comply with the requirements of all local, state and federal requirements.

Mobile fueling vehicles with a chassis-mounted tank in excess of 110 gallons (415 L) shall comply with the requirements of Section 5706.6, Section 5707, and NFPA 385.

The mobile fueling vehicle and its equipment shall be maintained in good repair.

Safety cans and approved metal containers shall be secured to the mobile fueling vehicle except when in use.

5707.3 Required documents. Documents developed to comply with Sections 5707.3.1 through 5707.3.3 shall be updated as necessary by the owner of the mobile fueling operation and shall be maintained in compliance with Section 107.3.

5707.3.1 Safety and emergency response plan. Mobile fueling operators shall have an approved written safety and emergency response plan that establishes policies and procedures for fire safety, spill prevention and control, personnel training and compliance with other applicable requirements of this code.

5707.3.2 Training records. Training records of operators shall be maintained. Mobile fueling vehicle operators shall possess evidence of training on proper fueling procedures and the safety and emergency response plan.

5707.3.3 Site plan. A site plan shall be developed for each location at which mobile fueling occurs. The site plan shall be in sufficient detail to indicate: all buildings, structures, lot lines, property lines, and appurtenances on site and their use or function; all uses adjacent to the lot lines of the site; fueling locations, the locations of all storm drain openings and adjacent waterways or wetlands; information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing, impounding and how a spill will be retained upon the site property; and the scale of the site plan.

5707.4 Mobile fueling areas. Mobile fueling shall not occur on public streets, public ways, or inside buildings. Fueling on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings is prohibited.

5707.4.1 Separation. Mobile fueling shall not take place within 25 feet (7620 mm) of buildings, property lines, or combustible storage.

Exception: The fire code official shall be authorized to decrease the separation distance for dispensing from metal safety cans or other approved metal containers in accordance with Section 5707.2.

When dispensing operations occur within 15 feet (4572 mm) of a storm drain, an approved storm drain cover or an approved equivalent method that will prevent any fuel from reaching the drain shall be used.

5707.4.2 Sources of ignition. Smoking, open flames, and other sources of ignition shall be prohibited within 25 feet (7620 mm) of fuel dispensing activities. Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7620 mm) of the vehicle and the point of fueling shall be prominently posted on the mobile fueling vehicle. The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during fueling.

5707.5 Equipment. Mobile fueling equipment shall comply with Sections 5707.5.1 through 5707.5.5.

5707.5.1 Dispensing hoses and nozzles. Where equipped, the dispensing hose shall not exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm) in length. The dispensing nozzles, hoses and appurtenances shall be of an approved and listed type.

5707.5.2 Break-away device. A listed break-away device shall be provided at the nozzle.

Exception: Mobile fueling vehicles equipped with an approved brake interlock tied to the nozzle holder that prohibits movement of the mobile fueling vehicle when the nozzle is removed from its holder.

5707.5.3 Shut off valve and fuel limit. Mobile fueling vehicles shall be equipped with a listed shutoff valve assembly and a fuel limit switch set to a maximum of 30 gallons (116 L).

5707.5.4 Fire extinguisher. An approved portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum rating of 4-A:80-B:C shall be provided on the mobile fueling vehicle with signage clearly indicating its location.

5707.5.5 Spill kit. Mobile fueling vehicles shall contain a minimum 5 gallon (19 L) spill kit of an approved type.

5707.6 Operations. Mobile fueling vehicles shall be constantly attended during fueling operations with brakes set and warning lights in operation. Mobile fueling vehicles shall not obstruct emergency vehicle access roads.

5707.6.1 Dispensing hose. Where equipped, mobile fueling vehicles shall be positioned in a manner to preclude traffic from driving over the dispensing hose. The dispensing hose shall be placed on an approved reel or in an approved compartment prior to moving the mobile fueling vehicle.

5707.6.2 Drip control. Operators shall place a drip pan or an absorbent pillow under the nozzle to catch drips and under each fuel fill opening prior to and during dispensing operations.

5707.6.3 Nighttime deliveries. Nighttime deliveries shall only be made in areas deemed adequately lighted by the fire code official.

5707.6.4 Vehicle lights. The mobile fueling vehicle flasher lights shall be in operation while dispensing operations are in progress.

5707.6.5 Safety cones. Safety cones or barriers shall be employed as warning devices to highlight the vehicle fueling area.

5707.6.6 Bonding. A means for bonding the mobile fueling vehicle to the motor vehicle shall be provided. Such bonding means shall be employed during fueling operations.

5707.6.7 Spill reporting. Spills shall be reported in accordance with Section 5003.3.1.

5707.7 Training. Mobile fueling vehicles shall be operated only by designated personnel who are trained on proper fueling procedures and the safety and emergency response plan. The vehicle operator training shall be approved by the fire code official.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.310 Flammable gases and flammable cryogenic fluids.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5803.3 to read:

5803.3 Mobile fueling of hydrogen vehicles. Mobile fueling of hydrogen vehicles is prohibited unless approved by the fire code official.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.320 Highly toxic and toxic compressed gases.
California Fire Code Section 6004 title is hereby amended to read:

Section 6004. Highly Toxic, Toxic and Moderately Toxic Compressed Gases Including Those Used as Refrigerants

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1 to read:

6004.1 General. Materials stored and used as a gas whether or not the material meets the definition of a compressed gas, and meets the definition of a highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gas shall comply with Section 6004.

The minimum threshold quantity for highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases, vapors and mists for indoor and exterior storage and use are set forth in Table 6004.1.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1 is hereby amended to add Table 6004.1 to read:

Table 6004.1

Minimum Threshold Quantities for Highly Toxic, Toxic and Moderately Toxic Gases

Highly Toxic

0

Toxic

10 cubic feet

Moderately Toxic

20 cubic feet

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.1 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.1 Special limitations for indoor storage and use by occupancy. The indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in certain occupancies shall be subject to the limitations contained in Sections 6004.1.1.1 through 6004.1.1.3.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.1.1 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.1.1 Group A, E, I or U occupancies. Toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases shall not be stored or used within Group A, E, I or U occupancies.

Exception: Cylinders not exceeding 20 cubic feet (0.556m3) at normal temperature and pressure (NTP) are allowed within gas cabinets or fume hoods.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.1.2 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.1.2 Group R occupancies. Toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases shall not be stored or used in Group R occupancies.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.1.3 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.1.3 Offices, retail sales and classrooms. Toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases shall not be stored or used in offices, retail sales or classroom portions of Group B, F, M or S occupancies.

Exception: In classrooms of Group B occupancies, cylinders with a capacity not exceeding 20 cubic feet (0.566 m3) at NTP are allowed in gas cabinets or fume hoods.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.2 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.2 Gas cabinets. Gas cabinets containing highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases shall comply with Section 5003.8.6 and the following requirements:

1. The average ventilation velocity at the face of gas cabinet access ports or windows shall not be less than 200 cubic feet per minute (1.02 m/s) with a minimum of 150 feet per minute (0.76 m/s) at any point of the access port or window.

2. Gas cabinets shall be connected to an exhaust system.

3. Gas cabinets shall not be used as the sole means of exhaust for any room or area. The maximum number of cylinders located in a single gas cabinet shall not exceed three, except that cabinets containing cylinders not exceeding 1 pound (0.454 kg) net contents are allowed to contain up to 100 cylinders.

Gas cabinets required by Section 6004.2 or 6004.3 shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Alternative fire-extinguishing systems shall not be used.

California Fire Code Section 6004.1.3 is hereby amended to read:

6004.1.3 Exhausted enclosures. Exhausted enclosures containing highly toxic, toxic or moderately toxic gases shall comply with Section 5003.8.5 and the following requirements:

1. The average ventilation velocity at the face of the enclosure shall not be less than 200 feet per minute (1.02 m/s) with a minimum of 150 feet per minute (0.76 m/s).

2. Exhausted enclosures shall be connected to an exhaust system.

3. Exhausted enclosures shall not be used as the sole means of exhaust for any room or area.

Exhausted enclosures required by Section 6004.2 or 6004.3 shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Alternative fire-extinguishing system shall not be used.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.4 to read:

6004.1.4 Automatic Shut-Off Valve. An automatic shut-off valve, which is of a fail-safe to close design, shall be provided to shut off the supply of highly toxic gases for any of the following:

1. Activation of a manual fire alarm system.

2. Activation of the gas detection system.

3. Failure of emergency power.

4. Failure of primary containment.

5. Seismic activity.

6. Failure of required ventilation.

7. Manual activation at an approved remote location.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.5 to read:

6004.1.5 Emergency Control Station. Signals from emergency equipment used for highly toxic gases shall be transmitted to an emergency control station or other approved monitoring station, which is continually staffed by trained personnel.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.6 to read:

6004.1.6 Maximum Threshold Quantity. Toxic gases stored or used in quantities exceeding the maximum threshold quantity in a single vessel per control area or outdoor control area shall comply with the additional requirements for highly toxic gases of Section 6004 of this code.

Moderately toxic gases stored or used in quantities exceeding the maximum threshold quantity in a single vessel per control area or outdoor control area shall comply with the additional requirements for toxic gases of Section 6004 of this code.

The following formula shall be used to calculate the maximum threshold quantity:

Max TQ (pounds) = LC50 (ppm) x 2 lb.

For gas mixtures containing one or more toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic components, the LC50 shall be calculated using CGA Standards P-20 and P-23.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.7 to read:

6004.1.7 Reduced Flow Valve. All containers of materials other than lecture bottles containing Highly Toxic material and having a vapor pressure exceeding 29 psia shall be equipped with a reduced flow valve when available. If a reduced flow valve is not available, the container shall be used with a flow-limiting device. All flow limiting devices shall be part of the valve assembly and visible to the eye when possible; otherwise, they shall be installed as close as possible to the cylinder source.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.8 to read:

6004.1.8 Fire Extinguishing Systems. Buildings and covered exterior areas for storage and use areas of materials regulated by this Chapter shall be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. The design of the sprinkler system for any room or area where highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases are stored, handled or used shall be in accordance with Section 5004.5.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.9 to read:

6004.1.9 Local Gas Shut Off. Manual activation controls shall be provided at locations near the point of use and near the source, as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official may require additional controls at other places, including, but not limited to, the entry to the building, storage or use areas, and emergency control stations. Manual activated shut-off valves shall be of a fail-safe-to-close design.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.10 to read:

6004.1.10 Exhaust Ventilation Monitoring. For highly toxic gases and toxic gases exceeding threshold quantities, a continuous monitoring system shall be provided to assure that the required exhaust ventilation rate is maintained. The monitoring system shall initiate a local alarm. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall be designed to provide warning both inside and outside of the interior storage, use, or handling area.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.11 to read:

6004.1.11 Emergency Response Plan. If the preparation of an emergency response plan for the facility is not required by any other law, responsible persons shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, and filed with the fire code official, a written emergency response plan. If the preparation of an emergency response plan is required by other law, a responsible person shall file a copy of the plan with the fire code official.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.12 to read:

6004.1.12 Cylinder Leak Testing. Cylinders shall be tested for leaks immediately upon delivery and again immediately prior to departure. Testing shall be approved by the fire code official in accordance with appropriate nationally recognized industry standards and practices, if any. Appropriate remedial action shall be immediately undertaken when leaks are detected.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.13 to read:

6004.1.13 Inert Gas Purge System. Gas systems shall be provided with dedicated inert gas purge systems. A dedicated inert gas purge system may be used to purge more than one gas, provided the gases are compatible. Purge gas systems inside buildings shall be located in an approved gas cabinet unless the system operates by vacuum demand.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.1.14 to read:

6004.1.14 Seismic Shutoff Valve. An automatic seismic shut-off valve, which is of a fail-safe to close design, shall be provided to shutoff the supply of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases with an LC50 less than 3000 parts per million upon a seismic event within 5 seconds of a horizontal sinusoidal oscillation having a peak acceleration of 0.3G (1.47m/sec2) and a period of 0.4 seconds.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.2 to read:

6004.2 Indoor Storage and Use. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.4.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.2.1 to read:

6004.2.1 Applicability. The applicability of regulations governing the indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases shall be as set forth in Sections 6004.2.1.1 through 6004.2.1.5.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.2.1.1 to read:

6004.2.1.1 Quantities Not Exceeding the Maximum Allowable Quantity per Control Area. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 5003.1.1(2) shall be in accordance with Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.2.1.4 and 6004.2.1.5.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.2.1.4 to read:

6004.2.1.4 Quantities not exceeding minimum threshold quantity per control area. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts not exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.1 shall be in accordance with Sections 6001, and 6004.1 and Chapter 50.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.2.1.5 to read:

6004.2.1.5 Quantities exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately gases in amounts exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.1 shall be in accordance with Sections 6001, 6004.1, 6004.2 and Chapter 50.

California Fire Code Section 6004.2.2 is hereby amended to read:

6004.2.2 General Indoor Requirements. The general requirements applicable to the indoor storage and use of highly toxic and toxic compressed gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.4.

Moderately toxic gases with an LC50 less than or equal to 3000 parts per million shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.4

Moderately toxic gases with an LC50 more than 3000 parts per million but not greater than 5000 parts per million and exceeding the maximum threshold quantity, as determined by 6004.1.6, shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.7.

California Fire Code Section 6004.2.2.7 is hereby amended to read:

6004.2.2.7 Treatment Systems. The exhaust ventilation from gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures and gas rooms and local exhaust systems required in Section 6004.2.2.4 and 6004.2.2.5 shall be directed to a treatment system. The treatment system shall be utilized to handle the accidental release of gas and to process exhaust ventilation. The treatment system shall be designed in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.7.1 through 6004.2.2.7.5 and Section 510 of the California Mechanical Code.

Exceptions:

1. Highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases storage. A treatment system is not required for cylinders, containers and tanks in storage when all of the following are provided:

1.1. Valve outlets are equipped with gas-tight outlet plug or caps.

1.2. Hand wheel-operated valves have handles secured to prevent movement.

1.3. Approved containment vessels or containment systems are provided in accordance with Section 6004.2.2.3.

California Fire Code Section 6004.2.2.10.2 is hereby amended to read:

6004.2.2.10.2. Alarms. The gas detection system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to a constantly attended control station when a short-term hazard condition is detected. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall provide warning both inside and outside the area where the gas is detected. The audible alarm shall be distinct from all other alarms.

California Fire Code Section 6004.3 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3 Outdoor Storage and Use. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.3.1 through 6004.3.4. The minimum threshold quantity for highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases for outdoor storage and use are set forth in Table 6004.1.

California Fire Code Section 6004.3.1 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3.1 Applicability. The applicability of regulations governing the outdoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases shall be as set forth in Sections 6004.3.1.1 through 6004.3.1.5.

California Fire Code Section 6004.3.1.1 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3.1.1 Quantities Not Exceeding the Maximum Allowable Quantity per Control Area. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic and toxic gases in amounts exceeding the threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 5003.1.1(4) shall be in accordance with Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1, 6004.3.1.4 and 6004.3.1.5.

California Fire Code Section 6004.3.1.4 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3.1.4 Quantities not exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts not exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.1 shall be in accordance with Sections 6001, 6004.1 and Chapter 50.

California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6004.3.1.5 to read:

6004.3.1.5 Quantities exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding the minimum threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.1 shall be in accordance with Sections 6001, 6004.3 and Chapter 50.

California Fire Code Section 6004.3.2 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3.2 General outdoor requirements. The general requirements applicable to the outdoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.3.2.1 through 6004.3.2.4.

Moderately toxic gases with an LC50 equal to or less than 3000 parts per million shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.3.

Moderately toxic gases with an LC50 more than 3000 parts per million but not greater than 5000 parts per million and exceeding the maximum threshold quantity, as determined by 6004.1.6, shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.3.2.1 through 6004.3.2.4.

Moderately toxic gases shall not be considered as toxic gases for maximum allowable quantities determinations under Table 5003.1.1(4).

California Fire Code Section 6004.3.3 is hereby amended to read:

6004.3.3 Outdoor Storage Weather Protection for Portable Tanks and Cylinders. Weather protection in accordance with Section 5004.13 shall be provided for portable tanks and cylinders located outdoors and not within gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures. The storage area shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 5004.5.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.330 Pyrophoric materials.
California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 6405.3.1 to read:

6405.3.1 Silane distribution systems automatic shutdown. Silane distribution systems shall automatically shut down at the source upon activation of the gas detection system at levels above the alarm level and/or failure of the ventilation system for the silane distribution system.

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

15.60.340 Reference standards.
California Fire Code Chapter 80 is hereby amended by adding the following:

Compress Gas Association (CGA) standards:

CGA

Standard Reference #

Title

G-7 (2014)

Guide to Labeling and Marking of Compressed Gas

G-13 (2015)

Storage and Handling of Silane and Silane Mixtures.

ANSI/P-18 (2013)

Standard for Bulk Inert Gas Systems

S-1.2 (2009)

Pressure Relief Device Standards – Part 2 Portable Containers for Compressed Gases

V-1 (2013)

Standard for Compressed Gas Cylinder Valve Outlet and Inlet Connections

(Ord. 1963 § 1, 1-10-17).

Chapter 15.65
WOOD BURNING APPLIANCES
Sections:

Article I. Definitions and General Provisions

15.65.010    Definitions.

15.65.020    Residential installations.

15.65.030    Commercial installations.

15.65.040    Gas fireplaces.

Article II. Prohibitions

15.65.050    Unauthorized appliances prohibited.

15.65.060    Certification.

15.65.070    Prohibited fuels.

15.65.080    Burning solid waste – Limitations – Specifications.

Article I. Definitions and General Provisions

15.65.010 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this article shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter.

(a) “Bay Area Air Quality Management District (“BAAQMD”)” means the air quality agency for the San Francisco Bay Area established pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 40200.

(b) “EPA” means United States Environmental Protection Agency.

(c) “EPA certified wood heater” means any wood heater that meets the standards in Title 40, Chapter 1, Subchapter C, Part 60, Subpart AAA, Section 60.530 et seq. of the Code of Federal Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations.

(d) “Fireplace” means any permanently installed masonry or factory-build wood burning appliance, except a pellet-fueled wood heater, designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to thirty-five (35) to one.

(e) “Gas fireplace” means a fireplace or any other listed gas appliance as defined in the Uniform Mechanical Code designed to burn natural gas in a manner that simulates the appearance of a wood burning fireplace and does not burn anything other than natural gas.

(f) “Paints” means all exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers, stains, primers, sealers, under coatings, roof coatings, wood preservatives, shellacs, and other paints or paint-like products.

(g) “Paint solvents” means all original solvents sold or used to thin paints or to clean up painting equipment.

(h) “Pellet-fueled wood heater” means any wood burning appliance that operates exclusively on wood pellets.

(i) “Solid fuel” means wood or any other nongaseous or nonliquid fuel.

(j) “Treated wood” means wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated, painted or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or weathering.

(k) “Waste petroleum products” means any petroleum product other than gaseous fuels that has been refined from crude oil, and has been used, and as a result of use, has been contaminated with physical or chemical impurities.

(l) “Wood burning appliance” means fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fired wood heater or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purposes. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.020 Residential installations.
All wood burning appliances installed in new residential units or wood burning appliances being added to existing residential units shall comply with this chapter. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.030 Commercial installations.
All wood burning appliances installed in new commercial buildings or wood burning appliances being added to existing commercial buildings shall comply with this chapter. Commercial buildings shall include, but not be limited to, hotels and restaurants. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.040 Gas fireplaces.
Gas fireplaces shall be exempt from this chapter. However, the conversion of a gas fireplace to burn wood shall constitute the installation of a wood burning appliance and shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

Article II. Prohibitions

15.65.050 Unauthorized appliances prohibited.
Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, any new commercial or residential wood burning appliance installed must be one of the following:

(a) A pellet-fueled wood heater;

(b) An EPA certified wood heater;

(c) A fireplace certified by EPA or a fireplace certified by an EPA-accredited laboratory as being compliant with the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District standards for fireplaces, using that district’s testing protocol for fireplaces;

(d) New fireplaces in newly built or existing residential, commercial or other nonresidential structures that replace lawful fireplaces which exist at the time when an application is approved for construction of new fireplaces;

(e) Outdoor fireplaces which are not attached to a structure; or

(f) Wood burning appliances which are primarily used for the preparation of food. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.060 Certification.
Any person who plans to install a wood burning appliance must obtain a building permit and submit documentation to the Building Department demonstrating that the appliance is a pellet-fueled wood heater, an EPA certified wood heater or a fireplace certified by EPA or a fireplace certified by an EPA-accredited laboratory as being compliant with the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District standards for fireplaces, using that district’s testing protocol for fireplaces. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.070 Prohibited fuels.
The following fuels are prohibited from use in a wood burning appliance:

(a) Any treated wood, plastic products, rubber products, glossy or colored papers and particle board;

(b) Any solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes generated from residential, commercial and industrial sources, including trash, refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphaltic products, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semi-solid wastes, or other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes;

(c) Waste petroleum products;

(d) Paints or paint solvents;

(e) Coal; and/or

(f) Salt water driftwood. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

15.65.080 Burning solid waste – Limitations – Specifications.
No person shall burn any solid waste within the limits of the City except in accordance with and subject to the following limitations and conditions:

(a) No person shall burn any garbage, or any rubbish that originates from any industrial or commercial establishment or any hospital, clinic, medical or dental office or medical laboratory, except in accordance with SCCC Title 15.

(b) No person shall create or cause the emission of noxious or offensive odors, dense smoke, or any private or public nuisance by burning any solid waste.

(c) No fire shall be kindled or maintained by any person within or upon any public street, way, road, alley, waterway, or other public property or place, except by a member of the Fire Department acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or a designee of the Fire Chief.

(d) No person shall burn any solid waste within or upon any premises except for the burning of fuel in wood burning appliances, which is not prohibited under this chapter.

(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Fire Marshal of the Fire Department may issue a permit for the burning of a bonfire or other fire in an outdoor location pursuant to Chapter 15.60 SCCC. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 5-21-02).

Chapter 15.70
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.70.010    Official street numbering map.

15.70.020    Numbers designated by the Building Official.

15.70.030    Display of numbers required.

15.70.040    Placement of numbers on buildings.

15.70.010 Official street numbering map.
A map entitled “House Numbering Grid System, City of Santa Clara, California,” (hereinafter referred to as “said map” or “official grid map”) is on file in the office of the Building Official. It exhibits the various lots and parcels of land fronting on the various streets in the City. The numbering grids thereon are hereby referred to for particulars and said map is made a part hereof. All numbers shall be determined and located as shown on said map. Where possible, all numbers located on the south or west sides of a street shall be even and all numbers on the north and east sides of a street shall be odd. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 7-24-79. Formerly § 25-33).

15.70.020 Numbers designated by the Building Official.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to designate the respective numbers for buildings or parcels of land fronting on streets heretofore laid out or extended in accordance with the official grid map. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 7-24-79. Formerly § 25-34).

15.70.030 Display of numbers required.
No owner or occupant of any building having an entrance which fronts on a public street shall display or permit the display of any number thereto other than the number designated by the Building Official. The owner or occupant shall, within five days after receiving notice of the designated number(s) from the Building Official, place the number(s) upon such building as provided in this chapter.

(a) All new buildings or occupancies shall have street numbers posted prior to the request for final building inspection.

(b) Required numbers, signs, and directories shall be maintained in good condition and shall be visible from the street.

(c) When signs are provided to display the name of the building, they shall also include the full address (e.g., Mission Building, 1500 Warburton Avenue). (Ord. 1384 § 1, 7-24-79. Formerly § 25-35).

15.70.040 Placement of numbers on buildings.
The following requirements for the placement of numbers on buildings shall apply:

(a) General requirements for buildings:

(1) All entrances from the public street to buildings fronting thereon shall be numbered as provided in this chapter. The numbers shall be placed in the immediate area of each entrance and shall be clearly visible from the street.

(2) All main address numerals shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in height with a three-eighths-inch stroke and shall be placed to read from left to right or vertically from top to bottom.

(3) Individual tenant numbers, when not facing a public street, shall have numbers with a minimum of two inches in height and with a one-quarter-inch stroke. Such numbers shall be located on the main door to each tenant space or as the Building Official may approve. When a rear entrance is provided, such entrance shall also be identified with the tenant space number.

(b) Single building (one and two stories) with multiple tenancy of twelve (12) units or less:

(1) The building is to be assigned a single address complying with the official grid map.

(2) Individual tenants shall be identified by unit numbers (e.g., Unit 1, 2, 3, etc.).

(3) Single story buildings having tenant spaces or units facing directly on the public street may, at the discretion of the Building Official, obtain a separate address.

(c) Single building of two stories containing more than twelve (12) units or a building of three or more stories with multiple tenants:

(1) The building is to be assigned a single address complying with the official grid map.

(2) Each unit shall be numbered with the first digit indicating the floor level (e.g., first floor – 101, 102, 103, etc.; seventh floor – 701, 702, 703, etc.).

(d) Two or more buildings on one property with multiple tenants:

(1) Each property complex shall be assigned a single address complying with the official grid map.

(2) Each separated building shall be assigned a building number (e.g., Building #1, Building #2, etc.). The building numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in height with a one-inch stroke and be of a contrasting color, illuminated or of a reflective material. The building numbers shall be displayed on each side of the building which faces a public or private access. When practicable, the building numbers shall be located a minimum of eight feet above grade. Visibility is imperative and due consideration for eaves, overhangs, and other obstructions shall be given.

(3) Individual tenant units shall be identified by unit number with the first digit indicating the building number (e.g., Building #1, Units 101, 102, etc.; Building #2, Units 201, 202, etc.). The Building Official may designate alternative numbering systems for clarity.

(4) Complex directories showing building locations and numbering systems shall be located as directed by the Building Official.

(5) When an access route does not provide access to all buildings of the complex, signs with numbers a minimum of two and one-half inches in height with a three-quarter-inch stroke shall be installed which will identify the buildings and/or units accessible from that particular access point.

(6) Multiple buildings on one property may have additional addresses assigned to such buildings when approved by the Building Official. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 7-24-79. Formerly § 25-36).

Chapter 15.75
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.75.010    Adoption of Existing Building Code.

15.75.010 Adoption of Existing Building Code.
The 2016 California Existing Building Code, published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., and the California Building Standards Commission in Part 10 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and referred to, and by this reference expressly incorporated and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The 2016 California Existing Building Code shall be designated and referred to as the “Existing Building Code” for the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1960 § 9, 11-22-16).

Chapter 15.80
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
Sections:

15.80.010  Enforcement of SCCC Title 15.

15.80.010 Enforcement of SCCC Title 15.
Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 15 [entitled "Buildings and Construction"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(a) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 15 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Added at request of city during 2003 recodification).

Chapter 15.90
SOLAR PERMITS
Sections:

15.90.010    Definitions.

15.90.020    Small residential rooftop solar energy system permitting process.

15.90.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a) “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

(1) E-mail.

(2) The Internet.

(3) Facsimile.

(b) “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

(1) Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

(2) Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

(c) “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” qualifies as such if it meets all of the following:

(1) A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

(2) A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City.

(3) A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

(4) A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height.

(d) “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1944 § 1, 9-22-15).

15.90.020 Small residential rooftop solar energy system permitting process.
(a) The Building Official is authorized and directed to develop and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The applicant shall submit the permit application and associated documentation to the City together with any required permit processing, plan review and inspection fees.

(b) Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall perform the following:

(1) At the applicant’s cost, verify using standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all dead, live, wind and seismic loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

(2) At the applicant’s cost, verify using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system, including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes, is adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

(c) The Building Official shall determine the completion of an application. Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the Building Official shall approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. If an application is deemed incomplete, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

(d) For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the Building Official and Fire Chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized.

(e) The City may require a use permit upon finding, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in this chapter, upon public health and safety.

(f) The City may not deny an application for a use permit under this chapter unless the City makes written findings that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. (Ord. 1944 § 1, 9-22-15).

Title 16
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Chapters:

16.05  Local Improvements – Generally

16.10  Local Improvements – Acquisition and Improvement Procedure

16.15  Assessment Bond Procedures

16.20  Public Authorities

16.25  Alternative Assessment Procedures

Chapter 16.05
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS – GENERALLY
Sections:

Article I. Definitions, Application, Effect and Remedies Generally

16.05.010  Definitions generally.

16.05.020  Title.

16.05.030  Proceedings generally.

16.05.040  Proceedings pending at time of adoption of title.

16.05.050  Procedure outlined alternative.

16.05.060  State law to be supplemental to title in certain cases.

16.05.070  Title to control where conflicting State law exists.

16.05.080  Proceedings governed by State law.

16.05.090  More than one improvement, etc., may be had in single proceeding.

16.05.100  Chapter 16.05 SCCC controlling over other provisions of title.

16.05.110  "Incidental expenses" defined.

16.05.120  Resolution of intention – References to title to be included therein.

16.05.130  References to title in later notices or orders, etc.

16.05.140  Waiver of objections when not made timely.

16.05.150  Decisions and determinations of City Council final.

16.05.160  Notice of award – Effect of State law.

16.05.170  Title to be construed liberally – Effect of errors or omissions, etc. – Exclusive remedy of aggrieved parties.

16.05.180  Limitation of actions generally – Ad valorem or other levy – Defenses.

16.05.190  Validation, procedure generally – Application of State law.

Article II. Notices

16.05.200  Provisions of article sufficient to give validity to proceedings.

16.05.210  Clerk required to give notice where no other person designated to do same.

16.05.220  Publication generally – Time of hearing after same.

16.05.230  Posting or mailing – When necessary.

16.05.240  Posting generally.

16.05.250  Ascertainment of addresses when notice required to be mailed.

16.05.260  Form of notice of improvement – Power of City Council to require same to be posted, etc.

16.05.270  Certificate of City Clerk conclusive proof of valid notice.

Article III. Public and Private Property

16.05.280  Public property – Application of title.

16.05.290  Land omitted from assessments – Assessment of remaining lots for full value of work to be done.

16.05.300  Liability of City after assessment – Applicability of certain State law.

16.05.310  Assessment of privately owned public utility property.

Article IV. Contributions and Advances

16.05.320  Acceptance of outside contributions.

16.05.330  Purchase of assessment, warrant and bonds by City generally – Payment to contractor, etc. – To whom bonds payable.

16.05.340  Purchase of bonds, etc., by City after issuance.

16.05.350  Delinquent property – Purchased by City.

16.05.360  Delinquent property – Sale generally.

Article V. Force Accounts and Revolving Funds

16.05.370  Purchase of supplies and labor by force account – Determination to be made by City Council – Execution of bonds – Powers of City Manager and rights of City over assessments.

16.05.380  Collection of assessments made pursuant to force account –Recordation of diagram.

16.05.390  Revolving fund – Establishment and purpose – Applicability of State law.

16.05.400  Assessment roll – Identifying map, diagram, etc.

Article VI. Procedure Generally

16.05.410  Protests or objections – Generally.

16.05.420  Form and information required – Objections to illegality.

16.05.430  Power of City Council to overrule.

16.05.440  Hearings – Notice generally.

16.05.450  Powers and duties of City Council generally.

16.05.460  Continuances – Matters noticed for hearing but not heard.

16.05.470  Modifications or changes – Generally.

16.05.480  Notice required in certain cases.

16.05.490  Protests – Recordation of changes – Effect of changes on original assessment lien.

16.05.500  Supplemental assessments – Generally.

16.05.510  How levied and collected – Notice, etc. – Payment.

Article VII. Reassessments

16.05.520  When made.

16.05.530  Uncompleted improvements.

16.05.540  Persons eligible to demand reassessment – Applicability of State law.

16.05.550  Interest.

16.05.560  Payment.

Article VIII. Liens

16.05.570  Priority of liens.

16.05.580  Reassessment, refunding and supplemental assessment liens.

16.05.590  Lien date.

16.05.600  Constructive notice.

16.05.610  Duration of lien.

16.05.620  Uniform priority law.

Article I. Definitions, Application, Effect and Remedies Generally

16.05.010 Definitions generally.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) "Acquisition" or "improvement," when used, referring to that which is done, which is to be done, or which may be done under proceedings had under this Code, shall be understood to be generic and as being employed for the purpose of brevity and to avoid repetition, and shall refer to and include any or all of the things comprehended in the meaning of the words "acquire" and "improve" herein. Acquisition may be by gift, purchase, lease or eminent domain, and may be before, while or after it comes into being in relation to the resolution of intention.

(b) "Block," whether it be a regular or irregular block, means a parcel larger than a lot which is bounded by a street or a boundary line of some other parcel which is not a part of it.

(c) "Contractor" shall mean the person, organization, business trust or contracting owners or their agents to whom a contract for the performance of any work authorized is awarded.

(d) "General law" or the word "act" or the reference to any law or act by its title shall mean an enactment of the legislature of the State. Unless otherwise provided in this title such law shall be as now or hereafter amended or codified at the time of adopting the resolution of intention in proceedings under this title.

(e) The terms "lot," "land," "piece" or "parcel of land," whether used singly or in combination, shall include property owned or controlled by any person.

(f) "Owner" shall mean the person owning the fee or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the County Recorder's office of the County in which the property is situated or the person in possession of the property or buildings under claim of ownership or exercising acts of ownership over the same for himself/herself or as life tenant, as the executor, administrator or guardian of the owner. If the property is leased, the possession of the tenant or lessee holding and occupying such property shall be deemed to be the possession of the owner.

(g) "Parking place" shall include a parking lot, garage or subsurface structure, including the grading, paving, draining, sewering, lighting or otherwise improving of such lot and the buildings and improvements necessary or convenient for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking meters and other equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor, together with provisions necessary or convenient for ingress to and egress from such places.

(h) "Paved" or "repaved" shall include pavement of any commonly used paving material.

(i) "Place" shall include any public street, alley or easement or other public property which has been dedicated and accepted or is otherwise publicly owned according to law or which has been in common and undisputed use by the public for a period of not less than five years next preceding or which is sought to be acquired in any proceeding undertaken pursuant to this title or which is sought to be acquired in conjunction with any proceeding undertaken pursuant to this title.

(j) "Project" or "improvement," when used in the generic sense, shall mean the acquisition or improvement undertaken in a singular proceeding.

(k) "Quarter block," when used with reference to an irregular block, shall include all lots or portions of lots having any frontage on either intersecting street halfway from such intersection to the next street or, if no street intervenes, to a boundary line of some other parcel which is not a part of that block.

(l) "Street" shall include avenues, highways, lanes, alleys, crossings or intersections and courts which have been dedicated and accepted according to law or which have been in common and undisputed use by the public for a period of not less than five years next preceding or which have been dedicated to a semipublic use.

(m) "Work" or "improvement," whether used singly or in combination, shall mean and include any work which is authorized to be done or any improvement which is authorized to be made under this title, as well as the construction, reconstruction and repair of all or part of any such work or improvement. (Ord. 859 § 32; Ord. 1175 § 1, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-1).

16.05.020 Title.
This title shall be cited and referred to as the "Santa Clara Improvement Procedure Code." (Ord. 859 § 1. Formerly § 16-2).

16.05.030 Proceedings generally.
Proceedings for the acquisition or construction of any public improvement or property of a local nature or the acquisition of lands, easements, buildings, improvements or property may be had pursuant to this title, whether or not provided in any general law of the State. (Ord. 859 § 3. Formerly § 16-3).

16.05.040 Proceedings pending at time of adoption of title.
This title shall not apply to any proceedings in which the resolution of intention was adopted prior to the effective date hereof, excepting proceedings for a supplemental assessment, a reassessment or a refunding and the curative provisions hereof. (Ord. 859 § 4. Formerly § 16-4).

16.05.050 Procedure outlined alternative.
The procedures or bond plans provided in this title are alternative. (Ord. 859 § 5. Formerly § 16-5).

16.05.060 State law to be supplemental to title in certain cases.
The provisions of this title shall not be exclusive, but the resolution of intention in any proceeding under an act or general law of the State may provide that such act or general law is supplemental by any part of this title. (Ord. 859 § 6. Formerly § 16-6).

16.05.070 Title to control where conflicting State law exists.
The provisions of this title shall be controlling over the provisions of any general law or act of the State in conflict herewith in any proceeding taken hereunder. (Ord. 859 § 8. Formerly § 16-7).

16.05.080 Proceedings governed by State law.
In the event any proceeding had pursuant to this title shall be adjudged a State affair, it is hereby declared to be the intention that such proceedings were had pursuant to the general laws of the State cited in the provisions of this title. (Ord. 859 § 10. Formerly § 16-8).

16.05.090 More than one improvement, etc., may be had in single proceeding.
One or more acquisitions or improvements may be had in a single proceeding. (Ord. 859 § 11. Formerly § 16-9).

16.05.100 Chapter 16.05 SCCC controlling over other provisions of title.
This chapter is supplemental to and controlling over the provisions of any other provision of this title in conflict therewith. (Ord. 859 § 12. Formerly § 16-10).

16.05.110 "Incidental expenses" defined.
(a) The term "incidental expenses," when referring to proceedings for an acquisition, shall be deemed to mean and shall include the following expenses incurred under this title:

(1) The amounts awarded to defendants by interlocutory judgments.

(2) The costs of any defendants.

(3) The compensation and expenses of referees, as allowed by court.

(4) All costs of the plaintiff in an action and expenses incurred by it in the trial thereof, including the compensation paid expert appraisers and witnesses.

(5) All expenses necessarily incurred in connection with proceedings under this title for publication, mailing and posting of resolutions, notices and orders in any of such proceedings.

(6) For maps, plats, surveys, searches and certificates of title to the property to be acquired.

(7) The compensation of the attorney.

(8) The compensation of the engineer.

(9) The clerical, stenographic and printing expenses incident to the actions.

(10) The estimated cost of preparing and selling the bonds.

(11) Any other expenses incurred by authority of this title; or

(b) The term "incidental expenses," when referring to proceedings for an improvement, shall be deemed to mean and shall include expenses necessarily incurred in such proceedings under this title and shall include the following:

(1) For the publication, mailing and posting of resolutions, notices and orders in any of such proceedings.

(2) The compensation of the attorneys.

(3) The compensation of the superintendent of work.

(4) The compensation of the engineers.

(5) The estimated cost of preparing the bonds.

(6) Any other expenses incurred by authority of this title or incidental to the completion of the improvement in the manner herein specified. (Ord. 859 §§ 40, 41. Formerly § 16-11).

16.05.120 Resolution of intention – References to title to be included therein.
The resolution of intention shall specify the parts of this title pursuant to which the proceedings therein are taken. (Ord. 859 § 50. Formerly § 16-12).

16.05.130 References to title in later notices or orders, etc.
In all resolutions, notices, orders and determinations subsequent to the resolution of intention and the notice of improvement, it shall be sufficient to refer to the resolution of intention by number for a description of the work or improvement. (Ord. 859 § 51. Formerly § 16-13).

16.05.140 Waiver of objections when not made timely.
All objections not made within the time and manner provided in this title are waived. (Ord. 859 § 161. Formerly § 16-14).

16.05.150 Decisions and determinations of City Council final.
All decisions and determinations of the City Council, upon notice and hearing, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal as to all errors, informalities, omissions and irregularities which might have been avoided or which might have been remedied during the progress of the proceedings or which can be remedied and as to illegalities not amounting to a want of due process of law. (Ord. 859 § 162. Formerly § 16-15).

16.05.160 Notice of award – Effect of State law.
The notice to pay assessments under the Street Opening Act of 1903 or the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, and a notice confirming assessment or reassessment under any other procedure therein, shall have like curative effect as the "Notice of Award" under the Improvement Act of 1911. (Ord. 859 § 163. Formerly § 16-16).

16.05.170 Title to be construed liberally – Effect of errors or omissions, etc. – Exclusive remedy of aggrieved parties.
This title shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purpose. No error, irregularity, informality, omission, or illegality and no neglect or omission of any officer in any procedure taken hereunder, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the legislative body to order the work or improvements shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any assessment for the cost of any work or acquisition hereunder. The exclusive remedy of any person affected or aggrieved thereby shall be by appeal to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this title.

No step in any proceeding shall be invalidated or affected by any error or mistake or departure from the provisions of this title as to the officer or person posting, publishing or mailing or procuring the same of any notice, resolution, order or other matter when such notice is actually given for the time required.

No assessment, reassessment, supplemental assessment, warrant, diagram or bond or any other levy or issuance and no proceedings for the same shall be held invalid by any court for any error, informality, omission, irregularity, illegality or other defect in the same, where the resolution of intention or notice of improvements have been actually published as provided in this title.

No proceedings shall be held to be invalid upon the ground that the property upon which the work or improvement or part thereof is to be or was done had not been lawfully dedicated or acquired, provided the same shall have been lawfully dedicated or acquired or an order for immediate possession and use thereof shall have been obtained at any time before judgment is entered in any legal action. (Ord. 859 §§ 164 – 167. Formerly § 16-17).

16.05.180 Limitation of actions generally – Ad valorem or other levy – Defenses.
No action, suit or proceedings to set aside, cancel, void, annul or correct any assessment or reassessment or to review any of the proceedings, acts or determinations in any proceedings or to question the validity or to enjoin the collection of any assessments or reassessments or supplemental assessments shall be maintained by any person unless such action, suit or proceedings shall have been commenced within thirty (30) days after the acquisition or improvement had been ordered or such assessment shall have been confirmed.

Where such proceedings are for an annual ad valorem or other benefit levy, the period shall be thirty (30) days after the ordering of such with reference to such levy as to any levy and thirty (30) days after ordering the issuance of such bonds with reference to their issuance as to any bonds. If such action or suit is not brought within the time specified in this section, all persons shall be barred from any such action.

No defense based on invalidity or irregularity in any such proceedings shall be raised or pleaded after the expiration of such thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 859 §§ 168 – 170; Ord. 1277 § 1, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-18).

16.05.190 Validation, procedure generally – Application of State law.
The City Council, at any time after the adoption of the resolution of intention; the proposed contractor, at any time after the award of the contract to him; or the proposed purchaser of the warrant or any bonds to be issued, at any time after the assignment of such warrants or award of such bonds to him; may bring an action in the Superior Court of the State in and for the County in which it is situated, to determine the validity of any such proceedings and of such proposed contract or of the assessment or tax levied or to be levied or of such bonds issued or to be issued.

The validation procedure of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply. (Ord. 859 §§ 171, 172; Ord. 1277 § 2, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-19).

Article II. Notices

16.05.200 Provisions of article sufficient to give validity to proceedings.
No notice, nor any publication of any notice, order, resolution or other matter, other than that expressly provided for in this title, shall be necessary to give validity to any proceedings provided for in this title. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-20).

16.05.210 Clerk required to give notice where no other person designated to do same.
Whenever any notice, resolution, order or other matter is required to be published, posted or mailed, and the duty of posting, publishing, mailing or procuring the same is not specifically enjoined upon any officer or person, the Clerk shall post or procure the publication or posting thereof, as the case may be. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-21).

16.05.220 Publication generally – Time of hearing after same.
Notices, resolutions or other documents required to be published shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. If any hearing is therein noticed, such hearing shall be had not less than ten days after the first publication unless a shorter time is provided by the general law. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-22).

16.05.230 Posting or mailing – When necessary.
It shall not be necessary to post or mail any notice, resolution or other document or make or file any affidavit in regard thereto, unless no publication is provided or posting or mailing is necessary to provide jurisdiction. In such event, said posting or mailing shall be at least ten days prior to any hearing provided therein unless a shorter time is provided by general law. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-23).

16.05.240 Posting generally.
All documents provided to be posted, other than a notice of improvement, shall be posted on or near the Council chamber door or on any bulletin board in or adjacent to City Hall. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-24).

16.05.250 Ascertainment of addresses when notice required to be mailed.
When any notice, resolution or other document is required to be mailed, it shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the property owners involved, as follows:

(a) To all persons owning real property proposed to be assessed, whose names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll for City taxes, including the utility roll, at said addresses.

(b) In cases of transfers of land, or parts thereof, subsequent to the date on which the last assessor's roll was prepared, to such transferee, at his/her name and address as the same appear on the records in the assessor's office which the assessor will use to prepare the next ensuing assessor's roll.

(c) To each person, including the owner or person having an interest in property assessed by the State under Section 14 of Article XIII of the California Constitution, who have filed with the County Assessor for the current fiscal year, a statement of his/her name, address, and a description of the property owned by him, requesting that a notice of all proposals affecting such property shall be mailed to him (Gov. Code 58905), at said address.

(d) To such person at his/her address or as otherwise known to the Clerk.

(e) In case of doubt as to the name and address of any owner, the Clerk shall cause said notice to be conspicuously posted on the property of such person in the assessment district, at or near the entrance thereto, so that it will be visible to persons on entering, leaving or passing said property. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-25).

16.05.260 Form of notice of improvement – Power of City Council to require same to be posted, etc.
Notice of improvement shall be entitled "Notice of Improvement" in letters at least one-half inch in height. The City Council may provide, in the resolution of intention or other document fixing a hearing, whether and where such notices shall be posted. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-26).

16.05.270 Certificate of City Clerk conclusive proof of valid notice.
The certificate of City Clerk or officer giving notice by posting or mailing shall be conclusive proof of the giving of notice and no affidavit shall be required. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-27).

Article III. Public and Private Property

16.05.280 Public property – Application of title.
If any lot or parcel of land belonging to the United States or to the State or to any county, city public agent, mandatory of the government, school board, educational, penal or reform institution or institution for the feeble-minded or the insane, is in use in the performance of a public function and fronts upon the proposed work or is included within the district to be assessed to pay the costs and expenses thereof, the legislative body may, in the resolution of intention, declare that such lots or parcels of land or any of them shall be omitted from the assessment thereafter to be made to cover the costs and expenses of the work. (Ord. 859 § 70. Formerly § 16-28).

16.05.290 Land omitted from assessments – Assessment of remaining lots for full value of work to be done.
If any lots or parcels of land are omitted from the assessment, the total expense of all work done shall be assessed on the remaining lots or parcels of land fronting on the work or lying within the limits of the assessment district, without regard to such omitted lots or parcels of land. (Ord. 859 § 71. Formerly § 16-29).

16.05.300 Liability of City after assessment – Applicability of certain State law.
If the City Council, in the resolution of intention, declares that any lot or parcel of land so owned and used shall be included in the assessment, then the City shall be liable for such sums as may thereafter be so assessed excepting for such portions as it shall by agreement collect from the entity owning the same. When such property is subject to assessment as provided in Section 5302.5 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State, the provisions thereof shall apply. (Ord. 859 § 72. Formerly § 16-30).

16.05.310 Assessment of privately owned public utility property.
Property owned or used by any privately owned public utility shall be assessed in the same manner as other property in the district. (Ord. 859 § 73. Formerly § 16-31).

Article IV. Contributions and Advances

16.05.320 Acceptance of outside contributions.
Contributions or partial payments from the United States or the State or any agency of either or from the County may be accepted and the same or any available City money applied to any part of the costs of a project at any time during or after the proceedings and applied in reduction of the amount assessed or to be assessed therefor. (Ord. 859 § 80. Formerly § 16-32).

16.05.330 Purchase of assessment, warrant and bonds by City generally – Payment to contractor, etc. – To whom bonds payable.
In any proceeding had under this title, the City may declare in the resolution of intention that it intends to purchase the assessment, warrant or bonds to be issued therein.

The City shall, upon the issuance of such assessment, warrant or bonds, pay to the contractor, who shall have been awarded the contract to do the work in such proceeding, in case of public improvements or into court, in case of acquisition proceedings, the principal amount thereof.

Such bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer.

The City shall succeed to all rights under such assessment, warrant and bonds. (Ord. 859 §§ 81 – 84. Formerly § 16-33).

16.05.340 Purchase of bonds, etc., by City after issuance.
The City shall have like power to subsequently acquire and own any bonds or assessments or contracts issued or levied or made under this title or now issued and outstanding, for any improvement or acquisition of the City. (Ord. 859 § 85. Formerly § 16-34).

16.05.350 Delinquent property – Purchased by City.
The City may bid and purchase any real or personal property offered for sale for the nonpayment of any improvement assessment levied and assessed under any of the provisions of this title or of any installment thereof or penalties, costs or interest thereon or any suit brought to foreclose such assessment. (Ord. 859 § 86. Formerly § 16-35).

16.05.360 Delinquent property – Sale generally.
Whenever any property shall have been acquired by the City at any such sale, then such property or any lien thereon or interest therein created by such assessment may be released, assigned, sold or otherwise disposed of by the City as it shall determine. No such release, assignment, sale or other disposition of any such lien or interest or of any such property shall be made unless there shall be first paid to the City a sum of money equal to and not less than the amount paid therefor by the City, together with all accrued penalties, costs, interest and necessary expenses incurred. If any lien, interest or property cannot, as determined by the City Council, be sold for the amounts or charges computed as provided in this section, then the City Council may, by four-fifths vote of all its members, sell any such lien or interest or property for the best price obtainable according to its judgment. (Ord. 859 § 87. Formerly § 16-36).

Article V. Force Accounts and Revolving Funds

16.05.370 Purchase of supplies and labor by force account – Determination to be made by City Council – Execution of bonds – Powers of City Manager and rights of City over assessments.
The City Council may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote of all its members, determine and declare that in its opinion the work in question may be more economically and satisfactorily performed by day labor, or the materials and supplies purchased at a lower price in the open market, and order that the same be done by force account, in the manner stated in this title, without further observance of the provisions of this title with reference to the award of contract or execution of contract or bonds.

In such case the City shall have the same rights as a contractor and such work and improvements shall be directed by the City Manager.

When such work shall have been completed, the City shall become the owner of the assessment made to pay the cost thereof and of all bonds issued thereon, with like power of enforcement as if held by a contractor. No warrant need be issued in such case.

Such bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer. (Ord. 859 §§ 90 – 94. Formerly § 16-37).

16.05.380 Collection of assessments made pursuant to force account –Recordation of diagram.
The Director of Finance or other City officer designated by the City Council is authorized, after the assessment and diagram shall have been recorded, to collect and receive payment of the several amounts due thereon in the manner provided in such act under which the proceedings shall have been taken for and in the place of such contractor and his/her statement of payments received, when filed, shall constitute and be in lieu of the contractor's return of the warrant and statement of payments received. (Ord. 859 § 93. Formerly § 16-38).

16.05.390 Revolving fund – Establishment and purpose – Applicability of State law.
In the exercise of any of the powers now or hereafter provided for in this title, including the right to take immediate possession in eminent domain proceedings, the City Council may create, use and reimburse a revolving fund.

Such revolving fund may be established, operated, reimbursed, reduced or dissolved, in which event Title 4, Division 4, Chapter 3, Article 2 (Section 43240 et seq.) of the Government Code shall apply. (Ord. 859 §§ 100, 101. Formerly § 16-39).

16.05.400 Assessment roll – Identifying map, diagram, etc.
Parcels may be described as contained on the assessment roll on which City taxes are collected or with reference to recorded maps or deeds or assessor's maps or by other means sufficient for identification.

The diagram may describe the property in reference to or be copies of official maps or assessor's maps, or be otherwise sufficient to identify the several parcels thereon. It shall not be necessary to show thereon their relationship to the acquisitions or improvements. (Ord. 859 §§ 110, 111. Formerly § 16-40).

Article VI. Procedure Generally

16.05.410 Protests or objections – Generally.
Objections may be made to ordering improvements or acquisitions, to grades, an assessment, the extent of the district, to any supplemental assessment or reassessment, the legality of any act or proceeding, to changes or to any part of any thereof, at or before the hour set for hearing thereon. (Ord. 859 § 120. Formerly § 16-41).

16.05.420 Form and information required – Objections to illegality.
Protests shall be in writing, signed by the protestant, contain a description of the property owned by him sufficient to identify such property and state his/her interest therein and the nature of the protest. Such protests shall be filed with the City Clerk.

Objections to illegality shall specify the illegality, and no other illegalities need be considered. (Ord. 859 §§ 121, 122. Formerly § 16-42).

16.05.430 Power of City Council to overrule.
The City Council, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, may overrule protests by the owners of more than half the area to be assessed. (Ord. 859 § 123. Formerly § 16-43).

16.05.440 Hearings – Notice generally.
No hearing need be set for a longer period than the time required for giving notice thereof. (Ord. 859 § 130. Formerly § 16-44).

16.05.450 Powers and duties of City Council generally.
At the hearing the City Council shall consider and pass upon the protests, may remedy or correct any irregularity and may order any improvement or acquisition to be completed according to the plans and specifications, and to their satisfaction. (Ord. 859 § 131. Formerly § 16-45).

16.05.460 Continuances – Matters noticed for hearing but not heard.
A hearing may be continued. Where any matter is noticed for hearing and is not heard it shall be deemed submitted and may be acted upon at any subsequent meeting. (Ord. 859 § 132. Formerly § 16-46).

16.05.470 Modifications or changes – Generally.
During the progress of the project, the legislative body may make changes in the improvements or acquisitions, the boundaries of the proposed assessment district, the assessment or the estimate of costs or in any of the proceedings or procedures under this title. (Ord. 859 § 140. Formerly § 16-47).

16.05.480 Notice required in certain cases.
Where changes result in extending the boundaries of the assessment district, increasing the total amount to be collected, or increasing improvements or acquisitions or making substitutions therein, or in the proceedings or procedures, they shall not be ordered except after notice of intention to do so is published by one insertion in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement was published, describing the proposed changes and specifying the time and place of hearing. (Ord. 859 § 141. Formerly § 16-48).

16.05.490 Protests – Recordation of changes – Effect of changes on original assessment lien.
Protests may only be made against the proposed changes. If no protests are made or such are found to be insufficient or overruled, immediately thereon the City Council may order such changes.

Such changes may be made upon the face of the plans, specifications, estimate, diagram, assessment or other document affected or by an amended or supplemental document.

The lien date of the original assessment shall not be affected by such order. The lien date of such changes shall be the date on which the original assessment was recorded. (Ord. 859 §§ 142 – 145. Formerly § 16-49).

16.05.500 Supplemental assessments – Generally.
If the first assessment for any improvement or acquisition or if the bonds issued to pay all costs, damages and expenses incurred or to be incurred, including any judgments rendered or to be rendered and the costs and expenses of such action or proceedings or the estimated amount of any thereof, are insufficient, the City Council may order a supplemental assessment to raise such deficit. (Ord. 859 § 150. Formerly § 16-50).

16.05.510 How levied and collected – Notice, etc. – Payment.
Supplemental assessments shall be made and collected in the same manner as the first assessment as far as possible, or a reassessment may be had therefor and such proceedings may be repeated until sufficient money is raised to pay for the same.

Notice shall be given, protests may be made and such supplemental assessment heard, confirmed and recorded as provided in SCCC 16.05.470 through 16.05.490 for modifications.

Proceedings for notices, demand and payment shall be had as provided for in the original assessment. (Ord. 859 §§ 151 – 153. Formerly § 16-51).

Article VII. Reassessments

16.05.520 When made.
If in the opinion of the City Council any assessment made under this title is void or unenforceable for any cause or if bonds are issued to represent or be secured by any assessments and such issuance is not effective through any provision of this title applicable thereto to make them valid and enforceable or if the previous assessment or bonds are insufficient to pay the cost or estimated cost of the project or if the City Council shall determine that the public interest will be served thereby, a reassessment may be had. (Ord. 859 § 180. Formerly § 16-52).

16.05.530 Uncompleted improvements.
Where the assessment was for an uncompleted improvement, a reassessment may be had notwithstanding the fact that such improvement is not completed. In such case, the reassessment shall assess upon the lands benefited the benefits derived from the improvement or to be derived from the improvement when completed. (Ord. 859 § 181. Formerly § 16-53).

16.05.540 Persons eligible to demand reassessment – Applicability of State law.
The reassessment shall be made upon the demand of the contractor or his/her assigns or the owner or holder of bonds aggregating one-third of the principal amount outstanding, or upon order of the legislative body and shall be made in the manner and form provided by the State Improvement Act of 1911 and State Improvement Bond Act of 1915. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the City Council from ordering a reassessment on its own motion and its decision to do so shall be final. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-54).

Stat. Ref.: For State Improvement Act of 1911, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 5000 – 6794. For State Improvement Bond Act of 1915, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 8500 – 8851.

16.05.550 Interest.
In the resolution ordering the reassessment, the City Council shall determine whether such reassessment shall include interest and if so, the rate at which and the date from which it shall be computed. In lieu thereof, the City Council may order that the reassessment shall bear interest at a rate and from a date certain. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-55).

16.05.560 Payment.
If the bonds have not been issued or if the bonds outstanding are not to be replaced by new bonds, proceedings for notice to pay, demand and payment shall be had as provided for in the original assessment. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-56).

Article VIII. Liens

16.05.570 Priority of liens.
The lien of a fixed lien assessment, whether a bond or bonds are issued to represent it, shall have priority over all fixed lien assessments which may thereafter be created against the property. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57).

16.05.580 Reassessment, refunding and supplemental assessment liens.
The lien of a reassessment and a refunding assessment shall have the same priority as the original assessment to which it relates. A supplemental assessment is a new assessment. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57.1).

16.05.590 Lien date.
Immediately upon the recording of a notice of assessment in the Office of the County Recorder, any assessment shall thereupon be a lien on the property against which it is made. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57.2).

16.05.600 Constructive notice.
From and after the date of recording a fixed lien warrant, assessment and diagram and from and after the recording of the notice of assessment, all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the contents of each thereof. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57.3).

16.05.610 Duration of lien.
The lien of a fixed lien assessment shall continue for a period of four years from the date of recording the notice of assessment. In the event bonds are issued to represent the assessment, the lien shall continue until the expiration of four years from the due date of the last installment upon the bonds or of the last principal coupon attached thereto. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57.4).

16.05.620 Uniform priority law.
The provisions of Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 4, Article 13 (commencing with Section 53930) of the Government Code, providing a uniform law as to the priority of liens, fixed lien and of ad valorem assessments, shall apply. (Ord. 1175 § 2, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-57.5).

Chapter 16.10
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS – ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE
Sections:

Article I. Investigation Proceedings

16.10.010  Preliminary hearing when proceedings not taken under State law.

16.10.020  Adoption of preliminary determinations by resolution – Information required.

16.10.030  Notice and hearing.

16.10.040  Persons eligible to object to noncompliance with State law.

16.10.050  Final determination of necessity by resolution.

16.10.060  Proceedings for modifications and changes generally.

16.10.070  Application of article.

16.10.080  Finality.

Article II. Proceeding UnderImprovement Act of 1911

16.10.090  Application to chapter.

16.10.100  Alternative method for collection of cash assessments – Generally.

16.10.110  Information required in resolution.

16.10.120  Filing of copy of resolution – Extension of taxes on tax roll.

16.10.130  Collection – Delinquency.

16.10.140  When due and to whom payable – Default.

16.10.150  Resale of property purchased by City upon default – Disposition of property when not bid for at sale.

Article III. Proceeding Under Street Opening Act of 1903

16.10.160  Application to chapter.

16.10.170  Proceedings for closing or abandoning streets, etc.

16.10.180  Designation of ordinance of intention – Notice of improvement.

16.10.190  Cash assessments or assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

Article IV. Proceeding Under Municipal Improvement Act of 1913

16.10.200  Application to chapter.

16.10.210  Hearing.

16.10.220  Issuance of bonds upon supplemental assessment.

16.10.230  Assessments – Payment.

16.10.240  Eminent domain proceedings.

16.10.250  Stipulations, offsets and references to referees.

16.10.260  Surplus.

16.10.270  Credit of surplus on assessment.

Article V. Parking Districts

16.10.280  "Parking place" defined.

16.10.290  Powers of City Council generally.

16.10.300  Improvement districts generally –Procedure for formation of same.

16.10.310  Acquisition of property.

16.10.320  Property owned by City.

16.10.330  Sale of property acquired for parking places.

16.10.340  Lease of property for parking places.

16.10.350  Utilization of surplus space for parking places.

16.10.360  Fees and rentals, etc., to be set by City Council.

16.10.370  Operation of parking places generally.

16.10.380  Annual assessment for maintenance of parking places.

16.10.390  Annual report when operative costs paid by special levy – Information required – Hearing and notice.

16.10.400  Report – Hearing procedures –Disposition generally.

16.10.410  Collection of assessment.

16.10.420  Acquisition, construction and improvements of parking places – Advancement of funds and pledges, etc.

16.10.430  Covenants.

16.10.440  Alteration or enlargement of parking districts – Generally – Resolution of intention and notice.

16.10.450  Hearing and power of City Council generally – Order of annexation and effect of same.

Article VI. Maintenance Districts

16.10.460  New maintenance districts.

16.10.470  Council powers.

16.10.480  Applicable general law.

16.10.490  Alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments.

16.10.500  Applicability to maintenance districts formed prior to effective date hereof.

16.10.510  Severability.

16.10.520  Effective date.

Article VII. Municipal Park Improvement Districts

16.10.530  Title.

16.10.540  Purposes.

16.10.550  Public body.

16.10.560  Governed by Council.

16.10.570  Other officers.

16.10.580  Employees.

16.10.590  Title to property – Assignment of contracts to district.

16.10.600  Statute applicability generally.

16.10.610  Indebtedness.

16.10.620  Acquisition or construction contracts – Combination with managing agency agreements.

16.10.630  Exceptions.

16.10.640  Action by resolution.

16.10.650  Public convenience and necessity.

16.10.660  Notice by mail.

16.10.670  Issuance and sale of bonds.

16.10.680  Bond issuance – Division into series.

16.10.690  Determination of amount.

16.10.700  Deficiency bonds.

16.10.710  Loans to special fund.

16.10.720  Tax base.

16.10.730  Charges.

16.10.740  Charges – Revision by agent.

16.10.750  Pledge of revenues.

16.10.760  Further bond security.

16.10.770  Disposition of surplus.

16.10.780  Refunding.

16.10.790  Managing agency agreements.

16.10.800  Validation of agreements.

16.10.810  Limitation of actions.

16.10.820  Judicial validation.

16.10.830  Applicability of Act and title.

16.10.840  Complete scheme of procedure.

16.10.850  Powers, limitations.

16.10.860  Inconsistency with other law.

16.10.870  Liberal construction.

16.10.880  Defect or omission validity of proceedings or bonds.

Article VIII. Santa Clara Downtown Business Improvement District

16.10.890  Resolution of intention, public hearing and findings.

16.10.900  Definitions.

16.10.910  Excluded business types.

16.10.920  Establishment of boundaries.

16.10.930  Establishment of district board of directors.

16.10.940  Establishment of benefit assessment.

16.10.950  Purpose and use of benefit assessments.

16.10.960  Exclusions from benefit assessment.

16.10.970  New businesses assessment waiver.

16.10.980  Collection of benefit assessment.

16.10.990  Voluntary contributions to district.

16.10.1000  Annual budget process.

16.10.1010  District proceeds do not offset City services.

16.10.1020  Disestablishment of the district.

Article IX. Santa Clara Tourism Improvement District

16.10.1110  Resolution of intention, public hearing and findings.

16.10.1120  Definitions.

16.10.1130  Establishment of boundaries.

16.10.1140  Establishment of district advisory board.

16.10.1150  Establishment of benefit assessment.

16.10.1160  Purpose and use of benefit assessments.

16.10.1170  Exclusions from benefit assessment.

16.10.1180  New business assessment waiver.

16.10.1190  Submission of the benefit assessment.

16.10.1200  Administrative charge and out-of-pocket reimbursement to City.

16.10.1210  Voluntary contributions to district.

16.10.1220  Annual report process.

16.10.1230  Decisions regarding expenditure of funds.

16.10.1240  Disestablishment of the district.

Article I. Investigation Proceedings

16.10.010 Preliminary hearing when proceedings not taken under State law.
When it appears that the public convenience and necessity requires an acquisition or improvement and proceedings should be taken without complying with the provisions of the State Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931, a public hearing shall be held on the question of the public convenience and necessity therefor which shall be called and notice of the time and place thereof shall be given in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-59).

Stat. Ref.: For State law as to Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 2800 to 3012.

16.10.020 Adoption of preliminary determinations by resolution – Information required.
A resolution of preliminary determination shall be adopted describing in general terms the proposed improvement or acquisition and setting a time and place when and where all persons interested may appear and show cause why the City

Council should not find and determine that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed acquisition or improvement without compliance with the State Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931. (Ord. 859 § 202. Formerly § 16-60).

16.10.030 Notice and hearing.
The resolution provided for in the preceding section shall contain a notice of the time and place of hearing. A copy of the resolution shall be published in one or more issues of a newspaper published and circulated in the City and a copy shall be posted on or near the Council door or on a bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. The posting and publication shall be had at least ten days before the date of hearing. The resolution may be consolidated with the resolution of intention and the notice may be incorporated in the notice of improvement. (Ord. 859 § 203. Formerly § 16-61).

16.10.040 Persons eligible to object to noncompliance with State law.
Any interested person may object to undertaking the proceedings without first complying with the provisions of the State Investigation Act mentioned in SCCC 16.10.010. (Ord. 859 § 204. Formerly § 16-62).

16.10.050 Final determination of necessity by resolution.
If no protests are made or when the protests shall have been heard and overruled, the City Council may adopt a resolution finding and determining that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed improvements or acquisitions and that the State Investigation Act shall not apply. The finding may be incorporated in the resolution ordering the improvement or acquisition.

The resolution determining the convenience and necessity shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council and its findings and determinations shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 859 §§ 205, 207. Formerly § 16-63).

16.10.060 Proceedings for modifications and changes generally.
When proceedings are had for a change and modification, the resolution of intention to change and modify shall be deemed a resolution of intention and the resolution ordering the changes and modifications shall be deemed a resolution ordering the improvement or acquisition as to the changes and modifications. (Ord. 859 § 206. Formerly § 16-64).

16.10.070 Application of article.
This article shall not apply to a proceeding which is excepted from the provisions of the State Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931 or when the investigation proceedings have been avoided or taken pursuant to such act. (Ord. 859 § 208. Formerly § 16-65).

16.10.080 Finality.
Where proceedings for any improvements or acquisitions or any part thereof have been undertaken without compliance with the State Investigation Act mentioned in the preceding section or without proceedings under this article, proceedings may thereafter be had under this article with reference thereto and the order of the City Council determining convenience and necessity therein shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-66).

Article II. Proceeding Under Improvement Act of 1911

Stat. Ref.: For State Improvement Act of 1911, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 5000 – 6794.

16.10.090 Application to chapter.
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this article the State Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-67).

16.10.100 Alternative method for collection of cash assessments – Generally.
As an alternative method for the collection of cash assessments or assessments of less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) levied under the provisions of this article, the City Council may, and upon the written request of the contractor or his/her assigns must, by resolutions adopted at or before the first day of September, direct that such assessments be collected upon the tax roll upon which general taxes are collected for the City. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-68).

16.10.110 Information required in resolution.
The resolution provided for in SCCC 16.10.100 shall contain a description of the properties so assessed, the amount of such assessments, together with interest thereon from the date of filing the original list of unpaid assessments and at the rate of one percent per month to the next succeeding thirty-first day of December of the tax year for which such roll shall have been prepared and the total amounts of principal and interest on each property. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-69).

16.10.120 Filing of copy of resolution – Extension of taxes on tax roll.
A certified copy of the resolution provided for in SCCC 16.10.100 shall be delivered immediately to the officer designated by law to extend City taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected.

Such officer shall extend upon such roll the total amounts of such assessments and interest. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-70).

16.10.130 Collection – Delinquency.
The amounts to be collected as provided in SCCC 16.10.100 shall be so collected at the same time and in the same manner as general municipal taxes are collected and be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for general municipal taxes, all of which laws for the levy, enforcement and collection of which are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-71).

16.10.140 When due and to whom payable – Default.
The assessments and the interest provided for by SCCC 16.10.100 and entered on the rolls as provided in SCCC 16.10.120 shall become due and payable to the contractor or his/her assigns at the office of the City Treasurer on the second day of January next succeeding.

Upon default in payment, the lands so assessed shall be sold in the same manner in which real property in the City is sold for the nonpayment of general municipal taxes and be subject to redemption within one year from the date of such sale in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from such delinquent sale. Upon failure of such redemption, such property shall in like manner be sold or pass by deed to the City. The City shall not, however, be required to pay into the assessment fund any part of such delinquency until such property be redeemed or sold and money received therefor. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-72).

16.10.150 Resale of property purchased by City upon default – Disposition of property when not bid for at sale.
Upon receipt of the deed to property sold as provided in SCCC 16.10.140, the City shall offer and sell such property at public auction in the manner provided by law for the sale of its tax deeded property and the amount of such assessment and the penalties and interest thereon less the costs of such sale shall be paid to the contractor or his/her assigns.

In the event there shall have been no bidder offering the amount then due on such property at the sale provided for in the preceding section, such property may, at the City's election, be declared sold to the owner of such assessment and in like manner be deemed to him and such assessment ordered satisfied of record. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-73).

Article III. Proceeding Under Street Opening Act of 1903

Stat. Ref.: For State Street Opening Act of 1903, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 4000 to 4443.

16.10.160 Application to chapter.
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this article, the State Street Opening Act of 1903 shall apply. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-74).

16.10.170 Proceedings for closing or abandoning streets, etc.
Proceedings under the State Street Opening Act of 1903 may be for closing or abandoning any street or easement and the Council may therein determine that no assessment is necessary. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-75).

16.10.180 Designation of ordinance of intention – Notice of improvement.
The ordinance of intention shall be called a resolution.

The notice of improvement shall be so called and no map need be contained therein. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-76).

16.10.190 Cash assessments or assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Cash assessments or assessments for less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be collected as provided in the alternative procedure of SCCC 16.10.100. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-77).

Article IV. Proceeding Under Municipal Improvement Act of 1913

Stat. Ref.: For State Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, see Sts. & H.C.A. §§ 10000 to 10609.

16.10.200 Application to chapter.
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this article, the State Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 shall apply. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-78).

16.10.210 Hearing.
The hearing on the report need not be set for more than ten days beyond the day of setting. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-79).

16.10.220 Issuance of bonds upon supplemental assessment.
Bonds may be issued upon any supplemental assessment and more than one such assessment may be had. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-80).

16.10.230 Assessments – Payment.
The time provided for payment of assessments may be thirty (30) days.

Payment shall be made to the City Treasurer unless the City Council shall specify some other officer to whom payments are to be made. (Ord. 859 §§ 243, 244. Formerly § 16-81).

16.10.240 Eminent domain proceedings.
Proceedings in eminent domain may be exercised under the State Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 859 § 245. Formerly § 16-82).

16.10.250 Stipulations, offsets and references to referees.
Stipulations and proceedings thereon for judgment may be had as provided in the State Street Opening Act of 1903.

Awards and assessments may be offset, as provided in the State Street Opening Act of 1903.

Reference to referees may be had as provided in the State Street Opening Act of 1903. (Ord. 859 §§ 246 – 248. Formerly § 16-83).

16.10.260 Surplus.
If there is, or the City Council shall determine that there will be, a surplus in the construction fund, it may determine that said moneys may be used for any one or more of the following purposes:

(a) For transfer to the general fund of the City; provided, that the amount shall not exceed the lesser of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or five percent of the total amount expended from the construction fund;

(b) To reimburse the City for any contributions or advances to or for the construction fund that were not pledged in the resolution of intention;

(c) For the maintenance of the improvements or a specified part thereof; or

(d) As provided in SCCC 16.10.270. (Ord. 859 § 249; Ord. 1175 § 3, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-84).

16.10.270 Credit of surplus on assessment.
As an alternative method of disposition, the surplus shall be refunded or credited to the parties assessed, as follows:

(a) Where the assessment or any installment has been paid in cash, the credit shall be returned in cash to the owner of the land upon which the assessment was levied, as such owner appears from the last equalized assessment roll at the time the refund is made;

(b) Where the assessment or any installment is unpaid, the credit shall be applied upon the assessment or the earliest unpaid installment of principal and interest; or

(c) When the assessment is ad valorem in nature and not fixed liens, the surplus shall be deposited in the bond interest and redemption fund. (Ord. 1175 § 4, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-84.1).

Article V. Parking Districts

16.10.280 "Parking place" defined.
The term "parking place," as used in this article, shall include a parking lot, garage or subsurface structure, including the grading, paving, draining, sewering, lighting or otherwise improving of such lot and buildings and improvements necessary or convenient for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking meters and other equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor, together with provisions necessary or convenient for ingress to and egress from such places. (Ord. 859 § 260. Formerly § 16-85).

16.10.290 Powers of City Council generally.
There is hereby vested in the City Council the powers to acquire, construct, reconstruct, install, extend, enlarge, repair, improve, maintain and operate public automobile parking places within the city, to acquire by purchase, lease or eminent domain the lands and public rights-of-way necessary or convenient therefor, to acquire and construct public improvements and equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor and to levy assessments and issue bonds to pay for the cost of the whole or any part thereof and the expenses incidental thereto. (Ord. 859 § 261. Formerly § 16-86).

16.10.300 Improvement districts generally –Procedure for formation of same.
The whole or any portion of the City may be formed into an improvement or maintenance district and assessments may be levied upon and bonds may be issued against the properties therein for the purpose of paying for the costs of acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, installing, extending, enlarging, repairing, improving, maintaining and operating parking places and the expenses incidental thereto. Proceedings for the formation of such districts, levying such assessments and issuing such bonds shall be had as provided in this title. (Ord. 859 § 262. Formerly § 16-87).

16.10.310 Acquisition of property.
The City may purchase, lease, obtain, option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, eminent domain or otherwise and hold, sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property within the city or any interest therein or improvement thereon. All such property shall be acquired and held in the name of the City. (Ord. 859 § 263. Formerly § 16-88).

16.10.320 Property owned by City.
City lands or property may be utilized for parking places. In such event, the resolution of intention shall describe the same and state the amount and manner of payment of compensation. In lieu thereof, the City Council may provide in such resolution that the compensation for such property shall be an amount to be fixed by the decision of two or three disinterested, competent appraisers to be appointed by the City Council. (Ord. 859 § 264. Formerly § 16-89).

16.10.330 Sale of property acquired for parking places.
The City Council may sell any property acquired for parking places which is not needed therefor. Any money received from such sale may be used for the acquisition, construction or improving of other parking places in such district. It may also be applied as a credit on any assessments levied for the acquisition of such property, in which case the provisions of SCCC 16.10.260 shall apply. (Ord. 859 § 265. Formerly § 16-90).

16.10.340 Lease of property for parking places.
When in the opinion of the City Council the public interest and economy will be served thereby, the City Council may lease one or more parking places and facilities. In so doing, the City Council may restrict or partially restrict their use to owners and tenants of real property in the district and classes of persons designated by such owners or tenants. (Ord. 859 § 266. Formerly § 16-91).

16.10.350 Utilization of surplus space for parking places.
Surplus space may be rented or devoted to commercial uses other than for the parking of automobiles when in the City Council's judgment it is necessary or convenient to conduct or permit such use in order to utilize properly the property as a parking space. Rentals received for such purposes shall be deposited in the improvement fund or in the operating fund or in the bond interest and redemption fund for such projects as the City Council shall determine. (Ord. 859 § 267. Formerly § 16-92).

16.10.360 Fees and rentals, etc., to be set by City Council.
The City Council may fix rentals, fees or other charges, for the properties, works and facilities of any parking place provided by this article. In so doing, the City Council may establish rates, charges or rentals for the owners and tenants of such properties and classes of persons designated by the owners or tenants which differ from and are less than the rates, charges and rentals charged other persons. (Ord. 859 § 268. Formerly § 16-93).

16.10.370 Operation of parking places generally.
Parking places may be maintained and operated and all or any costs and expenses thereof, including rent, repairs, replacement, fuel, power, electrical current, care, supervision and any other items necessary for the proper maintenance and operation thereof may be expended for that purpose. Included in such costs may be the cost of replacements, improvements and extensions to any parking place necessary or convenient for the proper operation thereof. (Ord. 859 § 269. Formerly § 16-94).

16.10.380 Annual assessment for maintenance of parking places.
An annual assessment may be levied upon the real property within the district established therefor for the purpose of maintaining and operating parking places. Such assessment shall be in an amount clearly sufficient to pay all costs and expenses of maintaining and operating such parking places then due or thereafter to accrue before the proceeds of another levy shall be available therefor. Such levy shall be apportioned among the properties within such district on the basis of the ad valorem value of such land as shown on the last equalized and secured utility tax rolls upon which City taxes are collected. (Ord. 859 § 270. Formerly § 16-95).

16.10.390 Annual report when operative costs paid by special levy – Information required – Hearing and notice.
When any part of the operative cost is to be paid by a special levy, the City Manager shall annually file with the City Clerk a written report stating in reasonable detail the estimated cost of maintenance and operation for which an assessment is to be levied in that year, including the cost of replacements, improvements and extensions to any parking place. It shall also state the rate of the levy to be made therefor. When such report shall have been preliminarily approved by the City Council, the Clerk shall give notice to interested persons that such report has been filed in his/her office and is open to inspection and of a time and place when such report will be heard by the City Council and an assessment ordered. Such notice may be by publication in a newspaper published in the City or by mail to the last assessees of the property at their addresses appearing in the last City tax roll or as known to the Clerk, at least ten days before the day set for hearing. (Ord. 859 § 271. Formerly § 16-96).

16.10.400 Report – Hearing procedures –Disposition generally.
The report provided in SCCC 16.10.390 shall be fully heard and may be altered, amended or supplemented by the City Council. When all objections have been heard and action taken with reference thereto, by their having been overruled or otherwise, such report shall be confirmed by resolution, of the City Council. Such levy shall become and remain a lien on the property described therein from the date it is confirmed until paid. (Ord. 859 § 272. Formerly § 16-97).

16.10.410 Collection of assessment.
The officer who collects the assessments shall compute and extend the amounts thereof in the next tax rolls on which City taxes are collected and it shall be collected in the same manner and be subject to the same penalties, costs and interest and may be redeemed and the property sold for nonpayment thereof and title shall pass to the purchaser in the same manner as provided for City taxes, except that the period of redemption shall be one year instead of five years. (Ord. 859 § 273. Formerly § 16-98).

16.10.420 Acquisition, construction and improvements of parking places – Advancement of funds and pledges, etc.
The City may advance funds for the acquisition, construction or improving of such parking places or for the maintenance and operation thereof and reimburse itself from the proceeds of any assessment subsequently levied for that purpose. It may also make contributions thereto from available funds.

The City Council may, at any time, make such pledges as it shall determine for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds or for the maintenance and operation of the facilities acquired or to be acquired therewith or for adequate reserves, from the income and revenue of on and off-street parking facilities. (Ord. 859 §§ 274, 275. Formerly § 16-99).

16.10.430 Covenants.
The City Council may provide all proper and usual covenants for the proper security and payment of the principal and interest of the bonds. (Ord. 859 § 276. Formerly § 16-100).

16.10.440 Alteration or enlargement of parking districts – Generally – Resolution of intention and notice.
The boundaries of the parking district may be enlarged from time to time. The territory to be annexed shall be set forth in a resolution of intention to be adopted by the City Council, which shall give notice that such matter and all persons interested will be heard by the City Council at a time to be stated therein, at the regular meeting place of the City Council.

Such resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, the first of which shall be at least ten days before the date fixed for hearing. (Ord. 859 §§ 277, 278. Formerly § 16-101).

16.10.450 Hearing and power of City Council generally – Order of annexation and effect of same.
The hearing mentioned in the preceding section may be adjourned from time to time. At the hearing the City Council shall have power to determine whether or not the entire territory or only a portion thereof to be annexed will be benefited by being so annexed.

The City Council shall by resolution order the annexation of such territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.

Thereafter the property annexed shall be subject to special levies for maintenance, operation and for any ad valorem bonds issued for the acquisition of construction of such improvements. (Ord. 859 §§ 279 – 281. Formerly § 16-102).

Article VI. Maintenance Districts

16.10.460 New maintenance districts.
Whenever the City Council determines that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature have not been adequately financed and provided for, proceeding therefor may be undertaken pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-102.01).

16.10.470 Council powers.
The City Council may, in its resolution declaring its intention to order work done or improvements made or by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature, including the cost of necessary repairs, replacements, fuel, power, electrical current, care, supervision, and any and all other items necessary for the proper maintenance and operation thereof, shall be assessed, either partly or wholly, upon such district as the City Council shall determine will be benefited by the maintenance and operation of the public improvements proposed to be maintained; the amounts so assessed to be collected in the same manner and by the same officers as taxes for City purposes are collected. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-102.02).

16.10.480 Applicable general law.
When the City Council has declared its intention pursuant to SCCC 16.10.470, the applicable provisions of Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 26 (entitled "Maintenance Districts"), Section 5820 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California, excepting Sections 5850 to 5853, inclusive, shall apply; provided, that all documents required to be posted, shall be posted on or near the Council chamber door or on any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall and in three public places within the territory proposed to be formed into a maintenance district or to be annexed to an existing maintenance district. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80; Ord. 1494 § 1, 4-10-84. Formerly § 16-102.03).

16.10.490 Alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative procedure by which the City Council may provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any public improvements which are local in nature, payable from annual benefit assessments apportioned among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district established therefor, the nature and formula or formulae for which is to be determined in the proceedings in which jurisdiction is provided for the use of such alternative procedure.

(b) Resolution of Intention. The resolution of intention to order work done or improvements made or said separate resolution shall contain a statement of the formula or formulae upon and by which annual assessment levies for the payment of said costs and expenses will be apportioned according to benefits among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district and the zones of benefit, if any, to be established therefor. Said formula or formulae may prescribe a maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment to be levied for such purposes.

(c) Written Protests and Oral Objections. In connection with the hearing provided for in the establishment of the maintenance district, and the zones of benefit, if any, or the annexation of territory to an existing maintenance district, or to the initial modification in said formula or formulae as hereinafter provided, owners may file written protests and make oral objections to said formula or formulae in the same manner, at the same time and with like legal effect as provided for other protests and oral objections in Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 26 (entitled "Maintenance Districts"), Section 5820 et seq. of said Streets and Highways Code.

(d) Initial Modification. At said hearing, the City Council, of its own volition or in response to any protest made, heard or considered, may make modifications in the formula or formulae for the purpose of making the same more fair and equitable; provided, however, that before making a final determination in said matter of modification it shall set said matter for hearing at a subsequent meeting of said City Council, which it shall call or to which it may adjourn; provided further, that it shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting by one publication in the newspaper in which the original resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation was published, at least ten days prior to said hearing. If the formula or formulae modification consists solely of a decrease in such maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment, the City Council may order such decrease by resolution and no hearing need be held thereon.

(e) Majority Protest. If the City Council finds that protests are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the City Council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council.

(f) Final Determination. At the initial hearing or at a subsequent hearing on the modification of said formula or formulae as herein provided or at any meeting to which either shall have been adjourned, or at any meeting of the City Council subsequent to the full hearing of said matter, with or without said matter having been submitted, the City Council, by resolution, shall finally adopt a formula or formulae for the apportionment of benefits in said annual assessment levies, which shall be that stated in the resolution of intention, or said separate resolution, or as modified, and its decision and determination shall be final and conclusive against all persons entitled to appeal to it as to all errors, informalities or irregularities which the City Council might have avoided or have remedied.

(g) Subsequent Modification. If, at any time following the final establishment of the formula or formulae for said annual assessment levies, the City Council shall by resolution determine that, by reason of changed conditions or because of defects or insufficiencies therein disclosed by its application, the established formula or formulae is, in any particular, inequitable or unfair, or may be made more equitable and fair, the City Council may, by resolution so declare, stating the reasons therefor, and fix a time and place of hearing thereon.

(h) Notice. The City Clerk shall cause a copy of the resolution adopted by the City Council as provided in subsection (g) of this section to be published once in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation in said proceedings was published, to be mailed, postage prepaid, to all owners of property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, and to be posted on or near the Council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said publication, mailing and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing.

(i) Hearing and Determination. At the hearing provided for in subsection (g) of this section, protests may be filed, heard and acted upon in the manner and with the like effect provided in subsections (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section.

(j) Budget – Contents. The City Manager shall annually cause to be prepared a budget for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all of said improvements of a local nature during the ensuing fiscal year which shall include the following:

(1) The gross amount required for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating said improvements;

(2) The surplus balance available at the end of the fiscal year for such purpose;

(3) The amount, if any, to be contributed by the City to pay any part of said costs and expenses;

(4) The amount, if any, to be repaid to the City for funds advanced by the City to pay deficits which occurred in prior years; and

(5) The balance of the amount necessary to pay said costs and expenses.

(k) Annual Benefit Assessment. The amount provided in subsection (j)(5) of this section shall be raised by an annual benefit assessment on all of the lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district.

(l) Report. In each fiscal year in which a balance is provided in the budget to be raised to pay said costs and expenses pursuant to subsection (j)(5) of this section, the Director of Public Works, City Engineer or Director of Streets and Automotive Services of said City shall cause to be prepared a report, in writing, for each maintenance district, which shall set forth the budget, the formula or formulae for the annual assessment levy and by properly headed columns, show the following data as to each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district:

(1) A description of each lot or parcel of property by a legal description, assessor's parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same;

(2) The amount of assessment to be levied against each lot or parcel of property in accordance with the formula or formulae; and

(3) Such other information as will be necessary or useful in applying the formula or formulae adopted by the City Council.

(m) Filing with City Clerk. When the report has been completed by said Director of Public Works, City Engineer or Director of Streets and Automotive Services, it shall be signed by them and filed with the City Clerk on or before June 1st of each year. Upon receipt of the report, the City Clerk shall present it to the City Council for its consideration.

(n) Approval by City Council. The report shall be reviewed by the City Council and said City Council may approve the report, as filed, or it may modify the report in any particular and approve it as modified.

(o) Hearing. Upon approval of the report by the City Council pursuant to subsection (n) of this section, the City Council shall, by resolution, appoint a time and place of hearing thereon.

(p) Notice. The City Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by mailing, postage prepaid, to all owners of property subject to said assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation; to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; and to be posted on or near the Council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said mailing, publication and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing.

The form of notice to be published and posted shall be substantially as follows:

NOTICE OF HEARING ON
_______ MAINTENANCE DISTRICT

Notice is hereby given that the Director of Public Works, City Engineer or Director of Streets and Automotive Services has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk a report, in writing, which provides the basis for the levy of benefit assessments for the costs of maintenance and operation on all lots or parcels of property within said maintenance district. Said report sets forth the amounts to be provided in the budget for maintenance and operation, a description of each lot or parcel of property in the maintenance district, by a legal description, assessor's parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same, and the amount of assessment to be levied for the fiscal year 20___ – 20___ against each lot or parcel of property. Said report is open to public inspection.

Said report will be heard by the Council at its meeting to be held on the ________ day of ________, 20___, at the hour of ________ o'clock _.M. in the regular meeting place of said Council, Council Chambers, City Hall, Santa Clara, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein.

Any interested owner, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any lot or parcel of property owned by him, may file with the City Clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing a protest, in writing, signed by him, describing the lot or parcel of property so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his/her protest, and may appear at said hearing and be heard in regard thereto.

The form of mailed notice shall be substantially as hereinabove set forth, and shall also contain a description of the lot or parcel of property covered by the notice sufficient to identify it, and the amount of the proposed assessment against said lot or parcel of property as set forth in the report.

If the City Council adopts the report, the requirement for mailed notice shall not thereafter apply to hearings on reports prepared in subsequent years for the annual benefit assessment and notice by posting any publication as herein provided shall be adequate.

(q) Hearing – Determination Final. The City Council shall hold the hearing at the time and place specified in the resolution and in any order continuing the hearing. During the course of, or upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may order changes in any of the matters provided in the report. Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the City Council may adopt a resolution confirming the report, either as originally submitted or as changed by it.

All decisions and determinations of the City Council, on notice and hearing as aforesaid, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal to it, as to all errors, informalities and irregularities which the City Council might have avoided, or have remedied during the hearing on the report.

(r) Certification and Filing. The report, together with the certificate of the City Clerk as to the fact and date of approval and adoption thereof by the City Council as provided in subsection (q) of this section shall forthwith be delivered to the Director of Finance of said City, who shall thereafter deliver said report, as adopted, to the officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected.

(s) Benefit Assessments, Posting. The officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected shall post to said tax roll the total amount of the benefit assessment levied and to be collected for said year on each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district as set forth in said report. The amount so posted shall appear as a separate item on the tax bill.

(t) Method of Collection. The special benefit assessments shall be collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon which said ad valorem property taxes are collected. They shall be in addition to all of said ad valorem property taxes, and shall be collected together with, and not separate therefrom, and enforced in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time and with the same penalties and interest as are said ad valorem property taxes. All laws applicable to the collection and enforcement of said ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to said special benefit assessment levy, and the assessed lot or parcel of property, if sold for taxes, shall be subject to redemption in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from the sale for ad valorem property taxes, and if not redeemed, shall in like manner pass to the purchaser.

(u) Omitted Property. If any property within the maintenance district is erroneously omitted in any such report, said property shall be assessed for the omitted amount in the next year after said omission is discovered, and appropriate provisions shall be made in the report for said year.

(v) Consolidated Hearing. The procedures relating to the formation of a maintenance district or the annexation to an existing maintenance district and the alternative method for the levy of the annual benefit assessment hereunder may be consolidated for hearing purposes. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80; Ord. 1494 § 2, 4-10-84; Ord. 1772 §§ 2, 3, 4, 8-20-02. Formerly § 16-102.04).

16.10.500 Applicability to maintenance districts formed prior to effective date hereof.
(a) Applicability – Petition. The provisions of SCCC 16.10.490 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments shall be applicable to maintenance districts formed before the effective date hereof, regardless of the law pursuant to which said maintenance districts were formed, if all of the owners of all of the lots or parcels of property subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation request, in writing, that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as provided in SCCC 16.10.490 shall apply.

(b) Applicability – City Council Action. The City Council may, by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as herein provided be made applicable to maintenance districts formed prior to the effective date hereof and shall fix therein a time and place for a hearing thereon.

(c) Hearing – Notice. Notice of said hearing shall be given by the City Clerk, who shall cause a copy of said resolution of intention to be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of any lot or parcel of property subject to a benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation as herein provided, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and to be posted on or near the Council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said mailing, publication and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing.

(d) Protests. At any time not later than the hour fixed for the hearing of objections in the resolution of intention, the owner of any lot or parcel of property subject to assessment in said maintenance district to pay the costs of said maintenance and operation may make written protest thereto.

(e) Hearing. The City Council shall hear and pass upon all protests thereto, and its decision thereon, expressed by resolution, shall be final and conclusive.

(f) Majority Protest. If the City Council finds that protests thereto are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the City Council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council. The City Council may adjourn the hearing from time to time.

(g) Consolidated Hearing. The procedures under SCCC 16.10.490 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments may be consolidated for hearing purposes with the procedures under this section. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-102.05).

16.10.510 Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article hereby adopted. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-102.06).

16.10.520 Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force thirty (30) days after its final adoption, and before such final adoption, it shall be published as required by the Charter of said City. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-102.07).

Article VII. Municipal Park
Improvement Districts

16.10.530 Title.
This article may be cited as the "Santa Clara Municipal Park Improvement District Ordinance." (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.1).

16.10.540 Purposes.
Any portion of the City may be formed into a municipal park improvement district for the purpose of creating an indebtedness, to be represented by bonds of the district, the proceeds from the sale of which shall be used for the acquisition or construction of any public park improvement or work authorized herein, and for the further purpose of owning, managing, maintaining and operating any such public park improvement or work.

"Improvement" or "work" whether used singly or in combination mean and include any work or improvement for public park or amusement or recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, buildings, motor vehicle parking facilities, lakes, streams, bridges, landscaping, and planting improvements, together with the acquisition of property necessary and convenient therefor, as well as the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, addition to, improvement, enlargement and repair of all or any part of such work or improvement, including roads, utilities, sewers, drains and other work or improvements appurtenant or related thereto. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.2).

16.10.550 Public body.
Any district formed under this article is a public body, corporate and politic, separate and distinct from the City, and not an administrative arm of the Council, exercising public and essential governmental functions, has perpetual succession, and has and may exercise the powers enumerated in this article, those necessarily implied therefrom and such other powers as the Council may hereafter provide. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.3).

16.10.560 Governed by Council.
Any district formed under this article shall be governed by the Council acting as governing body of the district. All rules of proceedings applicable to the Council acting as such, except as herein otherwise expressly provided, shall apply to the Council acting as governing body of district. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-7. Formerly § 16-102.4).

16.10.570 Other officers.
All other officers of the City are ex-officio district officers; provided, that the Council may appoint other qualified persons to any district office at any time. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.5).

16.10.580 Employees.
The Council may, at any time, appoint or employ, fix the compensation of, and prescribe the authorities and duties of other officers, employees, attorneys, architects, engineers and other consultants necessary or convenient for the business of the district. The Council may delegate the employment of employees, architects and engineers to a managing agent by contract pursuant to SCCC 16.10.790. All personnel appointed or employed under the authority of SCCC 16.10.570 and this section shall be officers, employees or independent contractors, as the case may be, of the district and not of the City. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.6).

16.10.590 Title to property – Assignment of contracts to district.
Title to any property acquired by any district or by the City on behalf of any district shall be vested in the district. Any property or rights acquired by the City on behalf of any district prior to its formation shall be deemed to be the property of such district and title thereto shall vest in the district upon its formation. Any contracts negotiated on behalf of any district prior to its formation shall be assigned to such district upon its formation. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.7).

16.10.600 Statute applicability generally.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, Article 6 commencing with Section 5350, of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of the Public Resources Code, shall apply. Said statute is hereinafter referred to as "the Act." (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.8).

16.10.610 Indebtedness.
Any district formed under this article shall have the power, in addition to the power to issue bonds as provided in the Act and this article, to borrow money, incur indebtedness and issue evidences of such indebtedness, and to refund or retire any indebtedness or lien against the district or its property. Such power shall be exercised by resolution of the Council acting as governing body of the district; the sources of funds to repay the indebtedness shall be set forth in said resolution. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.8.1).

16.10.620 Acquisition or construction contracts – Combination with managing agency agreements.
Any work or improvement and any subsequent addition thereto or enlargement thereof may be acquired by a district by purchase, condemnation or otherwise upon its completion. As an alternative, any such work, improvement, addition or enlargement may be constructed by the district by contract, through a managing agent or otherwise. Such contracts may be made by negotiation without regard to Sections 5365 and 5366 of the Act, and said sections shall not apply. Such contracts shall be contracts of the district and not of the City. If the Council determines that it is necessary, in order that maximum public use, benefit and enjoyment can be derived from any municipal park acquired or constructed pursuant to this article, that the functions of design, construction, operation, management and maintenance be integrated and combined by contract with a specially trained and experienced person, firm or corporation, who will act as agent for the district, so that the park will be designed, constructed, operated, managed and maintained in an efficient and economical manner, by and with coordinated, uniform and safe means and methods, and in accordance with the highest standards of quality and taste, then the district may contract with the same person, firm or corporation to perform all of said functions, provided such contracting agent meets all of the foregoing criteria. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.9).

16.10.630 Exceptions.
No petition shall be required to initiate the proceedings and no election shall be required to authorize the bonds. Section 5351, Subdivision (d) of Section 5352, and Sections 5357, 5358 and 5359 of the Act shall not apply. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.10).

16.10.640 Action by resolution.
All Council action required may be by resolution. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.11).

16.10.650 Public convenience and necessity.
Unless the proceeding has been excepted from the provisions of Division 4 (entitled "The Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931"), Section 2800 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code, or proceedings avoided, waived, or taken thereunder, the Council shall take proceedings pursuant to Article I of this chapter. The resolution required by SCCC 16.10.020 may be consolidated with the resolution or ordinance of intention and the notice required by SCCC 16.10.030 may be incorporated in the notice required by the Act. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.12).

16.10.660 Notice by mail.
Notice of the hearing on the formation of the district shall also be given by mail pursuant to SCCC 16.05.250. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.13).

16.10.670 Issuance and sale of bonds.
The bonds may be issued and sold as the Council determines and directs, at public or private sale, at or below their par value and at a rate of interest not to exceed the rate determined by the Council in the resolution providing for the issuance thereof. The bonds shall be payable at the times and in the amounts determined by the Council in said resolution and the limitations of Section 5361 of the Act shall not apply. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.14).

16.10.680 Bond issuance – Division into series.
The Council may divide the principal amount of any issue into two or more series and fix different dates for the bonds of each series. The bonds of one series may be made payable at different times from those of any other series. The maturity of each series shall comply with this article. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.15).

16.10.690 Determination of amount.
In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the Council may include all of the following:

(a) All costs and expenses and estimated costs and expenses incidental to or connected with the acquisition, construction, improving, or financing of the improvement, including the cost of any environmental impact or other studies, filings or reports required by law.

(b) All engineering, inspection, legal, and fiscal agent's fees, expenses in connection with the formation of the district, costs of the issuance of the bonds, bond reserve funds and working capital, and bond interest estimated to accrue during the construction period and for a period of not to exceed twenty-four (24) months after completion of construction. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.16).

16.10.700 Deficiency bonds.
If the proceeds of the bonds for any reason are less than the cost of the improvement or work authorized in the proceedings, additional bonds may be issued and sold to provide for the amount of the deficit, but not to exceed the amount necessary to complete the works according to the original plans and specifications. Such deficiency bonds shall be deemed to be the same in all respects as the original issue, and shall be entitled to payment, without preference or priority over the bonds first issued, and shall be disposed of in like manner. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.17).

16.10.710 Loans to special fund.
To expedite the conduct of proceedings and the making of any acquisition or improvement authorized by this article, the Council may, at any time, transfer into a special fund designated by the name of the improvement proceeding, out of any available funds of the City, such sums as it deems necessary. The sums so transferred are a loan to the special fund, and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the district bonds provided for in this article. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.18).

16.10.720 Tax base.
The tax provided in Section 5364 of the Act may be levied upon all taxable land, land and improvements, or all taxable property, as set forth in the resolution of intention. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.19).

16.10.730 Charges.
The Council may prescribe, revise and collect charges for the services, facilities or products of the improvement or work, or for the use thereof, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, charges for admission thereto. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.20).

16.10.740 Charges – Revision by agent.
Any managing agent appointed pursuant to SCCC 16.10.790 may be granted the authority by the Council to revise such charges subject to such standards and controls as may be established by the Council in the managing agency agreement for the adequate protection of the public interest. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.21).

16.10.750 Pledge of revenues.
Revenues derived under SCCC 16.10.730 and 16.10.740 may be pledged to the payment and security of the bonds pursuant to Article 4, commencing with Section 53500, of Chapter 3, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.22).

16.10.760 Further bond security.
District bonds may be further secured by a deed of trust or other appropriate encumbrance on the improvement or work financed with the bond proceeds. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.23).

16.10.770 Disposition of surplus.
Any revenues remaining after full satisfaction of all requirements of any district bond indenture and any other district agreements and obligations shall be transferred to the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.24).

16.10.780 Refunding.
Any bonds authorized and issued under this article may be refunded, in whole or in part, by proceedings under the Special Assessment and Bond Refunding Act of 1939 or under Article IV of this chapter with bonds under Chapter 16.15 SCCC or under any other refunding law available at the time of the refunding proceedings. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.25).

16.10.790 Managing agency agreements.
Whenever the Council determines that the management and operation of any improvement authorized hereunder is so complex and specialized as to require that it be accomplished by specially qualified persons, it may make and enter into managing agency agreements with competent persons, firms, or corporations specially trained and experienced to render such services, subject to retention of such controls over rates and use of the improvement as are necessary or desirable to assure its operation as a public municipal park improvement. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.26).

16.10.800 Validation of agreements.
Any and all contracts, stipulations or agreements made by the City on behalf of any district for the acquisition of any lands, easements, rights or property and for the design, construction, operation, management and/or maintenance of any improvements made prior to the effective date of the ordinance adding this article to the Code are hereby ratified, approved, confirmed, validated and declared legally effective. This shall include all acts and proceedings of the Council and of any person, public officer, board or agency heretofore done or taken in connection with said contracts, agreements or stipulations. All such contracts, agreements or stipulations heretofore made and hereafter carried out and completed in accordance with their terms shall be legal, valid and binding contracts of the district identified therein. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.27).

16.10.810 Limitation of actions.
No action, suit, or proceeding attacking or otherwise questioning the validity of any district formed under this article or of any bonds authorized hereunder or of any acts and proceedings of the Council or other City or district officials in connection therewith shall be brought unless such action, suit or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of adoption of the resolution or ordinance ordering the formation of the district. No action, suit or proceeding attacking or otherwise questioning the validity of any contract or agreement for the acquisition or construction of any improvement or work under SCCC 16.10.620 or for management services under SCCC 16.10.790 shall be brought unless such action, suit or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the action of the Council authorizing execution of any such contract or agreement on behalf of the City or district; provided, however, that if any such contract or agreement is authorized to be and is executed prior to the formation of the district, any such action, suit or proceeding may be commenced at any time prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of the resolution or ordinance ordering the formation of the district. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.28).

16.10.820 Judicial validation.
At any time before the expiration of the limitation period established by SCCC 16.10.810, an action may be brought pursuant to Section 53511 of the Government Code and Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure to determine the validity of the district and the bonds authorized therefor and the means and sources of payment of the principal and interest thereof, and of any contracts or agreements for acquisition or construction of improvement or work under SCCC 16.10.620 or for management services under SCCC 16.10.790 theretofore authorized, including without limitation the legality and validity of all acts and proceedings theretofore taken in connection with such district, bonds, contracts or agreements. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.29).

16.10.830 Applicability of Act and title.
Except as herein otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of the Act and of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.30).

16.10.840 Complete scheme of procedure.
The Council declares and finds that the Act, this article, and the Santa Clara Improvement Procedure Code constitute a complete scheme of procedure and full authority for the specific purposes set forth in SCCC 16.10.540. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.31).

16.10.850 Powers, limitations.
The powers conferred by this article are in addition to, and the limitations imposed by this article do not affect, the powers conferred by any other law. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.32).

16.10.860 Inconsistency with other law.
If this article is inconsistent or in conflict with any other law, this article is controlling. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.33).

16.10.870 Liberal construction.
This article shall be liberally construed to promote its objects and purposes. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.34).

16.10.880 Defect or omission validity of proceedings or bonds.
If the jurisdiction of the Council to order the proposed act is not affected, the defect or omission of the Council or of any officers of the district or the City in proceedings under this article does not invalidate the proceedings or bonds issued under this article. (Ord. 1264 § 1, 8-1-72. Formerly § 16-102.35).

Article VIII. Santa Clara Downtown Business Improvement District

16.10.890 Resolution of intention, public hearing and findings.
The recitals hereof, which set forth facts regarding the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, the conduct of public hearings and certain findings of the City Council, are true and correct and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.900 Definitions.
In order to distinguish between district businesses and for the purpose of calculating and applying the amount of assessments owed, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) "Billing period" shall refer to the calendar year.

(b) "Calendar year" means January 1st to, and including, December 31st of the same year.

(c) "Financial" means banks, savings and loans, credit unions, etc.

(d) "Lodging" businesses include inns, hotels, motels, RV Parks and other similar businesses.

(e) "Professional" includes attorneys, architects, accountants, engineers, surveyors, physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors and others in a medical/health service field, consultants, real estate brokers, financial advisors, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, artists and designers.

(f) "Restaurant" businesses include cafes, eating establishments, sandwich shops, dinner houses, restaurants and fast food services and other similar businesses.

(g) "Retail businesses" include all businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this section, at least fifty percent (50%) of whose gross income is derived from "retail sales" as that term is defined under the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of sales other than retail sales does not exclude said business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty percent (50%) of said business' gross income.

(h) "Service" businesses include general office, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, personal care facilities and outlets, entertainment uses, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, renting and leasing businesses, utilities, vending machine businesses, household finance companies, and other similar businesses not otherwise included in subsections (a), (b), (c), (e), or (f) of this section. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.910 Excluded business types.
The following business types are excluded from participating in the district:

(a) Residential uses;

(b) Nonprofit organizations;

(c) Schools;

(d) Governmental uses;

(e) Apartment rentals;

(f) Pre-school and day care facilities;

(g) Hospitals;

(h) Business uses in residential homes. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.920 Establishment of boundaries.
A parking and business improvement district is hereby established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the district and the benefit zones within the district shall be as set forth on Exhibit "A," attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. The district shall be known as the "Santa Clara Downtown Business Improvement District" (the "district"). (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.930 Establishment of district board of directors.
There shall be a board of directors of the district ("board") to administer the affairs of the district. Said board shall consist of businesses within the district. Within the board there shall be a president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer elected by the membership, and such other officers as deemed necessary by the board. Such other officers shall be appointed by the board of directors at their discretion. All voting within the district regarding election of board members and any actions regarding the normal and routine conducting of district business shall be based on one vote per assessed dollar, and said business must be current in payment of their district assessment(s) to participate in such votes. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.940 Establishment of benefit assessment.
All businesses, trades, and professions located within the district boundaries shown on Exhibit "A" shall, commencing January 1, 2000, pay an annual benefit assessment to the district in the following amounts:

Type of Business

Zone A

Zone B

Retailers and restaurants

 

$150.00 (1-3 emp.)

$225.00 (4-6 emp.)

$300.00 (7+)

 

$ 75.00

$112.50

$150.00

Service businesses

$150.00 (1-3 emp.)

$250.00 (4+ emp.)

$ 75.00

$125.00

Professional businesses

$100.00

$ 75.00

Financial institutions

$500.00

$500.00

Lodging, per complex

(bed/breakfast)

 

(Hotels, motels)

 

$150.00

 

$200.00

 

$150.00

 

$200.00

Note: Retail, restaurant and service businesses will be charged based upon the number of employees, either full-time or the equivalent made up of multiples of part-time employees. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.950 Purpose and use of benefit assessments.
The types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the district, including but not limited to the following:

(a) Promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the area and which take place on or in public places within the area;

(b) Furnishing of music in any public place in the area;

(c) Promotion of tourism within the area; and

(d) Activities which benefit businesses located and operating in the area, including but not limited to commercial shopping and promotional programs.

The assessment levied hereunder must be used for the purpose specified in this article and the proceeds shall not be used for any other purpose. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.960 Exclusions from benefit assessment.
No person or business in the district shall be required to pay an assessment based on:

(a) A residential use of the property; or

(b) A nonprofit organization as defined by Section 501(C)(3) or (C)(6) of the Internal Revenue Service Code. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.970 New businesses assessment waiver.
Any new business established within the district shall not be required to pay an assessment for the billing period during which said business is initiated. The business will have been considered initiated on the date of issuance of the business tax certificate. This waiver shall not apply to an existing business that has changed ownership or location within the district. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.980 Collection of benefit assessment.
(a) The benefit assessment authorized by this article for Santa Clara businesses shall be billed and collected each calendar year and due on January 1st for that calendar year. City will bill and collect the assessments, at no charge to the district and forward all funds collected to the district within thirty (30) days of said collections.

(b) Late payment penalties shall be applied to businesses that do not provide their respective assessment payments on the dates provided for herein at a rate of ten percent per month. At such time as late payment penalties equate to fifty percent (50%) of the total annual assessment, action shall be taken to recover said delinquent assessments. Costs of this recovery shall be borne by the business owing the assessment and late penalties. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.990 Voluntary contributions to district.
Contributions from businesses outside the district boundaries shall be permitted on a voluntary basis. The boundary of the district shall not be modified as a result of the contribution, nor shall said contributing business be considered a member of the district for voting or other purposes. However, said business making a voluntary contribution may be entitled to participate in the programs of the district upon a finding by the board of directors that the district derives a benefit from said business' participation in the program. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.1000 Annual budget process.
Pursuant to the California Streets and Highways Code, Sections 36533, 36534, 36535, it shall be necessary for the board to present an annual budget for City Council review and approval prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.1010 District proceeds do not offset City services.
City specifically finds and declares that the funds derived from the district shall not be used to offset or diminish current maintenance, capital improvement programs, including but not limited to, public property and sidewalk cleaning, street cleaning and maintenance, tree maintenance, restroom cleaning and maintenance. The City declares its intent to provide at least the same level and standard of maintenance and repair of public property within the district as are available from year to year. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

16.10.1020 Disestablishment of the district.
Proceeding to disestablish the district shall be initiated by the City Council following the procedures set forth in the California Streets and Highways Code, Section 36550. In the event of disestablishment of the district, remaining revenues of the district shall be refunded to paying business owners as set forth in the California Streets and Highways Code, Section 36551. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 10-5-99).

Article IX. Santa Clara Tourism Improvement District

16.10.1110 Resolution of intention, public hearing and findings.
The recitals of the adopting ordinance, which set forth facts regarding the adoption of Council Resolution(s), the conduct of public hearings and certain findings of the City Council, are true and correct and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1120 Definitions.
For the purpose of calculating and applying the amount of assessments owed, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) "The Act" refers to the authority under which this article is enacted. The authority for a tourism improvement district is Part 6 (entitled "Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989" – commencing with Section 36500) of Division 18 (entitled "Parking") of the California Streets and Highways Code.

(b) The "advisory board" is appointed by the City Council, pursuant to Section 36530 of the Act, to manage the affairs of the district.

(c) "Billing period" shall refer to the following fiscal quarters:

(1) First quarter: July, August, September;

(2) Second quarter: October, November, December;

(3) Third quarter: January, February, March; and

(4) Fourth quarter: April, May, June.

(d) "Fiscal year" means July 1st to and including June 30th of the following year. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1130 Establishment of boundaries.
A tourism improvement district is hereby established pursuant to the Act. The boundaries of the district and the benefit zones within the district shall be as set forth on Exhibit A, which was attached to Resolution No. 7176, and is incorporated herein by reference. [Resolution No. 7176 declared the intention of the City Council to establish a tourism improvement district.] That map depicts the initial district. The district shall be known as the "Santa Clara Tourism Improvement District" (the "district"). From time to time, amendments to the boundaries of the initial district map may be made by resolution of the City Council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 (entitled "Assessments" – Section 36530 et seq.) and Chapter 4 (entitled "Modification of Boundaries, Assessments, Improvements, or Activities" – Section 36540 et seq.) of the Act. Amendments to Exhibit A will contain, on the face of Exhibit A, the number of the amending resolution and date of adoption. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1140 Establishment of district advisory board.
There shall be an advisory board of the district to administer the affairs of the district. Said advisory board shall be constituted of representatives of businesses within the district. Within the advisory board there shall be a president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer elected by the membership, and such other officers as deemed necessary by the advisory board. At their discretion, other officers may be appointed by the advisory board. All voting within the district regarding the election of advisory board officers and any actions regarding the normal and routine conduct of district business shall be based on one vote per assessed dollar, and said business must be current in payment of their district assessment(s) to participate in such votes. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1150 Establishment of benefit assessment.
All hotel properties located within the district boundaries shown on Exhibit A, as amended from time to time, shall, on Monday, February 14, 2005, commence collection of a benefit assessment from hotel guests based on the payment of one dollar ($1.00) per room per occupied night. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1160 Purpose and use of benefit assessments.
The activities to be provided to the district will be funded by the levy of the assessments. A partial listing of the types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the district includes, but is not limited to:

(a) Sponsorship of an aggressive and colorful marketing campaign developed to attract additional travelers and tourists.

(b) Sponsorship of aggressive marketing efforts to attract additional conventions.

(c) Possibly sponsor the services of a consulting firm to prepare a travel/tourism marketing study and plan for the purpose of determining where to focus marketing funds and what market(s) to target as well as what specific marketing programs might be most effective.

(d) Possibly sponsor print ads in Sunset, Via and other similar travel publications.

(e) Possibly sponsor a creative and colorful outdoor advertising campaign.

(f) Possibly sponsor a commercial marketing campaign to attract specific cultural groups.

(g) Sponsor administrative costs of program development and implementation. The City Council finds that businesses within the district will be benefited by the above-referenced activities funded by the proposed assessment, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1170 Exclusions from benefit assessment.
No person or business shall be required to pay an assessment based on: (a) a residential use of the property within the district, or (b) a nonprofit organization as defined by Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.A.) located within the district. Various other businesses located within the district boundaries, but deemed not to be directly benefited from a tourism and convention stimulation program, may also be exempted. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1180 New business assessment waiver.
Any new business subject to the assessment established within the district shall not be required to pay an assessment for the billing period (the fiscal quarter) in which said business is initiated. The business will be considered initiated on the date of issuance of a City business license. This waiver shall not apply to an existing business that has changed ownership or location within the district. City agrees to supply the district with timely information regarding new businesses initiated within the district. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1190 Submission of the benefit assessment.
Santa Clara businesses located and benefited by the district shall commence submitting to the City the assessment monies collected from their guests during the initial fiscal quarter by April 14, 2005 (for the third fiscal quarter), and thereafter by the tenth business day of the month following the last day of a designated fiscal quarter [i.e., the payment for the fourth fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2005, is due by July 14, 2005]. The assessment funds and the accounting information backup for the funds shall be submitted to the City in accordance with this schedule. The City will forward to the district the funds (without interest) received from the participant businesses within thirty (30) days of the funds being submitted to the City. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1200 Administrative charge and out-of-pocket reimbursement to City.
There will be a City administrative charge. The City's administrative charge will initially be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per fiscal quarter (three thousand dollars [$3,000.00] per fiscal year) for processing the assessment submissions. In addition, the City shall be reimbursed for any of its out-of-pocket expenses (i.e., mailing, newspaper notices, etc.). The administrative charge will be reviewed annually as part of the annual report submitted by the advisory board to the City. The administrative charge and out-of-pocket reimbursement will be made quarterly as a deduction from the assessment funds the City will forward to the district quarterly. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1210 Voluntary contributions to district.
Contributions to the district will be permitted on a voluntary basis. The boundary of the district shall not be modified as a result of the contribution, nor shall said contributing business be considered a member of the district for voting or other purposes. However, said business making a voluntary contribution may be entitled to participate in the programs of the district upon a finding by the advisory board that the district derives a benefit from said business' participation in the program. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1220 Annual report process.
Pursuant to provisions of Section 36533 of the Act, it shall be necessary for the advisory board to present an annual report for City Council review and approval prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, as defined hereinabove. The annual report shall be submitted by April 1st of each year commencing April 1, 2006. Among the reasons for the submission of the annual report is to comply with provisions regarding public notice and hearing prior to establishing the benefit assessments for the following fiscal year pursuant to Sections 36534 and 35535 of the Act. Submission of a district budget is one of the mandated components of the annual report. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1230 Decisions regarding expenditure of funds.
Decisions regarding the expenditure of funds will be made pursuant to Chapter 3 (entitled "Assessments" – Section 36530 et seq.) and Chapter 4 (entitled "Modification of Boundaries, Assessments, Improvements, or Activities" – Section 36540 et seq.) of the Act. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

16.10.1240 Disestablishment of the district.
Proceeding to disestablish the district shall be initiated by the City Council following the presentation of a petition to the City Council signed by district business owners paying fifty percent (50%) or more of the total assessments levied in the last four completed fiscal quarters. Proceedings to disestablish the district shall follow the procedures set forth in the Act. The City Council shall disestablish the district if, following the public hearing prescribed in Section 36550(b), written protests are not withdrawn as to reduce the protests below the fifty percent (50%) level. In the event of disestablishment of the district, there may be surplus funds remaining. It would be difficult to return the funds to the individual guests who had paid the assessment. Consequently, the surplus funds, if any, are to be donated to bona fide charitable, educational, civic, religious or similar tax-exempt, nonprofit organization(s). The designation of recipient organization(s) and the amount to be donated will be at the discretion of the advisory board. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 12-14-04).

Chapter 16.15
ASSESSMENT BOND PROCEDURES
Sections:

Article I. Generally

16.15.005  Purpose and application of chapter.

16.15.010  Declaration of resolution of intention generally – Information required and interest rates generally.

16.15.015  Form of bonds.

16.15.020  Execution of bonds.

16.15.025  Sale of bonds generally – Disposition of funds.

16.15.030  Bonds sold for amount in excess of par value.

16.15.035  Registration of bonds against loss, theft and delinquent payment – Applicability of State law.

16.15.040  Payment of assessments with matured bonds and coupons.

Article II. Bond Plan A – Lot Bonds

16.15.045  Application of State law.

16.15.050  Interest – Starting date.

16.15.055  Alternative method of collection of assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

Article III. Bond Plan B – District Bonds

16.15.060  Application of State law.

16.15.065  Assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

16.15.070  Unpaid assessment lists.

16.15.075  Maturity date of bonds of certain denominations.

Article IV. Bond Plan C – District Liability Bonds

16.15.080  Application of State law.

16.15.085  Form of bonds.

16.15.090  Date and interest.

16.15.095  Issuance – Applicability of State law.

16.15.100  Advanced payments – Applicability of State law.

16.15.105  Assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

16.15.110  Unpaid assessment lists – Filing and information required.

16.15.115  Maturity dates of certain denominations.

Article V. Bond Plan D – Ad Valorem Land Bonds

16.15.120  Power of City Council generally.

16.15.125  Description of proposed assessment district in resolution of intention.

16.15.130  Improvements bonds generally – Issuance and delivery to contractor, etc. – Issuance of acquisition bonds when contractor paid from advance.

16.15.135  Acquisition bonds generally.

16.15.140  Municipal improvement district bonds generally – Duties of City Council – Issuance.

16.15.145  Possession bonds, generally – Issuance, etc.

16.15.150  Hearing generally – Notice generally.

16.15.155  Form of notice.

16.15.160  Objections – Powers of City Council.

16.15.165  Bonds generally – Issuance.

16.15.170  Bond issuance – Form and execution.

16.15.175  Issues, series and divisions.

16.15.180  Interest.

16.15.185  When callable.

16.15.190  Supplemental bonds.

16.15.195  Ad valorem tax – Generally.

16.15.200  Ad valorem tax – Method of collection.

16.15.205  Redemption fund – Contributions to same by City.

16.15.210  Division of assessment districts into zones.

16.15.215  Supplemental remedy provisions.

16.15.220  Validity of bonds and tax rate.

16.15.225  Issuance of new bonds when proceedings irregular.

16.15.230  Alteration of district.

Article VI. Bond Plan E – Ad Valorem Realty Bonds

16.15.235  Power of City Council generally.

16.15.240  Assessment.

16.15.245  Procedure.

Article VII. Bond Plan G – Vehicle Off-Street Parking Bonds

16.15.250  Powers.

16.15.255  Purpose.

16.15.260  Definitions.

16.15.265  Procedure.

16.15.270  Off-street parking revenues.

16.15.275  On-street parking meter revenues.

16.15.280  Resolution of intention.

16.15.285  Factors in assessment formula.

16.15.290  Engineer's report.

16.15.295  Notice to property owners.

16.15.300  Hearing.

16.15.305  Estimate.

16.15.310  Report – Preparation – Contents.

16.15.315  Report – Certification.

16.15.320  Report – Hearing.

16.15.325  Report – Notice of hearing.

16.15.330  Report – Mailing, subsequent reports.

16.15.335  Report – Form of notice.

16.15.340  Report – Proof of notice.

16.15.345  Protests.

16.15.350  Public hearing.

16.15.355  Report – Certification.

16.15.360  City budget.

16.15.365  Annual assessment.

16.15.370  Supplemental remedies.

Article VIII. Bond Plan H – Annual Benefit Assessment Bonds

16.15.375  Powers.

16.15.380  Purpose.

16.15.385  Assessment provisions inapplicable.

16.15.390  Resolution of intention.

16.15.395  Benefit assessment formulae.

16.15.400  Hearing as to benefits.

16.15.405  Initial modification.

16.15.410  Final determination.

16.15.415  Subsequent modification.

16.15.420  Notice.

16.15.425  Hearing and determination.

16.15.430  Form of bonds.

16.15.435  Separate series.

16.15.440  Interest.

16.15.445  Interest after maturity.

16.15.450  Callable bonds.

16.15.455  Execution.

16.15.460  Improvement fund.

16.15.465  Redemption fund.

16.15.470  Trust funds.

16.15.475  Budget – Contents.

16.15.480  Benefit assessment.

16.15.485  Report.

16.15.490  Certification.

16.15.495  Adoption by Council.

16.15.500  Further Council action.

16.15.505  Hearing – Date.

16.15.510  Hearing – Notice – Publication and posting.

16.15.515  Hearing – Notice – Form.

16.15.520  Hearing – Affidavits.

16.15.525  Hearing – Protests.

16.15.530  Hearing – Council duties.

16.15.535  Hearing – Decision final.

16.15.540  Certification and filing.

16.15.545  Benefit assessments – Posting.

16.15.550  Collection method.

16.15.555  Advance of funds.

16.15.560  Public property exempt.

16.15.565  Omitted property – Assessment.

16.15.570  Validity of bonds and tax rate.

16.15.575  Curation.

16.15.580  Dedication.

16.15.585  Decisions final.

16.15.590  New bonds – Issued when proceedings irregular.

16.15.595  Existing bonds – Security.

16.15.600  Existing bonds – Exchange.

16.15.605  Existing bonds – Sale of new bonds – Retirement of old bonds.

16.15.610  Alteration of boundaries.

Article IX. Bond Anticipation Notes

16.15.615  Bonds – Bond anticipation note defined.

16.15.620  Borrowing by City – Use of funds.

16.15.625  Resolution authorizing issuance.

16.15.630  Negotiability – Denomination – Maturity – Payment.

16.15.635  Issuance and sale – Interest.

16.15.640  Call and redemption prior to maturity.

16.15.645  Pledge of bond proceeds – Notes as lien on bond funds.

16.15.650  Limitation on amount.

16.15.655  Refunding.

Article I. Generally

16.15.005 Purpose and application of chapter.
When bonds are to be issued in any proceeding had and taken in connection with any public improvement, acquisition, immediate possession or street closing pursuant to this chapter, the same shall be issued, paid and collected in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 859 § 300. Formerly § 16-103).

16.15.010 Declaration of resolution of intention generally – Information required and interest rates generally.
When the Council shall have determined that bonds shall be issued to represent the cost and expenses of any proposed work or improvement or of the possession or acquisition of any property in any proceeding under this chapter, it shall so declare in its resolution of intention therefor and shall specify pursuant to which plan herein provided such bonds shall be issued, the term or maximum term of their maturity following their date and the rate of maximum rate of interest they shall bear, as determined by the Council. (Ord. 859 § 301; Ord. 1215 § 1, 6-24-69; Ord. 1299 § 1, 10-22-74; Ord. 1399 § 1, 4-8-80. Formerly § 16-104).

16.15.015 Form of bonds.
Whenever any bonds shall be issued pursuant to any one of the plans provided in this chapter, such bonds shall be substantially in the form provided in the particular plan specified, with such appropriate changes in the wording of such bonds as to show that they have been issued pursuant to such plan. (Ord. 859 § 302. Formerly § 16-105).

16.15.020 Execution of bonds.
The signature on the interest coupons and all signatures excepting one signature on the bonds may be by printed, engraved, lithographed or other process. (Ord. 859 § 303. Formerly § 16-106).

16.15.025 Sale of bonds generally – Disposition of funds.
When any bonds issued under this chapter are to be sold, they may be sold by the City Council as it shall determine.

The proceeds of such sale shall be placed in the City treasury to the credit of the fund for which they have been issued and shall be applied exclusively to the purposes and objects thereof. (Ord. 859 § 304. Formerly § 16-107).

16.15.030 Bonds sold for amount in excess of par value.
If any bonds be sold for an amount in excess of par, such excess shall be paid into the fund for the improvement unless the City Council shall otherwise determine. (Ord. 859 § 305. Formerly § 16-108).

16.15.035 Registration of bonds against loss, theft and delinquent payment – Applicability of State law.
Bonds may be registered against theft, in which event Title 4, Division 4, Chapter 4, Article 7 (entitled "Registration"), Section 43880 et seq. of the Government Code of the State shall apply.

Bonds may be registered for nonpayment, in which event Title 5, Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 3, Article 2 (entitled "Registration of Bonds"), Section 50630 et seq. of the Government Code of the State shall apply.

New bonds or coupons may be issued to replace lost or destroyed bonds, in which, event the provisions of Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 3, Article 3 (entitled "Lot or Destroyed Bonds"), Section 53460 et seq. of the Government Code of the State shall apply. (Ord. 859 §§ 306 – 308. Formerly § 16-109).

16.15.040 Payment of assessments with matured bonds and coupons.
Payment of all or any portion of any assessment taxes levied to pay the principal or interest due or to become due on the bonds of any district formed under this chapter may be made with matured bonds or matured coupons of such district. Such bonds and coupons shall be accepted and treated as cash and when so received shall be cancelled and the interest and sinking fund of such district shall be credited with the face value thereof. (Ord. 859 § 309. Formerly § 16-110).

Article II. Bond Plan A – Lot Bonds

16.15.045 Application of State law.
When bonds are issued pursuant to bond plan A, the bond provisions of the State Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply. (Ord. 859 § 320. Formerly § 16-111).

16.15.050 Interest – Starting date.
When an assessment is levied under this article, interest shall run from the date of filing the list of unpaid assessments. Otherwise, interest shall run from a date to be determined by the City Council. (Ord. 859 § 321. Formerly § 16-112).

16.15.055 Alternative method of collection of assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
As an alternative method for the collection of assessments under this article and which are of an amount less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), proceedings may be had in accordance with the alternative provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 859 § 322. Formerly § 16-113).

Article III. Bond Plan B – District Bonds

16.15.060 Application of State law.
Where bonds are issued pursuant to bond plan B, the State Improvement Bond Act of 1915 shall apply. (Ord. 859 § 330. Formerly § 16-114).

16.15.065 Assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Bonds may be issued in the total amount of all assessments in amounts of less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which are unpaid at such time, to mature at the same time as the maturity of the first series of such serial bonds and which assessments shall become due and payable at the same time as that portion of the larger assessments which shall have been collected for the payment of the first series of the serial bonds and the interest thereon. (Ord. 859 § 331. Formerly § 16-115).

16.15.070 Unpaid assessment lists.
The list of unpaid assessments filed with the City Clerk by the street superintendent shall separately state in such list the total of the assessments which are of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or over in amount and the assessments which are under twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in amount. (Ord. 859 § 332. Formerly § 16-116).

16.15.075 Maturity date of bonds of certain denominations.
Bonds for the amount of the assessments which are not an even multiple of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made to mature at the same time as the first series of bonds. (Ord. 859 § 333. Formerly § 16-117).

Article IV. Bond Plan C –
District Liability Bonds

16.15.080 Application of State law.
When bonds are issued pursuant to this article, the provisions of Sections 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 of the State Refunding Assessment Bond Act of 1935 shall apply. (Ord. 859 § 340. Formerly § 16-118).

16.15.085 Form of bonds.
Appropriate changes shall be made in the form of the bonds to show that they have been issued for a public improvement or acquisition. (Ord. 859 § 341. Formerly § 16-119).

16.15.090 Date and interest.
The City Council shall determine the date of bonds issued under this article and the date from which such interest shall run. Interest shall accrue on the assessments from such date. (Ord. 859 § 342. Formerly § 16-120).

16.15.095 Issuance – Applicability of State law.
Proceedings for the issuance of bonds under this article shall be had as provided in the State Improvement Bond Act of 1915. (Ord. 859 § 343. Formerly § 16-121).

16.15.100 Advanced payments – Applicability of State law.
Assessments for bonds under this article may be paid in advance of maturity in the manner provided in the State Improvement Bond Act of 1915 and the provisions thereof shall be inserted in such bonds instead of the provisions of the State Refunding Act. (Ord. 859 § 344. Formerly § 16-122).

16.15.105 Assessments under twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Bonds may be issued in the total amount of all assessments in amounts of less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which are unpaid at such time, to mature at the same time as the maturity of the first series of such serial bonds and which assessments shall become due and payable at the same time as that portion of the larger assessment which shall have been collected for the payment of the first series of the serial bonds and the interest thereon. (Ord. 859 § 345. Formerly § 16-123).

16.15.110 Unpaid assessment lists – Filing and information required.
The list of unpaid assessments filed with the City Clerk by the street superintendent shall separately state in such list the total of the assessments which are of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or over in amount and the assessments which are under twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in amount. (Ord. 859 § 346. Formerly § 16-124).

16.15.115 Maturity dates of certain denominations.
Bonds for the amount of the assessments which are not an even multiple of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made to mature at the same time as the first series of bonds. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-125).

Article V. Bond Plan D –
Ad Valorem Land Bonds

16.15.120 Power of City Council generally.
There is hereby vested in the City Council the power to issue serial ad valorem land bonds upon any district created under this chapter. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-126).

16.15.125 Description of proposed assessment district in resolution of intention.
The proposed district shall be described in the resolution of intention and established as provided in Chapter 16.10 SCCC pursuant to which such proceedings are had. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-127).

16.15.130 Improvements bonds generally – Issuance and delivery to contractor, etc. – Issuance of acquisition bonds when contractor paid from advance.
If proceedings are had pursuant to SCCC 16.10.090 through 16.10.150 upon completion of the work, the person appointed by the City Council to be in charge of the work shall prepare and file with the City Council a declaration that the work has been completed according to the contract therefor, together with an itemized statement of the cost of such work and of the expenses incidental to such proceedings, estimated to the conclusion of such proceedings. The amount of any contribution shall be stated therein as well as the balance for which bonds are to be issued. When the bonds have been issued they shall be delivered to the contractor upon his/her paying to the City any money due it for incidental expenses as stated in the declaration. The City Council may provide in the resolution of intention that the contractor shall be paid in cash from advances to be made to such project or from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds, in which event the bonds shall be issued as provided for the issuance of acquisition bonds. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-128).

16.15.135 Acquisition bonds generally.
If the proceedings are had pursuant to SCCC 16.10.160 through 16.10.190 upon the entry of all interlocutory judgments in any eminent domain proceedings brought pursuant thereto, proceedings shall be had substantially as provided herein for the issuance of improvement bonds. The bonds shall be sold by the City Council and the proceeds shall be used to pay the costs and expenses of the project. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-129).

16.15.140 Municipal improvement district bonds generally – Duties of City Council – Issuance.
If proceedings are had pursuant to SCCC 16.10.200 through 16.10.260 in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements the City Council shall determine the estimated cost of such acquisitions and improvements and of the expenses incidental thereof and the total estimated amount of the bonds to be issued. The bonds shall be issued and sold and the proceeds shall be used to pay the costs and expenses of the project. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-130).

16.15.145 Possession bonds, generally – Issuance, etc.
If assessment proceedings are had pursuant to SCCC 16.10.160 through 16.10.260 and proceedings shall be had for the taking of immediate possession of the property to be acquired, then the person in charge of such proposed acquisitions shall prepare and file with the City an estimate of the amount of money necessary to be deposited in court for immediate possession and proceedings shall be had for the issuance and sale of bonds therefor as provided for the issuance of acquisition bonds. In such event the City Council shall issue only such amount of additional bonds as is necessary to provide for the additional costs of such project and the proceeds of the possession bonds shall be finally used to apply to the cost of the acquisitions and improvements and expenses incidental thereto. (Ord. 859 § 365. Formerly § 16-131).

16.15.150 Hearing generally – Notice generally.
The City Clerk shall give notice of a time and place of hearing on the declaration filed in relation to the issuance of any bonds to be issued other than pursuant to SCCC 16.10.200 through 16.10.260. Such notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, the first of which shall be at least ten days before the date set for hearing. (Ord. 859 § 366. Formerly § 16-132).

16.15.155 Form of notice.
The notice provided in the preceding section shall refer to the resolution of intention in the proceedings for identification, for a description of the work to be done or acquisition or improvements to be had and for the boundaries of the assessment district and such notice shall be given therein to all persons interested that it is proposed to hear the report and issue bonds pursuant to this article and any person feeling aggrieved by any act or determination done or made in such proceedings or claiming that any previous acts or proceedings were irregular, defective, erroneous or faulty or claiming that the work or improvement has not been performed according to the contract in a good and substantial manner or claiming that any portion of the work or improvement for any reason was omitted or illegally included in the contract or having any objections or reasons why bonds should not be issued in the amount set forth in the declaration and statement on file may appear before the City Council at the time and place so fixed by it and be heard. (Ord. 859 § 367. Formerly § 16-133).

16.15.160 Objections – Powers of City Council.
All objections shall be made in writing and signed by the protestant and any grounds not stated therein and filed at or before the time fixed for the hearing shall be deemed waived. The contractor or his/her assigns and any other person interested in such matter may appear and be heard upon any of the matters referred to in such notice. The City Council may confirm, amend, alter, modify or correct the report in such manner as it shall deem just and require the work to be completed according to its directions or those of the persons designated by it therefor. (Ord. 859 § 368. Formerly § 16-134).

16.15.165 Bonds generally – Issuance.
In the City Council's final order upon the hearing or in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements when the proceedings are had pursuant to SCCC 16.10.200 through 16.10.260, the City Council shall, by resolution, order the issuance of bonds. The resolution shall state the total principal amount thereof and the amount to mature in each year during their term. The first maturity of the bonds may be postponed for a period not beyond July 2nd on the third calendar year following their date. The bonds may be made to mature on July 2nd over a period not to exceed forty (40) years from their date. (Ord. 859 § 369. Formerly § 16-135).

16.15.170 Bond issuance – Form and execution.
The bonds issued as provided in the preceding section shall be in such form, shall be executed by the officers and shall be made payable at such place within or without the State as the City Council shall determine. The bonds shall be negotiable in form and be payable to bearer. (Ord. 859 § 370. Formerly § 16-136).

16.15.175 Issues, series and divisions.
An issue of bonds shall constitute all of the bonds issued pursuant to a resolution of intention. Each issue shall be given a serial designation. The City Council may, in its discretion, divide the issue into two or more divisions and fix different dates for the bonds of each division, in which event the bonds of each division shall be made payable at such time as the City Council shall determine. Possession bonds shall constitute a division of an issue. All bonds of an issue shall have equal priority. (Ord. 859 § 371. Formerly § 16-137).

16.15.180 Interest.
Semi-annual interest coupons shall be attached to bonds issued pursuant to this article and be made payable on the second days of January and July of each year. The first coupon shall be for interest from their date to the second day of January next succeeding fourth months after the date of such bonds. Provision may be made for the payment of interest from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds for the period of acquisition and construction of the project and for one year thereafter. If upon presentation at maturity, payment of any bond is not made as provided by this article, interest shall continue at the same rate until the principal is paid in full. (Ord. 859 § 374. Formerly § 16-138).

16.15.185 When callable.
Bonds issued pursuant to this article are not subject to call or redemption prior to their fixed maturity date unless the right to exercise the call is expressly stated on the face of the bonds. Provision may be made therein for a premium on call. (Ord. 859 § 372. Formerly § 16-139).

16.15.190 Supplemental bonds.
If the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to this article are, for any reason, less than the cost of the acquisition, improvements and expenses incidental thereto, additional bonds may be issued by filing with the Clerk a declaration or statement of the amount necessary therefor and by giving notice and holding a hearing and determining the amount of bonds to be issued therefor as provided in this article for the issuance of bonds upon declaration, notice and hearing. Such bonds shall be deemed a division of the bonds of the main issue. (Ord. 859 § 373. Formerly § 16-140).

16.15.195 Ad valorem tax – Generally.
For each district in which an issue of bonds has been had pursuant to this article, the City Council shall annually, until all of the bonds and interest thereon have been paid in full and at the time of levying the taxes for general City purposes, levy an ad valorem assessment upon all lands within such district except publicly owned property, which levy shall be in an amount clearly sufficient, together with any money which are or may be in the redemption fund and after making adequate allowance for estimated delinquencies, shall pay all of the principal of and interest on such bonds which shall become payable before the proceeds of another such levy shall be available therefor. (Ord. 859 § 375. Formerly § 16-141).

16.15.200 Ad valorem tax – Method of collection.
The ad valorem levy as provided in SCCC 16.15.195 shall be levied and collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon which general City taxes are collected. It shall be in addition to all other taxes levied for general City purposes and shall be levied, computed, entered, collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same persons, at the same time and with the same penalties and interest as are other taxes for City purposes and all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of taxes for City purposes are hereby made applicable to such levy and such levy shall be subject to redemption within one year from the date of sale in the same manner as real property is redeemed from the sale for general City taxes and if not redeemed, shall in like manner pass to the purchaser. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-142).

16.15.205 Redemption fund – Contributions to same by City.
The City Council may annually, at or prior to the time the levy is made or at such other time as it shall determine, transfer to the redemption fund of such bonds such amounts as it shall determine. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-143).

16.15.210 Division of assessment districts into zones.
If, in the judgment of the City Council conducting the proceeding, varying benefits are to be derived by the different parcels of land lying within the assessment district so required, the district may be divided into zones according to benefits. The district may be divided into a number of zones up to the total number of parcels of land in the district, as may be deemed necessary and each zone shall be composed of and include all the lands within the district which will be benefited in like measure. The Council shall also determine the percentage of the sum to be raised each year by the levy and collection of the special assessment taxes in the district for the payments on the principal and interest of the bonds, which will be raised from the lands in each zone. When the district is divided into such zones, the resolution of intention shall so state, giving such percentages to be raised from the lands in each zone. Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or number and shall be plainly shown on the map or plat of the assessment district filed in the office of the City Clerk and referred to in the resolution of intention, either by separate boundaries, coloring or other convenient and graphic method so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain within which zone any parcel of land is located. It shall be sufficient in all cases where the assessment district is to be divided into such zones according to benefits if the resolution of intention states that fact and refers to the plat or map for the boundaries and all details concerning the zones. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-144).

16.15.215 Supplemental remedy provisions.
The supplemental remedy provisions of Division 10, Part 13 (entitled "Sale for Delinquency"), Section 8800 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California shall apply. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 43240 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-145).

16.15.220 Validity of bonds and tax rate.
All bonds issued and all taxes levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall by their issuance be conclusive evidence of the regularity, validity and legal sufficiency of all proceedings, acts and determinations in anywise pertaining thereto and after the same are issued, no tax levied or collected for the purpose of paying the principal or interest on such bonds shall be held invalid or illegal or set aside by reason of any error, informality, irregularity, omission or defect in such proceedings not amounting to a want of due process of law. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-146).

16.15.225 Issuance of new bonds when proceedings irregular.
When any court of competent jurisdiction shall determine that any contract purporting to have been made or any proceedings, steps or actions purporting to have been taken or any bond issued or any levy of assessment made under this article is void, invalid or unenforceable for any reason or shall for any cause enjoin the issuance of any bonds proposed to be issued under this chapter, such court shall also determine that new bonds shall be issued in the place thereof. The City Council may also order the issuance of new bonds when it shall determine the existence of such voidness, invalidity or unenforceability. In such event the City Council shall cause a declaration to be filed which shall state the amount of any work performed, improvements made, acquisitions had and the expenses incidental thereto and the estimated cost of any to be had. The declaration shall be noticed and heard and new bonds issued as provided for acquisition bonds. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-147).

16.15.230 Alteration of district.
The boundaries of any district heretofore or hereafter created pursuant to this article may be enlarged from time to time in the manner provided in SCCC 16.10.440 and 16.10.450. (Ord. 1104. Formerly § 16-147.1).

Article VI. Bond Plan E –
Ad Valorem Realty Bonds

16.15.235 Power of City Council generally.
There is hereby vested in the City Council the power to issue serial ad valorem realty bonds upon any district created under this chapter. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-148).

16.15.240 Assessment.
The annual ad valorem assessment to be levied under this article shall be upon all land and improvements within the assessment district excepting publicly owned property. (Ord. 859. Formerly § 16-149).

16.15.245 Procedure.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all of the provisions of SCCC 16.15.120 through 16.15.230 shall apply. (Ord. 859; Ord. 1175 § 5, 11-7-67. Formerly § 16-150).

Article VII. Bond Plan G –
Vehicle Off-Street Parking Bonds*

*Code reviser's note: Ord. 1277 § 4 provides as follows: "Bonds may be issued under Bond Plan G as set forth in this ordinance upon any district formed after its effective date despite the fact that the proceedings for the formation of the district were initiated prior to its effective date; provided, that the resolution of intention and the proceedings conducted pursuant thereto either include or are amended to include all of the provisions and matters required for such Plan G proceedings as set forth in this ordinance."

16.15.250 Powers.
There is hereby vested in the Council the power to issue vehicle off-street parking bonds upon an off-street parking assessment district created under this Code to finance the cost of acquiring, constructing, improving and extending vehicle off-street parking places and facilities and the costs incidental thereto and to the proceedings and the financing thereof, including public automobile parking lots, garages and underground or elevated structures, and all works, equipment, appliances, tools and facilities useful therein or therefor. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-151).

16.15.255 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure by which assessment bonds may be issued for the acquisition, construction, improvement, extension and financing of vehicle off-street parking places and facilities and to permit the bond redemption fund to receive the proceeds of pledges of revenues and contributions and to allow the assessments to reflect credits to properties which provide private off-street parking places and facilities. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-152).

16.15.260 Definitions.
As used in this article:

(a) "Charge" means fees, tolls, rates and rentals for the service or facilities of the parking enterprise.

(b) "Improve" means reconstruct, replace, extend, repair, better, equip, develop, embellish or otherwise improve.

(c) "Net revenues" mean the revenues (gross revenues) of parking places remaining after deducting all sums expended therefrom the annual management, operation, maintenance and repair thereof, including all incidental costs, fees and expenses properly chargeable thereto, without allowance for depreciation.

(d) "Net on-street meter revenues" mean the revenue from street meters remaining after deductions for the cost of acquiring and installing the meters, the cost of their maintenance, operation, repair, replacement and servicing, and the cost of collecting revenues therefrom, without allowance for depreciation or obsolescence.

(e) "Parking places" include parking lots, garages, subsurface structures and buildings for the parking of motor vehicles.

(f) "Real property" means land and improvements.

(g) "Revenues" mean all charges for and all income and receipts derived by the City from parking places or arising therefrom, and includes revenues in all revenue redemption, sinking and reserve fund and interest earned thereon. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-153).

16.15.265 Procedure.
Except as in this article otherwise provided, all of the provisions of Article IV of Chapter 16.10 SCCC and SCCC 16.15.005 shall apply. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-154).

16.15.270 Off-street parking revenues.
The City may pledge all or a part of the revenues to be derived by it from off-street parking facilities of the City then existing, to be acquired or constructed in the proceedings, or thereafter to be acquired or constructed by it, for the payment and security of the principal of and interest on the bonds to be issued pursuant to this article, the premiums on and costs of calling bonds prior to their fixed date of maturity and the costs of administration, maintenance, operation, improvement, extension and replacement thereof. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-155).

16.15.275 On-street parking meter revenues.
The City may pledge, place a charge upon, or otherwise make available, as additional security for the payment of bonds to be issued pursuant to this article, all or a part of any or all net on-street meter revenues then owned or controlled or to be acquired or controlled by it, for the purposes stated in SCCC 16.15.270. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-156).

16.15.280 Resolution of intention.
The resolution of intention shall state any pledges proposed to be made by the City pursuant to SCCC 16.15.270 and 16.15.275. It shall also state, in general terms sufficient to be understood and applied, the formula to be used in determining the annual apportionment of benefits in the levy of annual assessments upon the real property within the proposed assessment district and the granting of credits to the extent that private off-street parking places and facilities shall have been provided for the year by owners of real property within the district. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-157).

16.15.285 Factors in assessment formula.
In stating the assessment formula in the resolution of intention under SCCC 16.15.280, the Council may provide for but is not limited to variations in the basic formula based on:

(a) Zoning, as established by the City Zoning Ordinance;

(b) Land use;

(c) Distance from existing or proposed parking facilities;

(d) The extent to which the parking requirements of applicable City planning and zoning ordinances have been satisfied. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-158).

16.15.290 Engineer's report.
No assessment or diagram shall be provided for the engineer's report. However, it shall contain or be supplemented by a preliminary report for the first bond year, in form substantially as hereinafter provided for in this article, which shall contain a map or plat showing the parcels to be assessed and an estimated assessment of each parcel for the first bond year based upon the application of the formula set forth in the resolution of intention. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-159).

16.15.295 Notice to property owners.
Each notice to property owners mailed in connection with the first annual levy shall state the estimated amount of the first annual assessment against the particular parcel covered by the notice. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-160).

16.15.300 Hearing.
At the hearing on the resolution of the intention and report, the Council may make changes in the project, the costs, the assessment district, any zones proposed under SCCC 16.15.210, and the percentages relating thereto, in the supplemental report, and in the formula stated in the resolution of intention. In such event, notice shall be given and a further hearing held as provided in SCCC 16.05.470 through 16.05.490, inclusive. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-161).

16.15.305 Estimate.
The Director of Finance shall annually cause to be prepared an estimate for each bond issue under this article which shall include the following:

(a) The gross amount required to pay the principal and interest on the bonds which have accrued or which shall accrue before the proceeds of the next succeeding assessment levy under this article shall be available therefor; including allowance for anticipated delinquencies, and the amount estimated to be required and not available from other sources to pay the cost of management, operation, maintenance and repair thereof for the forthcoming fiscal year;

(b) The amount estimated to be available therefor in the bond interest and redemption fund created for the bonds;

(c) The amount estimated to become available therefor pursuant to a pledge of revenues in the assessment proceedings;

(d) The amount of net on-street meter revenues within or without the parking district, which have been pledged for the servicing of the bonds;

(e) The amount of any contributions which the City proposes to make to the bond fund for the year;

(f) The balance of the amount provided in subsection (a) of this section after deducting the aggregate total of the amounts determined under subsections (b) to (e), inclusive, of this section. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-162).

16.15.310 Report – Preparation – Contents.
The Director of Public Works shall annually cause to be prepared a report for each bond issue under this article, which shall, under appropriate headings, show the amounts to be provided in the annual budget and the property headed columns, show the information provided therefor and required by the assessment formula, and the amount of the total annual assessment for said year, on each parcel of land to be assessed. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-163).

16.15.315 Report – Certification.
When the report has been completed, it shall be endorsed by the Director of Public Works and filed with the Clerk on or before July 15th of each year. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-164).

16.15.320 Report – Hearing.
The report shall come on regularly for hearing by the Council at its regular meeting held on the first Tuesday of August in each year. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-165).

16.15.325 Report – Notice of hearing.
The Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by publication, posting and mailing. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-166).

16.15.330 Report – Mailing, subsequent reports.
Notices shall not be required to be mailed to persons as to a hearing on subsequent reports after the first year when the report is heard at the time fixed in SCCC 16.15.320. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-167).

16.15.335 Report – Form of notice.
The notice shall be substantially as follows:

NOTICE OF HEARING
ON PARKING ASSESSMENT ROLL PROJECT NO. ________

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Director of Public Works has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk a report which provides the basis for levying assessments on the properties within the parking district created and established for Vehicle Off-Street Parking Project No. ________, and the amounts proposed to be levied for the fiscal year of 20___, upon the several parcels of land in the parking assessment district created to pay the principal and interest of the bonds issued in said project, which report is open to public inspection.

Said report will be heard by the Council at its meeting to be held on the ________ day of ________, 20___, at the hour of 7:00 o'clock P.M., Council Chambers, City Hall, Santa Clara, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein.

Any interested person, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any parcel of land owned by him, may file with the City Clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing, a protest in writing signed by him, describing the parcel so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his/her protest, and may appear at said meeting and be heard in regard thereto.

City Clerk of the
City of Santa Clara

(Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-168).

16.15.340 Report – Proof of notice.
Affidavits of publication and affidavits or certificates of posting and mailing notice of hearing shall be made and filed with the Clerk. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-169).

16.15.345 Protests.
The Clerk shall endorse on each protest the date it is filed with him, and shall show whether the protest is filed prior to the hour fixed for hearing. No protest received after that hour shall be included in the computation of the percentage of protests, but the Council may, in its discretion, consider the protests and hear the signers thereof. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-170).

16.15.350 Public hearing.
At the time and place fixed for hearing, or at any time to which the hearing is adjourned, the Council shall:

(a) Hear all persons having an interest in any real property within the district.

(b) Hear all objections, protests or other written communications from persons interested in any real property within the district.

(c) Take and receive oral and documentary evidence pertaining to the matters contained in the report.

(d) Remedy and correct any error or informality in the report, and revise and correct any of the acts or determinations of the Director of Finance or of the person making the report as contained therein.

(e) Amend, alter, modify, correct and confirm the report and each of the assessments therein. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-171).

16.15.355 Report – Certification.
The report, together with the certificate of the Clerk as to the fact and date of approval by the Council, shall be delivered to the Director of Finance at or before the time the Council fixes the general City tax rate for the fiscal year. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-172).

16.15.360 City budget.
The estimated amounts provided under SCCC 16.15.305(c), (d), (e) and (f), as finally approved in the report, shall be included in the City budget for the fiscal year referred to in that section. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-173).

16.15.365 Annual assessment.
The amount provided in SCCC 16.15.305(f), including provision for anticipated delinquencies, shall be raised by annual assessments on all real property within the parking assessment district, in accordance with the provisions of the formula, until all of the bonds and the interest to accrue thereon have been paid in full. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-174).

16.15.370 Supplemental remedies.
The supplemental security and remedy provisions of Division 10, Part 13 (entitled "Sale for Delinquency"), Section 8800 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code shall apply. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 43240 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 8-7-73. Formerly § 16-175).

Article VIII. Bond Plan H –
Annual Benefit Assessment Bonds

16.15.375 Powers.
There is hereby vested in the Council the power to issue benefit assessment bonds within any district created pursuant to Chapter 16.10 SCCC or pursuant to any general law of the State. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.1).

16.15.380 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure by which benefit assessment bonds may be issued to pay the whole or any part of the costs of any public improvements which are inherently local in nature, payable from annual benefit assessment levies apportioned among the several lots and parcels of land or real property within the district established therefor, in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received by said lots and parcels of land or real property, the nature and formula or formulae for which is to be determined in the proceeding in which jurisdiction is provided therefor. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.2).

16.15.385 Assessment provisions inapplicable.
The respective provisions of any article of Chapter 16.10 SCCC or of any general law of the State pursuant to which said proceedings are undertaken to the contrary notwithstanding, no assessment or diagram shall be made, heard, levied or recorded, nor shall any amount of annual benefit assessment levies proposed to be made pursuant hereto be or become payable prior to their levy as herein provided. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.3).

16.15.390 Resolution of intention.
When the Council proposes to issue benefit assessment bonds pursuant to this article, it shall so declare in the resolution of intention pursuant to which the bonds are to be issued, the maximum term for which the bonds of any series of the issue may be issued, and the maximum rate of interest they may bear, and that bonds will be issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.4).

16.15.395 Benefit assessment formulae.
In addition to the matters required by SCCC 16.15.390, the resolution of intention shall contain a statement of the formula or formulae upon and by which annual benefit assessment levies for the payment of said bonds and the interest thereon will be apportioned according to benefits to be received among the several lots and parcels of land within the assessment district to be established therefor. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.5).

16.15.400 Hearing as to benefits.
At the hearing provided for establishing the benefit assessment district pursuant to any article of Chapter 16.10 SCCC or of any general law of the State, property owners may protest against and be heard as to the proposed formula or formulae pursuant to which annual benefit assessment levies are to be apportioned among the several lots and parcels of land or real property within the district established therefor in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received by said lots and parcels of land or real property in the same manner, at the same time and with like legal effect, as provided for other protests in said proceedings. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.6).

16.15.405 Initial modification.
At the hearing provided in SCCC 16.15.400, the Council, of its own volition or in response to any protest made, heard or considered, may make such modifications in the formula or formulae as it determines may be necessary to adequately effect the apportionment of said annual benefit assessments in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received; for the purpose of making the same more fair and equitable; provided, however, that before making a final order in said matter it shall set said matter for hearing at a subsequent meeting of said Council, which it shall call or to which it may adjourn; provided, further, that it shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting, by one publication in the newspaper in which the original resolution of intention or notice of improvement was published, at least ten days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.7).

16.15.410 Final determination.
At the initial hearing, or at the subsequent hearing on the modification of said formula or formulae, or at any meeting to which either shall have been adjourned, or at any meeting of the Council subsequent to the full hearing of said matter, with or without said matter having been submitted, the Council, by resolution, shall finally adopt a formula or formulae for the apportionment of benefits in said subsequent benefit assessment levies, which shall be that stated in the resolution of intention, or as modified, and its determination shall be final and conclusive against all persons excepting persons whose protests for grounds stated therein have been denied and who have brought action therefor within thirty (30) days following said determination, in the local superior court. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.8).

16.15.415 Subsequent modification.
If, at any time following the final establishment of the formula or formulae for said subsequent benefit assessment levies, the Council shall, by resolution, determine that, by reasons of changed conditions or because of defects or insufficiencies therein disclosed by its application, an established formula or formulae does not equitably apportion said annual benefit assessments in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received the Council may, by resolution, so declare, stating the grounds therefor, and fix a time and place of hearing thereon. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.9).

16.15.420 Notice.
A copy of the resolution provided in SCCC 16.15.415 shall be published once a week for two successive weeks, the first of which shall be at least 14 days prior to the day of said proposed meeting, in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement in said proceedings was published. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.10).

16.15.425 Hearing and determination.
At the hearing provided in SCCC 16.15.415, protest may be filed, heard and acted upon in the manner and with like effect provided in this article for the initial establishment and modification of said formula or formulae. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.11).

16.15.430 Form of bonds.
The benefit assessment bonds shall be of the form prescribed by resolution of the Council, shall be dated as the Council shall determine, shall be numbered consecutively, and shall be in registered form and serial in nature. They shall be payable on September 2nd of each year in such amount as the Council shall determine. The first maturity shall be not earlier than twelve (12) months after their date. The benefit assessment bonds may be made to mature on September 2nd over a period not to exceed forty (40) years from their date. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.12).

16.15.435 Separate series.
The benefit assessment bonds may be issued in successive series, divisions or parts having different dates, terms and dates of maturity. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.13).

16.15.440 Interest.
The bonds shall bear interest payable on March 2nd and September 2nd of each year. The first payment of interest shall become due on the interest payment date which is six months before the maturity of the first series of bonds, but if any portion of the interest is funded, the Council may specify that the first payment of interest shall become due on any earlier interest payment date following the date of the bonds. Interest shall be payable to the registered holders of the bonds as their names and addresses appeared on the records of the City or its registration agent on the fifteenth (15th) day preceding the interest payment date. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.14).

16.15.445 Interest after maturity.
If, upon presentation at maturity, or if redeemable and duly called for redemption, payment of the benefit assessment bonds or any interest thereon is not made in full accordance with the indenture of issuance, said bonds shall continue to bear interest at the rate stated in the bonds until paid in full. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.15).

16.15.450 Callable bonds.
The benefit assessment bonds may be made subject to call and redemption prior to their fixed dates of maturity with or without a premium, all as shall be prescribed by the Council; provided, that no bond shall be subject to prior call unless it shall so state on its face. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.16).

16.15.455 Execution.
The benefit assessment bonds shall be signed by the Director of Finance and the Clerk. However, the Council may by order authorize the use upon the bonds of an engraved, printed or lithographed signature of the Director of Finance and the Clerk in place of a signature by hand. It may also authorize the seal to be placed in a like manner on the bonds. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.17).

16.15.460 Improvement fund.
The proceeds of the bonds shall be deposited in an improvement fund which shall be created and maintained for each project. The moneys in said fund shall be used solely for the acquisition and construction of the improvements described in said proceedings, and the expenses incidental to said proceedings and the financing thereof, including legal or other fees incidental to or connected with the authorization, issuance and sale of the bonds, the cost of printing the bonds, and may include interest on the bonds during the estimated period of acquisition and construction. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.18).

16.15.465 Redemption fund.
A fund to be named "Bond Plan H, Series No. ________, Interest and Redemption Fund," or other designation sufficient to identify it, shall be created and maintained for each issue of bonds. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.19).

16.15.470 Trust funds.
All moneys which shall have been pledged or contributed to the payment of the bonds and the interest thereon, and all annual benefit assessments levied therefor, shall be deposited in the redemption fund for such issue, shall constitute a trust fund therefor, and shall not be expended for any other purpose; provided, that if any moneys remain in the redemption fund after the payment of all the bonds and the interest thereon it shall be transferred to the City general fund, unless a maintenance, improvement or a service facilities district has been created for the improvements acquired and constructed from the proceeds of said bonds, in which event it shall be transferred to such fund, and be used for the objects and purposes thereof. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.20).

16.15.475 Budget – Contents.
The City Manager shall annually cause to be prepared a budget for each bond issue hereunder which shall include the following:

(a) The gross amount required to pay the principal of and interest on the bonds and any premiums on bonds to be called, before the proceeds of a second assessment levy will be available therefor;

(b) The gross amount proposed to be raised for the maintenance and operation of the City improvements involved, and any capital additions, extensions, improvements or replacements therein, during the period provided in subsection (a) of this section;

(c) The balance available at the end of the fiscal year for either of the purposes provided in subsection (a) and (b) of this section;

(d) The amount estimated to be available pursuant to any pledge of applicable revenues, which shall be budgeted and appropriated, for either of the purposes provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section;

(e) The amount estimated to be available from additional contributions, which shall be budgeted and appropriated, for either of the purposes provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section; and

(f) The balance of the amount for either of the subsections (a) and (b) of this section. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.21).

16.15.480 Benefit assessment.
The amount provided in SCCC 16.15.475(f), including provision for anticipated delinquencies, shall be raised by annual benefit assessments on all taxable lands or real properties within the assessment district, as provided in SCCC 16.15.380 until all of the bonds and the interest to accrue thereon have been paid in full. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.22).

16.15.485 Report.
In each year that a balance is provided in the budget pursuant to SCCC 16.15.475(f), the City Manager shall cause to be prepared annually a report for each bond issue hereunder, which shall, under appropriate headings, show the amounts to be provided in the annual budget pursuant to SCCC 16.15.475 and by properly headed columns, show the County assessor's description of each lot or parcel of land or real property to be assessed, the amount of the levy applicable to said lot or parcel of land or real property, and such other information as will be necessary or useful in applying out the formula or formulae adopted by the Council for the particular issue of bonds to which said budget provisions apply. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.23).

16.15.490 Certification.
When the report has been completed, it shall be endorsed by the City Manager in duplicate, and filed with the City Clerk on or before the first day of June. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.24).

16.15.495 Adoption by Council.
If the formula or formulae adopted for an issue of bonds is sufficiently simple as to leave no discretion, it shall be reviewed by the Council and adopted and approved by resolution. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.25).

16.15.500 Further Council action.
If the formula or formulae adopted for an issue of bonds requires the exercise of a discretion by the Council, further proceedings shall be had as provided in SCCC 16.15.505 through 16.15.530. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.26).

16.15.505 Hearing – Date.
Said report shall come on regularly for hearing by the City Council at its regular meeting held on the first Tuesday of July each year. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.27).

16.15.510 Hearing – Notice – Publication and posting.
The City Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by two publications in a newspaper in the City, and by posting a copy of the notice on the bulletin board of the City Hall. The posting and first publication shall be at least ten days before the day fixed for hearing. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.28).

16.15.515 Hearing – Notice – Form.
The notice shall be substantially as follows:

NOTICE OF HEARING
(Project Title)

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Manager has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk a report which provides the basis for levying benefit assessments on the properties within the assessment district created and established for the project cited above, and the amounts proposed to be levied for the fiscal year ________ upon the several lots and parcels of land or real property in the assessment district created to pay the principal and interest of the bonds issued for said project and to pay the costs of maintenance and operation, if any, of the improvements involved and any capital additions, extensions, improvements or replacements therein, which report is open to public inspection.

Said report will be heard by the Council at its meeting to be held on the _______ day of ________, 20___, at the hour of _______ o'clock ___.M. in the regular meeting place of said Council, Council Chambers, City Hall, Santa Clara, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein.

Any interested owner, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any lot or parcel of land or real property owned by him, may file with the City Clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing a protest, in writing, signed by him, describing the lot or parcel of land or real property so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his/her protest, and may appear at said hearing and be heard in regard thereto.

(Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.29).

16.15.520 Hearing – Affidavits.
Affidavits or certificates of publication and posting of hearing shall be made and filed with the Clerk. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.30).

16.15.525 Hearing – Protests.
The Clerk shall endorse on each protest the date it is filed with him, and shall show whether said protest is filed prior to the hour fixed for hearing. No protest received after said hour shall be legal, but the Council may, at its discretion, consider said protests and hear the signers thereof. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.31).

16.15.530 Hearing – Council duties.
At the time and place fixed for said hearing, or at any time to which said hearing is adjourned, the Council shall:

(a) Hear all persons having an interest in any lot or parcel of land or real property within the district;

(b) Hear all objections, protests or other written communications from any persons interested in any lot or parcel of land or real property within the district;

(c) Take and receive oral and documentary evidence pertaining to the matters contained in the report;

(d) Remedy and correct any error or informality in the report, and revise and correct any of the acts or determinations of the City Manager or of the person making said report as contained therein;

(e) Amend, alter, modify, correct, approve and confirm said report and each of the benefit assessments therein. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.32).

16.15.535 Hearing – Decision final.
All decisions and determinations of the Council, after notice and hearing as aforesaid, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal as to all errors, informalities and irregularities which the Council might have avoided, or have remedied during the hearing on the report. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.33).

16.15.540 Certification and filing.
The report, approved pursuant to SCCC 16.15.495 and 16.15.530, together with the certificate of the Clerk as to the fact and date of approval by this Council, shall be delivered to the County Auditor on or before the first day of August of each year. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.34).

16.15.545 Benefit assessments – Posting.
The County Auditor shall post to the County tax roll, in a column provided therefor, the total amount of the benefit assessment to be levied and collected for said year on each lot or parcel of land or real property within the assessment district. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.35).

16.15.550 Collection method.
Said benefit assessments shall be levied and collected upon the tax rolls upon which property taxes are collected. They shall be in addition to all other taxes, and shall be levied, entered and collected together with, and not separate from, property taxes, and enforced in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time, and with the same penalties and interest, as are property taxes, and all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes are applicable to said special benefit assessment levy, and the assessed real property, if sold for taxes, shall be subject to redemption within one year from the date of sale in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from the sale for property taxes and if not redeemed shall in like manner pass to the purchaser. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.36).

16.15.555 Advance of funds.
The Council may annually, at, or prior to, the time the levy is made, or at such other time as it determines, advance as a loan or contribution to the redemption fund of said bonds such amount or amounts as it may from time to time determine. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.37).

16.15.560 Public property exempt.
Public property, whether or not in use in the performance of a public function, shall be exempt from the levy of benefit assessments to service bonds of this article. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.38).

16.15.565 Omitted property – Assessment.
If any lot or parcel of land or real property is omitted from the tax roll for any year in which such levy is made, it shall be added at the end of the roll and assessed as contained in the report hereinafter provided. If any lot or parcel of land or real property is omitted in any such report, it shall be assessed for the omitted amount in the next year after said omission is discovered, and appropriate provision shall be made in the report for said year. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.39).

16.15.570 Validity of bonds and tax rate.
All bonds issued and all benefit assessments levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall by their issuance or levy be conclusive evidence of the regularity, validity and legal sufficiency of all proceedings, acts and determinations in anywise pertaining thereto, and after the same are issued no benefit assessment levied or collected for the purpose of paying the principal or interest on said bonds shall be held invalid or illegal, or set aside by reason of any error, informality, irregularity, omission or defect in said proceedings, not amounting to a want of due process of law. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.40).

16.15.575 Curation.
No benefit assessment or benefit assessment bonds, or any order for their issuance, and no proceedings prior thereto, shall be held invalid by any court for any error, omission, irregularity, informality, or other defect in the same, where the resolution of intention has been published as herein provided. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.41).

16.15.580 Dedication.
No proceeding taken or had under this article shall be held to be invalid on the ground that the real property or a portion thereof, upon which the work or improvement or part thereof, is to be done or was done, has not been lawfully dedicated or acquired, provided the same has been lawfully dedicated or acquired, or an action for the acquisition thereof has been filed, or otherwise, at any time before judgment has been entered in any legal action or proceeding involving such issue. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.42).

16.15.585 Decisions final.
All the decisions and determinations of the Council, upon notice and hearing as aforesaid, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal under the provisions of this article, as to all errors, informalities, omissions, irregularities, and other defects, which the Council might have avoided, or might have remedied, during the progress of the proceedings, or which it can at that time remedy. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.43).

16.15.590 New bonds – Issued when proceedings irregular.
When any court of competent jurisdiction or the Council, of its own volition, determines that any contract purported to have been made, or any proceedings, steps or actions purported to have been taken, or any bond or bonds issued, or levy of benefit assessment made, under this article, is or are void, invalid, or unenforceable for any reason, or any court for any cause enjoins the issuance under this article, or the payment of any pledge or contribution, or the levy of any annual benefit assessment, or any other action or determination which might or will affect the prompt and orderly payment of any such bonds or the interest thereon as they shall accrue, said court or the Council shall also determine that new bonds shall be issued in the place thereof. In such event the Council shall cause a declaration to be filed which shall state the amount of any work performed, improvements made, acquisitions had, and the costs thereof and expenses incidental thereto, and the estimated cost of any future work improvements, acquisition and incidental costs and expenses. Jurisdiction therefor shall be had after notice published and posted and hearing had as provided in Article IV of Chapter 16.10 SCCC or of any general law of the State; provided, that there shall be no bar to said proceedings by reason of a majority or other protest against them. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.44).

16.15.595 Existing bonds – Security.
If the invalidity is not in the bonds themselves or in the issuance thereof, the Council may so declare in the reassessment proceedings. In such event, the reauthorization proceedings shall constitute the proceedings providing the legal authority for the issuance of the outstanding bonds, and the redemption fund created in any reassessment proceedings shall constitute a trust fund for their payment. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.45).

16.15.600 Existing bonds – Exchange.
If the invalidity is in the bonds themselves or in the issuance thereof, or if the Council so determines in the reassessment proceedings, new bonds shall be issued and exchanged for the outstanding bonds. The new bonds shall mature in the amounts and at the times provided for the outstanding bonds, as nearly as may be. If the Council so determines, it may assign different bonds and allot maturities as it deems equitable. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.46).

16.15.605 Existing bonds – Sale of new bonds – Retirement of old bonds.
If any part of the outstanding bonds have matured or will mature before the time for providing for the servicing of the new bonds, or if interest has accrued or will so accrue, the Council may provide for the issuance of additional new bonds in the amount thereof and for their maturity. If the holders of said outstanding bonds, or any other holders of outstanding bonds have refused to accept exchange of bonds therefor, the Council shall sell additional bonds in the amount thereof, and deposit the proceeds in the redemption fund. Said outstanding bonds shall forthwith become due and payable without premium, and shall no longer bear interest. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.47).

16.15.610 Alteration of boundaries.
The boundaries of such district may be enlarged from time to time. The territory to be annexed shall be set forth in a resolution of intention to be adopted by the Council, which shall give notice that said matter, and all persons interested, will be heard by the Council at a time to be stated therein, at the regular meeting place of the Council. Such resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, the first of which shall be at least ten days before the date fixed for hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. At the hearing the Council shall have power to determine whether or not the entire territory, or only a portion thereof, to be annexed will be benefited by being annexed. The Council shall by resolution order the annexation of such territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter the property annexed shall be subject to special levies for maintenance and operation and for any bonds issued for the acquisition or construction of said improvements. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 5-24-88. Formerly § 16-175.48).

Article IX. Bond Anticipation Notes

16.15.615 Bonds – Bond anticipation note defined.
As used in this article:

(a) "Bonds" means bonds or other evidences of indebtedness of the City or of any area, agency, department, authority, or mandate of the City, including without limitation any local improvement district or the redevelopment agency of the City, which have been duly authorized but not issued and sold.

(b) "Bond anticipation note" means a note issued upon the security of funds receivable from the sale of bonds. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-176).

16.15.620 Borrowing by City – Use of funds.
The City Council, acting on behalf of the City or any area, agency, department, authority, or mandate of the City, including without limitation any local improvement district or the redevelopment agency of the City, may borrow money pursuant to this article, such indebtedness to be represented by a bond anticipation note or notes issued to the lender pursuant to this article. The money borrowed may be used and expended by the City solely for the purposes for which the bonds were authorized. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-177).

16.15.625 Resolution authorizing issuance.
The bond anticipation note or notes shall be issued pursuant to a resolution authorizing the issuance thereof, adopted by the City Council, acting as such or as the governing body of the issuing agency or authority of the City. Bond anticipation notes authorized to be issued may be issued from time to time as provided in such resolution. The resolution shall set forth the form and the manner of execution of the bond anticipation note or notes, shall generally describe the bonds, and shall include a covenant that the City will diligently take all action legally necessary and appropriate to issue and sell the bonds. The resolution may also contain an assignment of proceeds of the sale of the bonds to the holders or owners of the notes in payment thereof. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-178).

16.15.630 Negotiability – Denomination – Maturity – Payment.
Any bond anticipation note issued under this article may be negotiable or may be payable to order or to bearer and may be in any denomination. Such note shall be payable not later than five years after the date of issue and shall be payable solely from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds described in the resolution authorizing its issuance. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-179).

16.15.635 Issuance and sale – Interest.
The Council may issue and sell such notes as the Council determines and directs, at public or private sale, at or below their par value and at a rate of interest not to exceed the rate determined by the Council in the resolution authorizing the issuance thereof. The notes shall be payable at the times and in the amounts determined by the Council in said resolution. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-180).

16.15.640 Call and redemption prior to maturity.
The resolution authorizing the issuance of any note may provide that such note shall be subject to call and redemption prior to maturity, at the option of the obligor, at such price or prices as may be fixed in the resolution. The resolution shall fix the method of giving notice of redemption to the holder of the note to be redeemed and the price or prices at which the note shall be subject to redemption. A note so subject to call and redemption prior to maturity shall contain a recital to that effect on its face, and no note shall be subject to call or redemption prior to its fixed maturity date unless it contains such recital. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-181).

16.15.645 Pledge of bond proceeds – Notes as lien on bond funds.
The proceeds from the sale of the bonds described in the resolution providing for the issuance of the notes shall be pledged for the payment of the bond anticipation note or notes and the interest thereon. The note or notes and the interest thereon are a first lien upon and charge against said proceeds. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-182).

16.15.650 Limitation on amount.
Bond anticipation notes may be issued in such principal amount as is set forth in the resolution authorizing their issuance, which may include interest on the notes for their full term; provided, however, that such notes shall not be issued in a principal amount at any time outstanding which, when added to the interest payable thereon for the full period of the notes, exceeds eighty percent (80%) of the authorized principal amount of the bonds described in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the notes. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-184).

16.15.655 Refunding.
Any bond anticipation notes outstanding may be refunded by the issuance of refunding notes in such amount as the Council may deem necessary to refund the principal of the notes to be so refunded, any unpaid interest to be paid in connection therewith, any discount and funded interest, and issuing expenses. (Ord. 1294 § 1, 8-6-74. Formerly § 16-185).

Chapter 16.20
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

16.20.010  Public uses and purposes.

16.20.020  Legislative finding and declaration.

16.20.030  Purpose.

16.20.040  Municipal affair.

16.20.050  Effect of chapter upon other law.

16.20.060  Exercise of powers by the City.

16.20.070  Application of planning, zoning, etc., laws and ordinances.

16.20.080  Partial invalidity.

16.20.090  Effect of definitions.

16.20.100  Authority.

16.20.110  Obligee of authority – Obligee.

16.20.120  State public body.

16.20.130  Project.

16.20.140  Open space land.

Article II. Sports and Open Space Authority

16.20.150  Establishment.

16.20.160  Resolution of need for authority to function.

16.20.170  Determination of need.

16.20.180  Evidence of establishment and authorization.

16.20.190  City exercising powers of authority – Resolution.

16.20.200  Resolutions – Adoption – Contents.

16.20.210  Meetings – Vote necessary to act.

16.20.220  City Council as authority.

16.20.230  Council as authority – Meeting expenses.

16.20.240  Appropriation for administrative expenses.

16.20.250  Reports.

16.20.260  Financial statements – Publication.

16.20.270  Failure to function – Suspension of authority.

16.20.280  Restoration of authority – Members.

16.20.290  Winding up affairs.

16.20.300  Transfer to City.

16.20.310  Order for dissolution.

Article III. Powers

16.20.320  Corporate powers.

16.20.330  Acquisition and disposal of property – Facilities – Insurance.

16.20.340  Maintenance and management.

16.20.350  Lease of surplus space.

16.20.360  Establishment and operation of open space.

16.20.370  Receipt and expenditure of funds.

16.20.380  Investments.

16.20.390  Borrowing.

16.20.400  Exercise of powers.

16.20.410  Necessary or convenient acts.

16.20.420  Use of services and facilities of City.

16.20.430  Managing agency agreements.

16.20.440  Grants and loans for public purposes.

Article IV. Revenue Bonds

16.20.450  Bonds.

16.20.460  Power to borrow and issue bonds – Nature of bonds.

16.20.470  Recitals.

16.20.480  Types of bonds – Sources of payment.

16.20.490  Additional sources of payment.

16.20.500  Terms and conditions.

16.20.510  Provision for principal – Maturities – Interest – Denominations, etc.

16.20.520  Resolution as contract with bondholders.

16.20.530  Resolutions and contracts –Incorporation into bonds by reference – Rights of subsequent holders.

16.20.540  Covenants and agreements.

16.20.550  Covenants – Punctual payment.

16.20.560  Covenants – Operation of facilities.

16.20.570  Covenants – Repairs, renewals and replacements.

16.20.580  Covenants, discharge of claims, charges, and liens.

16.20.590  Covenants – Limitation on right to encumber, sell or lease.

16.20.600  Covenants – Revenues charged with payments of bonds.

16.20.610  Covenants – Reserve, sinking, and other special funds – Use of money in funds.

16.20.620  Covenants – Proceeds of bonds.

16.20.630  Covenants – Additional indebtedness.

16.20.640  Covenants – Insurance.

16.20.650  Acceleration of maturity – Terms and conditions.

16.20.660  Breach of covenant, condition, or obligation – Effect.

16.20.670  Amendment, modification, or waiver of conditions – Bondholders' meetings.

16.20.680  Amendment, modification, or waiver of conditions – Bonds held by interested parties.

16.20.690  Provisions for security and marketability.

16.20.700  Trustee – Designation – Authority.

16.20.710  Trustee – Handling of funds.

16.20.720  Trustee – Duties and powers.

16.20.730  Series, divisions, maturities, interest rates – Issuance of other bonds.

16.20.740  Variance in bonds of same issue.

16.20.750  Call and redemption.

16.20.760  Place of payment – Coin or currency.

16.20.770  Signatures.

16.20.780  Signatures – Continuing validity.

16.20.790  Serial or sinking fund type maximum maturity – Calculation of maturity.

16.20.800  Issuance and sale of bonds.

16.20.810  Determination of amount.

16.20.820  Interest – Payment from proceeds of sale of bonds.

16.20.830  Interest and principal as charge upon revenues.

16.20.840  Temporary bonds, certificates, etc.

16.20.850  Refunding bonds.

16.20.860  Refunding bonds – Amount issuable.

16.20.870  Negotiability.

16.20.880  Validating proceedings.

Article V. Rates, Fees and Charges

16.20.890  Covenants – Duty to perform.

Article VI. Rights of Obligees

16.20.900  Enforcement of rights.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

16.20.010 Public uses and purposes.
The planning, maintaining, improving, protecting, limiting the future use of or otherwise conserving open spaces and areas within the city and the performance of all undertakings incidental or advantageous thereto are public uses and purposes for which public money may be spent and private property acquired, and are governmental functions. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-200).

16.20.020 Legislative finding and declaration.
The Council finds and declares as follows:

(a) That the preservation of open space land, as defined in this chapter, is necessary for the assurance of the continued availability of land for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation and for the use of natural resources.

(b) That discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion of open space land to urban uses is a matter of public interest and will be of benefit to City residents because it will discourage noncontiguous development patterns which unnecessarily increase the costs of City services to City residents.

(c) That the anticipated increase in the population of the City demands that the City at the earliest possible date make definite plans for the preservation of valuable open space land and take positive action to carry out such plans by the adoption and strict administration of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as authorized by this chapter or by other appropriate methods.

(d) That in order to assure that the interests of all its people are met in the orderly growth and development of the City and the preservation and conservation of its resources, it is necessary to provide for the development by the City of coordinated plans for the conservation and preservation of open space lands.

(e) That for these reasons this chapter is necessary for the promotion of the general welfare and for the protection of the public interest in open space land. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-201).

16.20.030 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Council in enacting this chapter to recognize that open space land is a limited and valuable resource which must be conserved wherever possible and to establish procedures for the creation of an authority which will prepare and carry out open space plans which, along with State and regional open space plans, will accomplish the objectives of a comprehensive open space program, as contemplated by Article 10.5, (commencing with Section 65560) of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California. This article is adopted in furtherance of the objectives of said Article 10.5. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-202).

16.20.040 Municipal affair.
The activities set forth in SCCC 16.20.010 are a municipal affair, necessary and appropriate to a municipal corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, and not prohibited by the Constitution of the State of California nor by the City Charter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-203).

16.20.050 Effect of chapter upon other law.
This chapter shall not affect any other provision of law relating to the same or a similar subject but provides an alternative method of procedure governing the subject to which it relates, and it shall not abridge, modify or otherwise affect the right of the City to exercise any power given to it by the Constitution or any other law. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-204).

16.20.060 Exercise of powers by the City.
The City may exercise any or all of the powers granted to the authority by this chapter alone, or in combination with powers granted by any other law relative to sports and open space facilities. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-205).

16.20.070 Application of planning, zoning, etc., laws and ordinances.
Sports and open space facilities of the authority are subject to the planning, zoning, sanitary, and building laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to the locality in which they are situated. In the planning and location of any such facility, the authority is subject to the relationship of the facility to any officially adopted master plan or sections of such master plan for the development of the area in which the authority functions to the same extent as if it were a private entity. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-206).

16.20.080 Partial invalidity.
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-207).

16.20.090 Effect of definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this part govern the construction of this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-208).

16.20.100 Authority.
"Authority" means the public corporation created by Article II of this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-209).

16.20.110 Obligee of authority – Obligee.
"Obligee of the authority" or "obligee" means any of the following:

(a) Any bondholder or trustee for any bondholders.

(b) Any lessor demising to the authority property used in connection with a sports or open space facility or any assignee of all or part of such lessor's interest.

(c) The State or the United States, or any agency of either, when a party to any contract with the authority by which aid or a loan is given or made to the authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-210).

16.20.120 State public body.
"State public body" means the State, or any city, city and county, county, district, authority, or any other subdivision or public body of the State. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-211).

16.20.130 Project.
"Project" means any acquisition, improvement, construction, or undertaking of any kind authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-212).

16.20.140 Open space land.
"Open space land" is any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use as defined in this section, and which is designated on a local (including redevelopment), regional, or State plan as any of the following:

(a) Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams, bays and estuaries; and coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers and streams, and watershed lands.

(b) Open space used for the managed production of resources including, but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the production of food or fiber; areas required for recharge of groundwater basins; bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams which are important for the management of commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in short supply.

(c) Open space for outdoor recreation including, but not limited to, areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes, including recreational or theme parks and related facilities, outdoor sports activities such as golf, and access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major recreation and open space reservations, including utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.

(d) Open space for public health and safety including, but not limited to, areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, floodplains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74; Ord. 1501 § 1, 7-3-84. Formerly § 16-213).

Article II. Sports and Open Space Authority

16.20.150 Establishment.
There is in the City a public body corporate and politic known as the Sports and Open Space Authority of the City. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-220).

16.20.160 Resolution of need for authority to function.
The authority shall not transact any business or exercise any powers unless and until the City Council by resolution declares that there is need for the authority to function in the City. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-221).

16.20.170 Determination of need.
The determination that there is need for an authority to function may be made by the City Council on its own motion, or upon the filing of a petition signed by one hundred (100) residents of the City, asserting that there is need for an authority to function in the City and requesting that the City Council so declare. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-222).

16.20.180 Evidence of establishment and authorization.
In any suit, action, or proceeding by or against or in any manner relating to the authority, the authority shall be conclusively deemed to have become established and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers upon proof of the adoption of the resolution by the City Council declaring the need for the authority to function. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-223).

16.20.190 City exercising powers of authority – Resolution.
A City shall not transact any business or exercise any powers pursuant to SCCC 16.20.060 unless and until the City Council declares by resolution that there is need for the City to exercise the powers of a Sports and Open Space Authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-224).

16.20.200 Resolutions – Adoption – Contents.
Either or both resolutions provided for in this part may be adopted by the City Council. If both resolutions are adopted, they shall clearly specify the areas within the city within which, or the projects over which, the authority and the City, respectively, are to have jurisdiction and control. The division of jurisdiction and control shall be as specified, but may be changed from time to time to such extent as is consistent with obligations to bondholders by action of both the City Council and the authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-225).

16.20.210 Meetings – Vote necessary to act.
The authority shall hold meetings at such times as it shall determine. The concurring votes of four members of the authority shall be required for the taking of any action. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74; Ord. 1578 § 1, 11-10-87. Formerly § 16-226).

16.20.220 City Council as authority.
The City Council shall be the Sports and Open Space Authority. The City Council may, at the time of the adoption of a resolution pursuant to SCCC 16.20.160, declare itself to be the authority, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities vested by this chapter in the authority shall be vested in the City Council as the Sports and Open Space Authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-227).

16.20.230 Council as authority – Meeting expenses.
If the City Council has declared itself to be the authority pursuant to SCCC 16.20.220, each member of the authority shall receive a meeting expense fee for each meeting of the authority attended by the member in the amount per meeting established for attendance of meetings by members of the redevelopment agency of the City pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1578 § 1, 11-10-87. Formerly § 16-227.1).

16.20.240 Appropriation for administrative expenses.
At the time the authority becomes authorized to transact business and exercise its powers, and from time to time thereafter, the City Council, subject to its fiscal law, may make an estimate of the amount of money required for administrative purposes of the authority, and appropriate such amounts to the authority as it deems necessary, subject to such conditions as it prescribes. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-228).

16.20.250 Reports.
Annually, the authority shall prepare a detailed report of all its transactions, including a statement of all revenues and expenditures. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-229).

16.20.260 Financial statements – Publication.
At least once annually the authority shall publish a statement of all its financial affairs, audited by independent certified public accountants. The statement shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City, or if none is so published then in such newspaper of general circulation as the authority may deem most likely to give notice to the residents of the City. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-230).

16.20.270 Failure to function – Suspension of authority.
If within four years after the adoption of a resolution declaring the need for an authority to function in a City, the authority has not acquired or entered into possession of land for a sports or open space facility, issued bonds, or entered into any contract for the acquisition, construction, or operation of such a facility, the City Council by resolution may declare that there is no need for the authority to function in the City. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the offices of the members of the authority become vacant and the capacity of the authority to transact business or exercise any power is suspended until the City Council again adopts a resolution declaring the need for the authority to function. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-231).

16.20.280 Restoration of authority – Members.
Upon the termination of any such suspension by the adoption of such resolution declaring the need for the authority to function, proceedings for the organization and activation of the authority shall be had and taken as if such resolution were the original resolution declaring need for a Sports and Open Space Authority to function provided for by SCCC 16.20.160. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-232).

16.20.290 Winding up affairs.
After adoption of a resolution declaring there is no need for an authority to function, and while it is in effect, the City Council may wind up the affairs of the authority and has title to all property of the authority for such purpose and for the benefit of the City. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-233).

16.20.300 Transfer to City.
At any time after the activation of the authority, the City Council by a two-thirds vote may adopt a resolution transferring the property of the authority to the City, and the City may, through such department, board, officer, or agency, as it determines, exercise its powers in regard to such property by virtue of the Constitution, its Charter, this chapter or any general law. No such transfer shall be made in contravention of any covenant or agreement made with the holders of bonds of the authority issued and outstanding. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-234).

16.20.310 Order for dissolution.
The City Council may order the dissolution of the authority if the authority has no outstanding bonded indebtedness, and if the unanimous written consent of the members of the authority is first obtained. (Ord. 1301 § 1, 11-19-74. Formerly § 16-235).

Article III. Powers

16.20.320 Corporate powers.
The authority may:

(a) Sue and be sued, have a seal, and make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers.

(b) Make, and from time to time amend and repeal, bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter to carry into effect the powers and purposes hereof.

(c) Select and appoint or remove such permanent and temporary officers, agents, counsel, and employees, as it requires, and may determine their qualifications, duties, and compensation. The powers of the authority under this article are subject to all limitations and rights applicable to similar employment by the City, unless by resolution the City Council otherwise determines. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-250).

16.20.330 Acquisition and disposal of property – Facilities – Insurance.
The authority may:

(a) Purchase, lease, obtain option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise, any real or personal property within the city, or any interest in, or improvements on, such property.

(b) Sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, encumber (by mortgage, deed of trust, or otherwise) or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property or any interest in such property.

(c) Insure any of its real or personal property or operations against risks or hazards. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-251).

16.20.340 Maintenance and management.
The authority may acquire, construct, rent, lease, maintain, repair, manage and operate all or any portion of any real and personal property, including the leasing of the operation of the property, and the leasing for commercial purposes of surplus space or space which it is not economic to use for open space purposes; provided, that such leasing, in any transaction financed on a tax exempt basis, shall be restricted to less than a major portion of the property acquired or constructed on such basis, as now or hereafter defined by Federal law or applicable regulation. Leases may be negotiated without competitive bidding or awarded after competitive bidding in such manner as may be established by the authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74; Ord. 1301 § 2, 11-19-74. Formerly § 16-252).

16.20.350 Lease of surplus space.
Neither the authority nor the City shall manage or operate surplus space devoted to commercial purposes, but shall lease such space to private operators. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-253).

16.20.360 Establishment and operation of open space.
The authority may do any act to acquire and maintain open space within the city, to devote such open space to uses and activities consistent with the purposes of this chapter and to acquire and construct such improvements on open space owned, controlled, or operated by it as may be necessary or appropriate to such uses and activities. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-254).

16.20.370 Receipt and expenditure of funds.
The authority may receive, control, and order the expenditure of any and all money and funds pertaining to sports or open space facilities or related properties, including but not limited to:

(a) All revenue derived from operations of the authority.

(b) All money appropriated or made available by the City.

(c) The proceeds of all financial aid or assistance by the City, the State, or the Federal government.

(d) The proceeds of assessments levied by the City.

(e) The proceeds of all bonds issued pursuant to this chapter.

(f) The proceeds of all general obligation, revenue, or other bonds issued by the City for sports or open space facilities. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-255).

16.20.380 Investments.
The authority may invest funds held in reserve, or sinking funds, or funds not required for immediate disbursement, in property or securities in which cities may legally invest funds subject to their control. No such investment shall be made in contravention of any covenant or agreement with the holders of any bonds of the authority issued and outstanding. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-256).

16.20.390 Borrowing.
The authority may borrow money or accept financial or other assistance from the City, the State, the Federal government, or any other source for or in aid of any sports or open space facility within its area of operation, and to such ends may comply with any conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-257).

16.20.400 Exercise of powers.
The authority may exercise all or any part or combination of the powers granted by this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-258).

16.20.410 Necessary or convenient acts.
The authority may do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary, convenient, desirable, or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-259).

16.20.420 Use of services and facilities of City.
In order that there may be no unnecessary duplication of effort or expense, the authority may provide for the furnishing of services by, and the use of facilities of, any department, office or agency of the City in lieu of, or in conjunction with, the direct provision by the authority of services and the use of facilities through employment or purchase or other means. The furnishing of such services and the use of such facilities of any such department, office or agency shall be upon such terms and conditions as may be approved by the authority and the City Council, and subject to reimbursement of the appropriate funds of the City for the reasonable value thereof. The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, provide for the making by the authority to the City, annually, of a payment, the amount of which shall be determined in a manner provided by such City Council, but which shall not exceed the amount the authority would be required to pay to the City in ad valorem taxes if it were a private entity owning the same property. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-260).

16.20.430 Managing agency agreements.
Whenever the authority determines that the management and operation of any facility authorized hereunder is so complex and specialized as to require that it be accomplished by specially qualified persons, it may make and enter into managing agency agreements with competent persons, firms or corporations specially trained and experienced to render such services, subject to retention of such controls over rates and use of the facility as are necessary or desirable to assure its operation as a public municipal sports or open space facility. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-261).

16.20.440 Grants and loans for public purposes.
The authority may make grants or loans of money or property to the redevelopment agency, housing authority, parking authority or any other agency or authority of the City, or to the City itself, to facilitate the accomplishment of any public purpose, subject to such terms and conditions as may be established by the authority. Such public purposes may be carried out and accomplished by the entity to which such grant or loan was made without limitation or restriction by reason of the existence of such grant or loan, other than such as may be established by such terms and conditions. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2-15-83. Formerly § 16-262).

Article IV. Revenue Bonds

16.20.450 Bonds.
As used in this chapter, "bonds" means revenue bonds issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-275).

16.20.460 Power to borrow and issue bonds – Nature of bonds.
The authority shall have power to borrow money to provide funds for any project, including without limitation funds for the purpose of making grants or loans pursuant to SCCC 16.20.440, and to issue in its name revenue bonds to evidence the indebtedness created by such borrowing. The bonds of each issue shall constitute special obligations, and evidence a special indebtedness, of the authority, which shall be a charge upon, and payable, both as principal and interest and as to any premiums upon the redemption of any thereof, solely from, such revenues and funds as are specified therein and in the proceedings for their issuance and shall not constitute obligations nor evidence any indebtedness of the City. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2-15-83. Formerly § 16-276).

16.20.470 Recitals.
All such bonds shall recite upon their face, in substance, that the bonds of each issue shall constitute special obligations, and evidence a special indebtedness, of the authority, which shall be a charge upon, and payable, both as principal and interest, and as to any premiums upon the redemption of any thereof, solely from, such revenues and funds as are specified therein and in the proceedings for their issuance, and shall not constitute obligations, nor evidence any indebtedness, of the City and shall also recite upon their face that they are issued under this chapter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-277).

16.20.480 Types of bonds – Sources of payment.
An authority may issue such types of bonds as it determines, including bonds on which the principal and interest are payable:

(a) Exclusively from the income and revenue of the facilities financed with the proceeds of the bonds, or with such proceeds and financial assistance from the State or Federal governments or from any other source in aid of such projects.

(b) Exclusively from the income and revenue of certain designated facilities, whether or not such facilities were financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of the bonds, and including income or revenue from any future extension, betterment, or addition to any such facilities thereafter to be established.

(c) From its revenues generally.

(d) From any contributions or other financial assistance from the City, the State or Federal governments, or from any other source.

(e) From any combination of these sources. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-278).

16.20.490 Additional sources of payment.
Nothing in this chapter nor in the specification, in the proceedings for the issuance of any bonds, of the sources of payment thereof, shall preclude any of the following:

(a) The payment of interest on or principal of any such bonds out of sums received as premiums or accrued interest on the sale thereof.

(b) The payment of principal of or interest on, or premiums on the redemption of, any such bonds out of the proceeds of the sale of refunding bonds issued for that purpose.

(c) The payment of any interest on any such bonds accruing during, and for not to exceed two years after, the period of the construction of a project on account of which they were issued, or for any other reasonably limited period, out of the proceeds of the sale of such bonds.

(d) The payment of any principal of, interest on, or premiums on the redemption of, any such bonds by the purchasers thereof, or by any entity other than the authority issuing the same in any case where such purchasers or entity may have guaranteed such payment.

(e) The application to the payment of any principal of, interest on, or premiums on the redemption of, any such bonds of any funds which the authority may lawfully so apply. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-279).

16.20.500 Terms and conditions.
Except as limited by express provision of this chapter, the authority, by resolution, or by contract, or other agreement with or for the benefit of the bondholders, may determine all the terms and conditions of each issue, series, or division of bonds and of their sale and issuance, and all matters necessary or appropriate in connection with the bonds. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-280).

16.20.510 Provision for principal – Maturities – Interest – Denominations, etc.
The authority may provide for the aggregate principal amount, date or dates, maturities, interest rate or rates, interest payment dates, denominations and form of such bonds, and may provide for the issuance thereof as serial bonds or sinking fund bonds, as payable to bearer or to named payees, or as registered bonds, and for the issuance thereof with or without coupons, and for the subsequent registration of bonds, and for all other terms and conditions upon which they shall be executed, issued, secured, sold, paid, redeemed, funded, and refunded. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-281).

16.20.520 Resolution as contract with bondholders.
The authority may provide that any resolution or resolutions adopted in connection with the authorization of any bonds shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds, not subject to repeal, and not subject to any modification other than to the extent and in a manner provided in any such resolution. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-282).

16.20.530 Resolutions and contracts –Incorporation into bonds by reference – Rights of subsequent holders.
Reference on the face of the bonds to any such resolution by the date of its adoption, or to any such contract or other agreement by the date of its execution, or the apparent date on the face thereof, is sufficient to incorporate all of the provisions of the contract or agreement into the body of the bonds and their appurtenant coupons. Each taker and subsequent holder of the bonds or coupons, whether the coupons are attached to or detached from the bonds, has recourse to all of the provisions of the indenture and is bound thereby. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-283).

16.20.540 Covenants and agreements.
The authority may provide for such covenants and agreements on the part of the authority as it deems necessary or advisable for the better security of any bonds. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-284).

16.20.550 Covenants – Punctual payment.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to pay punctually the principal and interest on any bonds on the date or dates, at the place or places, and in the manner mentioned in the bonds and coupons in accordance with their terms. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-285).

16.20.560 Covenants – Operation of facilities.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to continuously operate in an efficient and economical manner any or all facilities and properties any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-286).

16.20.570 Covenants – Repairs, renewals and replacements.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to make all repairs, renewals and replacements necessary to the operation of any or all facilities and properties any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made, and to keep any and all such facilities and property at all times in good repair. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-287).

16.20.580 Covenants, discharge of claims, charges, and liens.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to pay and discharge from the funds available for that purpose all lawful claims for labor, materials and supplies, or other charges which if unpaid may become a lien or charge upon all or any part of the revenue, any facilities or properties, revenues charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which the covenant is made, or physical properties of the project which may impair the security of the bonds. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-288).

16.20.590 Covenants – Limitation on right to encumber, sell or lease.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant which limits, restricts, or prohibits the power of the authority to mortgage or otherwise encumber, sell, lease, or dispose of any or all facilities and properties, any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which the covenant is made, or to enter into any lease or agreement which might impair or impede the operation of such facilities or properties, or any part thereof, or might otherwise impair or impede the rights of bondholders with respect to such revenues. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-289).

16.20.600 Covenants – Revenues charged with payments of bonds.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to fix, prescribe and collect, with respect to any or all properties, any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made, fees, tolls, rentals or other charges in connection with the services and facilities furnished from any such properties operated by it, and to fix and collect rentals or other charges for any such properties leased by it to others for operation, sufficient, with such other funds as may have been made available for and charged with such payment, to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds as they become due and payable, together with all expenses of operation, maintenance and repair of such facilities and properties, and with such additional sums as may be required for any sinking fund, reserve fund or other special fund provided for the further security of such bonds or as a depreciation charge or other charge in connection with such facilities and properties, and all other charges payable out of any revenues charged with the payment of the bonds.

The authority may also provide for the making of a covenant requiring the fixing and prescribing by it and the collection by any lessee or operator of any or all facilities and properties, any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made, of all fees, tolls, rentals, or other charges in connection with the services and facilities furnished by such lessee or operator, sufficient to assure the payment by such lessee or operator to such authority of the rentals or other charges payable by such lessee or operator to such authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-290).

16.20.610 Covenants – Reserve, sinking, and other special funds – Use of money in funds.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring the authority to provide for the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds, sinking funds, or other special funds in the City treasury or special trust accounts in a bank or trust company to insure payment, when due or payable, whether at maturity or upon redemption, of the principal of and interest on any bonds, including premiums, if any due, upon the redemption of any thereof, or to insure the application of the proceeds of such bonds to the purposes for which the same were issued, or for any other appropriate purpose. Any money placed in any such reserve, sinking, or other special fund or trust account shall constitute a trust fund and shall be applied only to the purposes for which it was created. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-291).

16.20.620 Covenants – Proceeds of bonds.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring it to apply the proceeds of the bonds in connection with which such covenant is made, or any part thereof, to the acquisition or construction of a specified facility, or other specified purpose. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-292).

16.20.630 Covenants – Additional indebtedness.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant restricting the incurring of additional indebtedness payable in whole or in part out of revenues or funds which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-293).

16.20.640 Covenants – Insurance.
The authority may provide for the making of a covenant requiring it to carry insurance on any facilities or properties any revenues of which are charged with the payment of any bonds in connection with which such covenant is made, or any operations incident thereto, specifying or limiting the kind, amount and character of such insurance, and providing for the use and disposition of the proceeds of any such insurance thereafter collected. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-294).

16.20.650 Acceleration of maturity – Terms and conditions.
The authority may provide for the terms and conditions upon which any bonds may become or be declared due and payable prior to maturity, upon the happening of any specified event of default, and the terms and conditions upon which such declaration and its consequences may be waived. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-295).

16.20.660 Breach of covenant, condition, or obligation – Effect.
The authority may provide for the rights, limitations, powers, and duties arising upon breach by the authority of any of the covenants, conditions, or obligations contained in any resolution, contract, or agreement. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-296).

16.20.670 Amendment, modification, or waiver of conditions – Bondholders' meetings.
The authority may provide for a procedure by which certain specified terms and conditions of any resolution, contract, or agreement may be subsequently amended or modified, or any provision thereof waived, with the consent of the authority and the vote or written assent of the holders of a specified principal amount of the bonds issued and outstanding. Such provision may authorize meetings of bondholders and specify the manner in which the consent of the bondholders may be given. Such provision shall specifically state the effect of such amendment, modification, or waiver upon the rights of the holders of all of the bonds and interest coupons appertaining to the bonds, whether attached to or detached from the bonds. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-297).

16.20.680 Amendment, modification, or waiver of conditions – Bonds held by interested parties.
The provisions for such procedure may include an agreement that bonds held by the authority, the City, or by any other person or entity who or which the authority may determine to be so interested in the matter as to make it proper, shall not be counted as outstanding bonds, and that the holders thereof shall not be entitled to vote or assent with respect to such amendment, modification or waiver, but shall nevertheless be subject thereto. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-298).

16.20.690 Provisions for security and marketability.
The authority may provide for such other acts and matters as it may deem to be necessary, convenient, or desirable to secure the bonds or to make them more marketable. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-299).

16.20.700 Trustee – Designation – Authority.
The authority may designate a bank or trust company as a trustee for the holders of bonds issued pursuant to this chapter and may authorize the trustee to act on behalf of the bondholders, and to exercise and prosecute on their behalf the rights and remedies available to them. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-300).

16.20.710 Trustee – Handling of funds.
The authority may fix and determine the conditions upon which any trustee shall receive, hold, or disburse any or all funds coming into its hands pursuant to any resolution, contract, or agreement. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-301).

16.20.720 Trustee – Duties and powers.
The authority may prescribe the duties and powers of any trustee respecting the payment of principal and interest on bonds, the redemption of bonds, the registration and discharge from registration of bonds, and the management of any sinking or other fund provided as security for bonds, and with respect to any other appropriate matter. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-302).

16.20.730 Series, divisions, maturities, interest rates – Issuance of other bonds.
The authority may provide for the issuance of bonds in series, and for the division of any issue into two or more divisions, and may fix different maturities or dates of such bonds, different rates of interest, or prescribe different terms and conditions for the bonds of the several series or divisions. After having authorized or issued bonds the authority may from time to time thereafter authorize and issue other bonds, subject to any covenants it may have made restricting the future issuance of bonds. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-303).

16.20.740 Variance in bonds of same issue.
All bonds of the same authorized issue need not be of the same kind or character, have the same security, or bear the same interest rate, but the terms of the bonds shall in each case be prescribed by the authority. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-304).

16.20.750 Call and redemption.
Bonds may be callable upon such terms, conditions, and notice as the authority determines, and upon the payment of the premium, if any, fixed by the authority in the proceedings for their issuance. No bond shall be subject to call or redemption prior to its fixed maturity date unless the right to exercise such call is expressly stated on its face. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-305).

16.20.760 Place of payment – Coin or currency.
The authority may provide for the payment of the principal and interest of bonds at any place within the State, or for the payment or collection of such principal without the State, and in any specified coin or currency of the United States. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-306).

16.20.770 Signatures.
Signatures on the bonds and interest coupons may be printed, lithographed, or engraved facsimile, except that on the bonds, but not on the interest coupons, the countersignature of the Clerk or other officer of the authority designated by it shall be manually affixed. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-307).

16.20.780 Signatures – Continuing validity.
If any officer or representative whose signature or countersignature appears upon the bonds or coupons ceases to be an officer or representative before the delivery of the bonds or coupons, his/her signature or countersignature is nevertheless valid and of the same force and effect as if he had continued to hold his/her office or position until the delivery of the bonds and coupons. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-308).

16.20.790 Serial or sinking fund type maximum maturity – Calculation of maturity.
Bonds issued under this chapter may be serial or sinking fund bonds. A bond by its terms shall not mature more than forty (40) years from its own date. If any authorized issue is divided into two or more series or divisions, the maximum maturity date shall be calculated from the date on the face of each bond separately, irrespective of the fact that different dates may be prescribed for the bonds of each separate series or division of any authorized issue. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-309).

16.20.800 Issuance and sale of bonds.
The bonds may be issued and sold as the authority determines and directs, at public or private sale, at or below their par value and at a rate of interest not to exceed the rate determined by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance thereof. The bonds shall be payable at the times and in the amounts determined by the authority in said resolution.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the bonds may also be issued directly to the seller of land, improvements or property acquired for authority purposes, as all or part of the purchase price thereof, on such terms as may be established by the agreement for acquisition. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-310).

16.20.810 Determination of amount.
In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the authority may include all of the following:

(a) All costs and expenses and estimated costs and expenses incidental to or connected with the acquisition, construction, improving, or financing of the facility, including the cost of any environmental impact report or statement or other studies, filings or reports required by law.

(b) All engineering, inspection, legal, and fiscal agent's fees, costs of the issuance of the bonds, bond reserve funds and working capital, and bond interest estimated to accrue during the construction period and for a period of not to exceed twenty-four (24) months after completion of construction. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-18-74. Formerly § 16-311).

16.20.820 Interest – Payment from proceeds of sale of bonds.
The authority may provide that interest on bonds issued for the acquisition, construction or completion of any project may be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds during the actual construction of the project and for a period of not to exceed two years after completion of actual construction, or for any other reasonably limited period. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-312).

16.20.830 Interest and principal as charge upon revenues.
In the proceedings for the issuance of bonds, the authority may provide that the principal of and interest on the bonds constitute such charge upon the revenues of any project acquired, constructed or completed from the proceeds of the bonds, or upon other available and specified revenues or funds as may be provided for in such proceedings. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-313).

16.20.840 Temporary bonds, certificates, etc.
Pending the actual issuance or delivery of bonds, the authority may issue temporary or interim bonds, certificates, or receipts of any denominations, with or without coupons, to be exchanged for definitive bonds when ready for delivery. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-314).

16.20.850 Refunding bonds.
The authority may provide for the issuance, sale or exchange of refunding bonds to redeem or retire any revenue bonds issued by it. All provisions of this chapter are applicable to the issuance, sale or exchange. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-315).

16.20.860 Refunding bonds – Amount issuable.
Refunding bonds may be issued in a principal amount sufficient to provide funds for the payment of the bonds to be refunded and all expenses incident to the calling, retiring, or paying of the outstanding bonds and the issuance of the refunding bonds. These expenses include:

(a) The difference in amount between the par value of the refunding bonds and any amount less than par for which the refunding bonds are sold.

(b) The amount of interest upon the refunding bonds from the date of their sale to the date of payment of the bonds to be refunded or to the date upon which the bonds to be refunded will be paid pursuant to their call or pursuant to any agreement with the holders of such bonds.

(c) Any premiums required to be paid to call or retire the outstanding bonds.

(d) The interest accruing on the outstanding bonds to the date of their call or retirement. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-316).

16.20.870 Negotiability.
Bonds issued pursuant to this chapter are negotiable instruments, unless registered in the manner provided in the bond resolution. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-317).

16.20.880 Validating proceedings.
An action to determine the validity of bonds may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-318).

Article V. Rates, Fees and Charges

16.20.890 Covenants – Duty to perform.
The authority shall have power, and it shall be its duty, fully and faithfully to keep and perform any covenant it may make pursuant to SCCC 16.20.600 with or for the benefit of the holders of any bonds with respect to the fixing and maintaining of fees, tolls, rentals or other charges, and each and every other covenant it may make, or obligation it may assume, pursuant to any provision of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of each and every officer, representative and employee of the authority to do and perform each and every act necessary or appropriate for such keeping and performance by such authority of every such covenant and obligation. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74. Formerly § 16-325).

Article VI. Rights of Obligees

16.20.900 Enforcement of rights.
In addition to all other rights conferred on an obligee and subject only to any contractual restrictions binding upon him, an obligee may:

(a) By mandamus, suit, action, or proceeding at law or in equity, compel the authority and its members, officers, agents or employees to perform every term, provision, and covenant contained in any contract of the authority with or for the benefit of the obligee, to carry out all covenants and agreements of the authority, and to fulfill all duties imposed upon the authority by this chapter.

(b) By suit, action, or proceeding in equity, enjoin any acts or things which are unlawful and in violation of any of the rights of the obligee.

The members, officers, agents and employees of the authority are not personally liable for damages caused by the performance or nonperformance of their duties under this chapter or any contract or indenture made pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1296 § 1, 10-8-74; Ord. 1301 § 3, 11-19-74. Formerly § 16-350).

Chapter 16.25
ALTERNATIVE
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

16.25.010  Applicable provisions.

16.25.020  Billing and collection by Director of Finance.

16.25.030  Payment – Delinquency – Penalty.

16.25.010 Applicable provisions.
In conducting special assessment proceedings for the construction or acquisition of public improvements and the financing thereof, the City Council may employ the provisions of (1) the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (California Streets and Highways Code Section 10000 et seq.); (2) the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (California Streets and Highways Code Section 8500); and/or (3) this title. Whenever the City Council elects to employ those statutes, the modifications set forth in this chapter shall be deemed to apply, notwithstanding provisions in the statutes to the contrary. (Ord. 1691 § 1, 7-2-96).

16.25.020 Billing and collection by Director of Finance.
Notwithstanding anything specified in either of said above Acts and said Improvement Procedure Code, the City, in lieu of any other procedure for the collection of assessments, may, in its sole discretion, provide that any or all unpaid assessments may be billed and collected by the Director of Finance of said City. (Ord. 1691 § 2, 7-2-96).

16.25.030 Payment – Delinquency – Penalty.
The following shall apply:

(a) The unpaid assessments shall be payable in annual installments corresponding in number and in proportionate amount to the number of installments and principal amounts of bonds maturing or becoming subject to mandatory prior redemption in each year. An annual proportion of each assessment shall be payable in each fiscal year preceding the date of maturity or mandatory prior redemption date of each of the bonds which have been issued, sufficient to pay the bonds when due. The annual proportion of each assessment coming due in any year, together with the annual interest on the assessment, shall, subject to SCCC 16.25.020, be payable in the same manner and at the same time and in the same installments as the general taxes of the City on real property are payable, and the assessment installments and the annual interest on the assessment shall be payable and become delinquent at the same times and in the same proportionate amounts and, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall bear the same proportionate penalties and interest after delinquency as do the general taxes on real property of the City.

(b) The City Council may provide, in the resolution of intention to do the work, that a penalty of two percent per month of the total amount of the delinquent installment shall be added to the delinquent installment after the close of business on the delinquency date and an additional penalty of two percent of the amount of the delinquency shall be added at the beginning of business on the tenth day of each succeeding month until that delinquent installment and all penalties thereon are fully paid. This penalty shall be in lieu of all other penalties assessed by other provisions of law. The Director of Finance shall collect the penalties with, and as a part of, the delinquent installments. All penalties collected shall be deposited in the redemption fund. (Ord. 1691 § 3, 7-2-96).

Title 17
DEVELOPMENT
Chapters:

17.05    Subdivisions

17.10    Development Agreements

17.15    Property Developments

17.20    Professional Football Stadium Ground Lease

17.25    Bayshore North Project Enhancement Authority

17.30    Stadium Authority Procurement Policy

17.35    Park and Recreational Land

17.40    Citywide Affordable Housing Requirements

Chapter 17.05
SUBDIVISIONS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

17.05.010  Citation and authority.

17.05.020  Purpose.

17.05.030  Application.

17.05.040  Exceptions.

17.05.050  Interpretation.

17.05.060  Severability.

Article II. Definitions and Responsibilities

17.05.100  Definitions.

17.05.110  Responsibilities.

Article III. Maps Required

17.05.200  General.

17.05.210  Division of land – Five or more parcels.

17.05.220  Division of land – Four or fewer parcels (minor subdivisions).

17.05.230  Fees and deposits.

Article IV. Subdivision of Five or More Parcels

17.05.300  Tentative maps.

17.05.310  Final maps.

Article V. Subdivision of Four or Fewer Parcels (Minor Subdivisions)

17.05.400  Tentative parcel map.

17.05.410  Parcel maps.

Article VI. Dedications and Reservations

17.05.500  Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.

Article VII. Subdivision Improvements

17.05.600  General.

17.05.610  Improvements required.

17.05.620  Deferred improvement agreements.

17.05.630  Design.

17.05.640  Access.

17.05.650  Public improvement agreement.

17.05.660  Improvement security.

Article VIII. Vesting Tentative Maps

17.05.700  Vesting tentative maps.

17.05.710  Procedures.

17.05.720  Vesting of development rights.

Article IX. Penalties

17.05.800  Violation a misdemeanor.

Article I. General Provisions

17.05.010 Citation and authority.
This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq., of the Government Code and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the division of land within the City of Santa Clara and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions; the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act; and the procedure to be followed in securing all official approvals by the City. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land, and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.030 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all parts of subdivisions within the City of Santa Clara and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each subdivision and each part thereof lying within the City shall be made and each map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required by this chapter. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.040 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

(a) The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks.

(b) Mineral, oil or gas leases.

(c) Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code.

(d) A lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel; and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, the lot line adjustment is approved by the City Engineer.

(e) Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code for community apartment or cooperative housing projects.

(f) The conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a condominium if the requirements of Sections 66412(g) and (h) of the Subdivision Map Act are met.

(g) The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion, for the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other ordinances regulating design and improvements.

(h) The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel.

(i) The construction, financing or leasing of second family residential units (commonly referred to as "accessory units") according to the provisions of SCCC Title 18, Zoning.

(j) Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock.

(k) Leasing of, or grant of easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions of land, for financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind powered electrical generation device which is subject to discretionary action by the City. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.050 Interpretation.
None of the provisions in this Subdivision Ordinance or in any other ordinance or resolution of the City or in any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, whether preexisting, existing or in the future are intended to create or to be construed to create an imposition of civil liability on the City, its Council, officers or employees while acting in accordance with such provisions. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.060 Severability.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Subdivision Ordinance are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article II. Definitions and Responsibilities

17.05.100 Definitions.
(a) "Alley" means any public thoroughfare, other than a street, that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property at the rear or sides thereof.

(b) "Block" means the area of land within a subdivision which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.

(c) "Building Official" means the Building Official or his/her designee.

(d) "City Attorney" means the City Attorney or his/her designee.

(e) "City Engineer" means the City Engineer or his/her designee.

(f) "City Manager" means the City Manager or his/her designee.

(g) "Common interest development (Condominium)" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

(h) "Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings.

(i) "Design" means descriptions, drawings, plans, specifications or any other depictions, including but not limited to the following:

(1) Street alignments, grades and widths;

(2) Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades;

(3) Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

(4) Lot size and configuration;

(5) Vehicular and pedestrian access;

(6) Grading;

(7) Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and

(8) Other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.

(j) "Development" means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of and construction on the land.

(k) "Director of Planning" means the Director of Planning and Inspection or his/her designee.

(l) "Environmental Impact Report (EIR)" means a detailed statement under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects. The contents of the EIR are described in Article 9, Section 15120 of the State CEQA Guidelines and the City's CEQA Guidelines.

(m) "Final map" means a map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act designed to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. This may also be referred to as a "tract map."

(n) "General Plan" means the General Plan of the City, and any amendments or revisions.

(o) "Improvement" means any streets, storm drainage facilities, utilities and landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map. Any other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which, either by, or by a combination of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity approved by the City, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.

Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Santa Clara Street Standards, Standard Specifications and Plans and/or, when applicable, with standards as adopted by local utility companies and approved by the City Engineer.

(p) "Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision, parcel, or record of survey map or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.

(q) "Lot line adjustment" means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the City Engineer or authorized representative, and where each of the lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and the Uniform Building Code.

(r) "Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.

(s) "Minor subdivision" means a subdivision of four or fewer parcels except a subdivision of five or more condominiums as defined in Section 1351(f) of the California Civil Code or for the conversion of a dwelling to stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units.

(t) "Parcel map" means a map showing a minor subdivision of land of four or fewer parcels as required by this ordinance, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. This may also be referred to as a Final Parcel Map.

(u) "Peripheral street" means an existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of the subdivision.

(v) "Remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land. The remainder is not considered as part of the subdivision but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area surrounding subdivision development.

(w) "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision or a minor subdivision for himself/herself or for others. Employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in that capacity, are not "subdividers."

(x) "Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved contiguous land shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, other than a minor subdivision. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined herein or in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 1003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. "Subdivision" includes any division of land by gift or inheritance (probate). Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels.

(y) "Subdivision Map Act (SMA)" means State of California Government Code Sections 66410 to 66499.

(z) "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision, other than a minor subdivision, and the existing conditions in and around it. The term "tentative map" may include a vesting tentative map, a subdivision map and a vesting subdivision map.

(aa) "Vesting tentative map" means a map that meets the requirements of a tentative map and Article VIII, and has the words "vesting tentative map" printed on it. The vesting tentative map conveys development rights for subdivisions according to Article VIII.

(bb) "Zoning Ordinance" means SCCC Title 18, or any ordinance enacted under zoning law. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.110 Responsibilities.
(a) City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all property development agreements, subdivision improvement agreements and/or public improvement agreements.

(b) City Manager. Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 802(a) of the Santa Clara City Charter, the City Manager shall designate the following positions: Director of Planning and Inspection, City Engineer, and Building Official. Further, the City Manager shall be responsible for executing all property development agreements, subdivision improvement agreements and/or public improvement agreements.

(c) City Council. The City Council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of tentative and final maps, tentative parcel maps and improvement agreements, and the acceptance by the City of lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the City for subdivisions of five or more parcels.

The City Council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative subdivision maps for subdivisions of five or more parcels.

(d) City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for:

(1) Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications;

(2) Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and for reporting the findings together with any recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map to the Director of Planning and Inspection;

(3) The processing of final maps, parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans, lot line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance;

(4) Examining and stating that final maps and parcel maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map;

(5) The inspection, approval and acceptance of subdivision improvements;

(6) The acceptance of dedications and improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels.

(e) Director of Planning and Inspection. The Director of Planning and Inspection shall be responsible for:

(1) The processing of tentative subdivision and tentative parcel maps, and for the collection of all required planning fees.

(2) The recording of a notice of completion of private subdivision improvements when not to be maintained by the City.

(f) Project Clearance Committee. The Project Clearance Committee shall be responsible for the review of tentative maps for subdivisions of five or more parcels or units for compliance with City ordinances and regulations and determining the practicability of the proposal with respect to the provision of City services, and for providing suitable conditions of approval to the Planning Commission and the City Council.

(g) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for making recommendations for approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map for subdivisions of five or more lots or units and reporting its recommendations to the City Council; and hearing of appeals for minor subdivisions of four or fewer parcels.

(h) Subdivision Committee. The Subdivision Committee shall be responsible for making recommendations for approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative parcel maps for four or fewer parcels and review of lot line adjustments.

(i) Director of Planning and Inspection. The Director of Planning and Inspection shall be responsible for investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the General Plan, specific plans and Zoning Ordinance of the City, and reporting findings together with recommendations for approval or conditional approval to the Planning Commission and City Council for subdivisions of five or more parcels. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article III. Maps Required

17.05.200 General.
The necessity for preliminary, tentative or vesting tentative, final, tentative parcel and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.210 Division of land – Five or more parcels.
A tentative or vesting tentative and final subdivision map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the Director of Planning and Inspection that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 1351(f) of the California Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where:

(a) The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or

(b) Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

(c) The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or

(d) Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or is not less than a quarter (1/4) of a quarter (1/4) section.

A parcel map shall be required for these subdivisions described in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.220 Division of land – Four or fewer parcels (minor subdivisions).
A tentative parcel map and parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or fewer parcels, except that such maps shall not be required for:

(a) Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days notice in writing.

(b) Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to the public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. The foregoing exemption shall only apply if, prior to the conveyance, the owner of the subject land complies with this section. The owner shall submit an application for exemption in the form and with such information as is required by the City Engineer. Upon receipt of a complete application by the City Engineer, the City Engineer shall either determine that the exemption applies, determine that the exemption applies subject to conditions or determine that public policy necessitates a parcel map. In making this determination, the City Engineer shall consider any written materials submitted by the applicant or any interested party. The City Engineer shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing. If the City Engineer determines that a parcel map is necessary, the applicant shall not subdivide the subject land without obtaining City approval of a parcel map pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a tentative map and parcel map for a division of land into four or fewer parcels shall not be required for the dedication of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility which is required by the City as a condition of approval of a development project.

(c) Lot line adjustments, provided:

(1) No additional parcels or building sites have been created;

(2) The adjustment does not create the potential to further divide any of the parcels into more parcels than would have been otherwise possible;

(3) There are no resulting violations of any City ordinance;

(4) Adjustment involves four or fewer adjoining parcels. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.230 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by any City resolution or ordinance establishing fees and charges. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article IV. Subdivision of Five or More Parcels

17.05.300 Tentative maps.
(a) General. The form and contents, submittal and approval of a tentative map for subdivisions of five or more parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this section.

(b) Form and Contents. The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Department of Planning and Inspection and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or licensed land surveyor.

The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on a single twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24'' x 36'') sheet and contain not less than the following:

(1) A title that shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision.

(2) Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map, including registration or license number.

(3) Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision.

(4) Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours.

(5) Existing and proposed land uses and zoning districts.

(6) A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community.

(7) Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:

(A) Topographical contours at an interval adequate to determine the drainage pattern of the area;

(B) Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm overflow; of all areas covered by water; and the location width and the direction of flow for all watercourses and areas subject to overflow by tidal waters;

(C) The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways;

(D) The widths, location and identity of all existing public and private easements and/or rights-of-way;

(E) The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains and the location of fire hydrants. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, fire hydrants and streetlights.

(8) Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:

(A) The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be so indicated;

(B) The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs;

(C) The location, width and purpose of all easements;

(D) The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees;

(E) The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut-and-fill slopes to scale, and the number of each lot;

(F) Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use;

(G) Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space;

(H) The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains and the location of fire hydrants. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated.

(9) The name or names of any geologist, soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map.

(10) All lettering size shall be one-tenth (1/10th) inch minimum or typed print of legible size.

(11) If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units, the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown.

(c) The Department of Planning and Inspection may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrate that a waiver is justified. The Department of Planning and Inspection may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary in order to determine the application complete.

(d) Accompanying Data and Reports. The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports:

(1) Street Names. A list of potential street names for any unnamed street or alley. The Department of Planning and Inspection may submit the list to the Historical and Landmarks Commission for comment and recommendations. Those comments and recommendations may be included in the staff report to the Planning Commission.

(2) Soils Report. The City Engineer or Building Official may require the preparation of a preliminary soils report. If a preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. The City Engineer or Building Official may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate or unsatisfactory.

The preliminary soils report may be waived if the City Engineer or Building Official determines that, due to knowledge of the soil qualities in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

(3) Title Report. A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map.

(4) Engineering Geology and/or Seismic Safety Report. If the subdivision lies within a "medium-risk" or "high-risk" geologic hazard area, as shown on maps on file in the Department of Planning and Inspection, a preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report, prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the Department of Planning and Inspection. If the preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report indicates the presence of geologic hazards or seismic hazards which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, an engineering geology and/or seismic safety report shall accompany the final map and shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision.

(5) Environmental Assessment. The subdivider shall provide additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents.

(6) Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the Department of Planning and Inspection.

Subsections (a), (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to condominium conversions.

(e) Submittal to Department of Planning and Inspection. The tentative map shall be considered for filing only when the map conforms to subsection (b) of this section and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by subsection (d) of this section, have been submitted and accepted by the Planning Division of the Department of Planning and Inspection.

(1) The subdivider shall file with the Department of Planning and Inspection the number of tentative maps the Director may deem necessary.

(2) Determination of Complete Application. The Project Clearance Committee shall determine whether the application is complete within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application and shall notify the applicant of its determination in writing. The application shall be determined as complete on the date written minutes of the Project Clearance Committee, showing a complete application, is prepared by the Planning Division and mailed to the developer.

(f) Project Clearance Committee Review. Upon determination of a complete application, the Project Clearance Committee shall advise the applicant in writing of any comments it desires to make and any changes in the proposed plan it deems appropriate as a result of its preliminary review, and forward any conditions of approval to the Planning Commission.

(g) Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall review each complete application and shall make recommendations of denial, approval or conditional approval to the City Council.

(h) City Council Action.

(1) The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map and shall report its decision to the subdivider within fifty (50) days after certification of an environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration or a determination by the City that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act.

(2) The approval, conditional approval, or denial shall be based on the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of notification to the developer of the determination that the application is complete according to subsection (e) of this section. If the City has initiated formal proceedings and published notice of an ordinance or resolution amending ordinances, policies, and standards applicable to the developer's project prior to a complete application, the amended ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of tentative map approval shall apply. If the developer requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies, and standards, and if they are adopted, the changes shall apply.

(3) If no action is taken by the City Council within the time limit as specified, and all other State and City requirements have been met, including but not limited to the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) the tentative map application shall be deemed to be approved by the City Council if it complies with other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, other City ordinances and the General Plan, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify the approval. The appeal period shall begin on the date of such certification.

(4) Approval.

(A) The City Council may approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, if it finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the General Plan adopted by the City of Santa Clara and all applicable provisions of this Code and if the tentative map provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities.

(B) The City Council may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the Planning Commission and/or Department of Planning and Inspection report, except conditions required by City ordinance or by the City Engineer, related to public health and safety or to standards approved by the City Engineer. The City Council may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval.

(C) Whether or not such a condition is explicitly listed as a condition of approval, every approved tentative map shall be deemed to include a condition requiring the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City or its agents, officers or employees to attach, set aside, void or annul an approval of the City Council, Planning Commission, Project Clearance Committee or City staff concerning a subdivision. The City shall promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense.

(5) Denial. The tentative map may be denied by the City Council on any of the grounds provided by this code or the Subdivision Map Act.

The City Council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

(A) That the proposed map is not consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, or any applicable provision of this code;

(B) That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plans;

(C) That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

(D) That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

(E) That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

(F) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding is made pursuant to Section 21081(c) of the Public Resources Code that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures and project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

(G) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

(H) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the City Council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the City Council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

(I) That the land is subject to a contract under the Williamson Act and that the resulting parcels following the subdivision would be too small to sustain their agricultural use, subject to the exceptions listed in Section 66474(b) of the Subdivision Map Act.

(i) Expirations and Extensions.

(1) Expiration.

(A) The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after the date of approval by the City Council. However, the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act if the filing of multiple final maps is authorized by SCCC 17.05.310(b) and if the subdivider is required to provide off-site improvements in the amounts specified in Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may be approved as provided in subsection (i)(2) of this section.

(B) The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66452.6(b) of the Subdivision Map Act.

(C) The period of time specified above shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the City Council. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the Director of Planning and Inspection, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty (40) days after receiving the request, the City Council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall, within ten days, declare its findings.

(D) Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map.

(E) If the signed final map and agreement have been delivered to the City Engineer prior to the expiration of the tentative map, processing, approval and recording may occur after the expiration date of the tentative map.

(2) Extensions.

(A) Request by Subdivider. The subdivider or the engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the Department of Planning and Inspection prior to expiration of the map. The map shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first.

(B) Planning Commission Action. The Director of Planning and Inspection shall review the request and submit the application for the extension to the Project Clearance Committee for compliance with current codes and regulations and ordinances, and for suitable changes to the originally recommended conditions of approval. The request shall then be set for review by the Planning Commission, whose recommendation on the extension, together with a report, shall be forwarded to the City Council for approval, conditional approval or denial at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting. A copy of the Director of Planning and Inspection's report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the City Council meeting on the extension. The resolution adopted by the City Council approving or conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative map.

(C) Time Limit of Extension. The expiration date may be extended pursuant to this section for a period or periods totaling no more than three years.

(D) Conditions of Approval. As a condition of the extension of a tentative map, the City Council may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map as recommended by the Department of Planning and Inspection in its report or as it may find necessary.

(E) Fee. The fee for processing an extension application shall be at actual cost. A deposit to be applied toward this fee may be required.

(j) Amendments to Approved Tentative Map. Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the Department of Planning and Inspection and the City Engineer upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided:

(1) The change will not result in a greater than five percent (5%) increase in the number of lots, units or building sites;

(2) Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; and

(3) There are no resulting violations of the Santa Clara City Code.

Any such minor amendment shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection and the City Engineer. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and signed by the Director of Planning and Inspection and the City Engineer.

(k) Amendments of the tentative map, which the Department of Planning and Inspection determines are not minor, shall be presented to the Planning Commission for recommendation. Processing shall be in accordance with subsections (e) and (f) of this section. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.310 Final maps.
General. The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this article.

(a) The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a properly licensed civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

(b) Submittal by Units. Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the Director of Planning and Inspection in writing of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map. In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. The City Council shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After filing of the tentative map, the Director of Planning and Inspection and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

(c) The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, or the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The public improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision.

(d) Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed one ten-thousandth (1/10,000th) for field closures and one twenty-thousandth (1/20,000th) for calculated closures.

(e) At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the City Engineer.

(f) Form. The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

(1) The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-base film. Statements, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

(2) The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches (18'' x 26''). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one foot equals one hundred (100) feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included.

(3) All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-tenth (1/10th) inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

(4) The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the City Engineer.

(g) Contents. The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

(1) Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a distinctive border line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

(2) Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or other by references acceptable to the City Engineer. The following words shall appear in the title, "City of Santa Clara, Santa Clara County."

(3) Statements. The following statements shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

(A) Owner's Statement. A statement, signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication to the public certain specific parcels of land or easements. Exceptions are those parties having rights-of-way, easements or interests, which cannot ripen into a fee, or as provided in Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(B) Trustee's Statement. A statement, signed and acknowledged by any trustees of record at the time of City Council approval of the final map, consenting to the recording of the map and any offers of dedications.

(C) Engineer's Statement. A statement by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map shall appear on the map. The statement shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by or under the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. The statement shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The statement shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. The statement shall state that the map complies with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this chapter.

(D) Statement of Soils and Geologic Report. When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, and the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report.

(E) City Engineer's Statement. A statement by the City Engineer stating the map has been examined and that it is in accord with the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof, complies with the Subdivision Map Act of the state and the provisions of this chapter, and is technically correct.

(F) City Clerk's Statement. A statement for execution by the City Clerk stating the date of approval by the City Council approving the final map and stating that the City Council accepted, subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.

(G) County Recorder's Statement. A statement to be executed by the County Recorder stating that the map has been accepted for recording. The statement shall show who requested the recording of the map, the time and date the map was recorded, and the book and page where the map was recorded.

(4) Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point, and the basis of bearings. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the City Engineer.

(5) Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.

(6) Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard City monuments shall be set at or on City Engineer approved offsets from the following locations:

(A) The intersection of street centerlines;

(B) Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines;

(C) At other locations as may be required by the City Engineer.

(7) Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands under the same ownership are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the City Engineer.

(8) Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision, and if no such subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner, and reference to the recorded deed by book page number for the last recorded owner of such adjacent property.

(9) City Boundaries. City boundaries that cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

(10) Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

(11) Easements. Easements for roads or streets, paths, storm water drainage, sanitary sewers, or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the City or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map.

(A) All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder's document number and date, or book and page of official records.

(B) Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the County Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created.

(C) The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown to scale by dashed lines on the final map with the widths and lengths of record.

(h) Additional Information. The City Engineer or Director of Planning and Inspection may require additional information to be recorded simultaneously with the final map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of the recording, and is not intended to affect record title interest. The document or additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional information is derived from public records, or reports, and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet. Whenever additional information is made by separate document, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded document. This reference shall be completed by the County Recorder according to Section 66468.1 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(i) Submittal for City Approval.

(1) Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the City Engineer.

(A) Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as directed by the City Engineer.

(B) Soils Report. A soils report prepared as directed by the City Engineer.

(C) Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map.

(D) Public Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer water, drainage, grading, paving or other improvements required pursuant to SCCC 17.05.600 et seq. have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of SCCC 17.05.650 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of SCCC 17.05.660.

(E) Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for public or private easements or rights-of-way. Written evidence acceptable to the City in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of any sewer, water, electric and/or other facility.

(F) Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines.

(G) Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains, sewer, water and/or electric facility.

(H) Governing Documents. If required by the City, the submittal of the final map or parcel map for a common interest development within the meaning of Sections 1350 et seq. of the California Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and Inspection, City Engineer and City Attorney.

(I) Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the City and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary.

(J) Flood Plain Information. Flood plain information including the amount of flooding that may occur during a one hundred (100) year flood, and mitigation measures necessary to protect the subdivision from flooding.

(K) Copies of the final map in approved electronic format as required by the City Engineer.

(L) Any additional data, reports or information as required by the City Engineer.

(2) Review by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the final map and the subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the City Engineer.

(3) Approval by City Engineer. The subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the statements on the map, to the City Engineer.

(4) The City Engineer and Director of Planning and Inspection shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall transmit the final map to the City Council at its next meeting.

(5) Approval by City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the final map at the meeting at which it receives the map or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the subdivision improvement agreement, if any, prior to approving or disapproving the final map. The City Council shall approve the subdivision improvement agreement and the final map if they conform with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the provisions of this code which were applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

(6) If the City Council approves the final map, it shall at the same time accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the final map the action by the City Council. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the City Council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may, by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

(7) The City Council may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. If the subdivision improvement agreement (if any) and final map are approved by the City Council, it shall instruct the City Manager to execute the agreement on behalf of the City. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map are unacceptable, the Council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the City Engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map have been resubmitted.

(8) The City Council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider or the City has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made.

(9) The City Council shall deny the final map if it finds that the final map is not in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map.

(10) Upon approval of the final map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate statement on the map and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the County Recorder. If the subdivider dedicates property to the City, the City Clerk shall also prepare and forward for recording a certificate concerning the dedication as provided in Section 66477.5 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article V. Subdivision of Four or Fewer Parcels (Minor Subdivisions)

17.05.400 Tentative parcel map.
(a) General. The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative parcel maps for four or fewer parcels shall conform to the provisions of this article. The map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

(b) Form and Content, Accompanying Data and Reports. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Department of Planning and Inspection by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of SCCC 17.05.300(b) and the accompanying data and reports shall comply and be consistent with SCCC 17.05.300(d). The Department of Planning and Inspection may require additional information or may waive any of these requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrates that a waiver is justified.

(c) Subdivision Committee Review. The tentative parcel map application shall be filed with the Subdivision Committee for review in accordance with the provisions of SCCC 17.05.300(d) and (e)(2).

(d) Notice of Public Hearings. Upon completion of the review and upon receipt of a complete application for the tentative map, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given as provided in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091. Such notice shall include the time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved.

(1) The City shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed application. In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(2) In the event that the proposed subdivision has been requested by a person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the City shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(3) In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the secretary of the Planning Commission. A request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of a calendar year. The City may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of mailing.

(4) Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article.

(5) The City Engineer may require that the public hearing be held by the Planning Commission when the proposed development arouses extraordinary public concern.

(e) Approval and/or Denial. In approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, the City Council shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plans adopted by the City and all applicable provisions of this code and if the tentative map provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. Whether or not such a condition is explicitly listed as a condition of approval, every approved tentative map shall be deemed to include a condition requiring the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City or its agents, officers or employees to attach, set aside, void or annul an approval of the City Council, Planning Commission, Subdivision Committee or City staff concerning a subdivision. The City shall promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense.

(f) The tentative parcel map may be denied for any reason provided by City ordinances, resolutions, or the Subdivision Map Act. The City Council shall deny approval of the tentative parcel map if any of the findings contained in SCCC 17.05.300(h)(5) are made.

(g) Expiration and Extensions.

(1) Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of its approval by the City Council.

(A) The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a law suit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the City Council. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the Director of Planning and Inspection, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty (40) days after receiving such request, the City Council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall, within ten days, declare its findings.

(B) The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(C) The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative parcel map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map.

(D) If the signed parcel map and agreement, if required, are submitted to the City Engineer prior to the expiration of the tentative map, approval, processing and recording may occur after the expiration date of the tentative map.

(2) Extensions.

(A) Request by Subdivider. The subdivider or engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the Director of Planning and Inspection prior to the expiration of the map. The map shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application for extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied whichever occurs first.

(B) Director of Planning and Inspection Action. The Director of Planning and Inspection shall review the request for extension for approval, conditional approval or denial. The Director of Planning and Inspection shall make a written determination on the request and, if approved or conditionally approved, shall specify the new expiration date.

(C) Time Limit of Extension. The expiration date may be extended pursuant to this section for a period or periods totaling no more than three years.

(D) Conditions of Approval. As a condition of the extension of a tentative map, the City Engineer may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions of the tentative map.

(E) Appeal. The subdivider may appeal any action of the Director of Planning and Inspection concerning an extension to the City Council within ten days of such action in conformance with SCCC 17.05.300(i)(2).

(F) Fee. The fee for processing an extension shall be at actual cost. A deposit to be applied toward this fee shall be required.

(h) Amendments to the Approved Tentative Map. Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection and the City Engineer upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided:

(1) No lots, units or building sites are added;

(2) Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval;

(3) There are no resulting violations of the Santa Clara City Code;

(4) Any revision shall be approved by the City Engineer. The revision shall be denoted on the approved tentative map and/or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate;

(5) Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved tentative map; and

(6) The City Engineer may require a new tentative parcel map application in lieu of the above procedure when, in his/her opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refilling and reprocessing. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.410 Parcel maps.
(a) General. The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act.

(b) Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed one ten-thousandth (1/10,000th) for field closures and one twenty-thousandth (1/20,000th) for calculated closures.

(c) Form. The form of the parcel map shall conform to final map form requirements as specified by SCCC 17.05.310(f).

(d) Contents. The contents of the parcel map shall conform to final map content requirements as specified by SCCC 17.05.310(g), excepting subsections (g)(3)(iv) and (7).

(e) Statements shall be in accordance with Section 66449 of the Government Code, with the addition of the trustee's certificate according to SCCC 17.05.310(g)(3)(ii).

(f) The City Clerk's statement will be required if the tentative parcel map was approved by the City Council. The City Clerk's statement may include acceptance of offers of dedication.

(g) Lots shall be designated by letters commencing with "A" and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications.

(h) Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by SCCC 17.05.310(i)(1), Preliminary Submittal. The City Engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrates that compliance with the requirements of SCCC 17.05.310(i) is not necessary.

(i) Review by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider's engineer shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the City Engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the statements on the map, to the City Engineer.

(j) Approval by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the tentative map and all conditions thereof.

(k) Filing with the County Recorder. The City Clerk or authorized agent shall file the approved parcel map directly to the County Recorder. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article VI. Dedications and Reservations

17.05.500 Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative, or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public greenways, scenic easements, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article VII. Subdivision Improvements

17.05.600 General.
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on and off site according to standards as approved by the City. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.610 Improvements required.
(a) General. All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or City ordinance, together with, but not limited to the following shall be required of all subdivisions.

(1) Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map.

(2) As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public, subject to the provisions of Sections 66485 through 66489 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(b) Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions.

(c) Storm Drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

(d) Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by a community sewer collection system as required by Chapter 13.10 SCCC, unless an individual system is permitted thereunder.

(e) Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system.

(f) Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cable television facilities.

(1) Underground Utilities. All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along either side of peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission Regulations and as otherwise provided below.

(A) If the subdivision is in the Underground District, as designated in the General Plan, all utility lines along peripheral streets shall be undergrounded or an in lieu of undergrounding fee shall be paid. Undergrounding shall be required for overhead lines on either side of the peripheral street.

(B) If the subdivision is outside the Underground District, undergrounding overhead utilities on peripheral streets shall not be required unless the City Engineer finds that undergrounding of such utilities is likely to occur within the ten-year period following approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.620 Deferred improvement agreements.
(a) Subdivisions. The frontage improvements along existing peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the City Engineer. Deferral will be allowed when the City Engineer finds that construction is impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood is absent of similar improvements. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the City in a form acceptable to the City Attorney for the installation of all frontage improvements at such time in the future as required by the City. The agreement shall provide:

(1) Construction of improvements shall commence within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the City;

(2) That in event of default by the subdivider and/or owner, the City is hereby authorized to cause said construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid;

(3) That this agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Santa Clara County, California, at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner, and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of the title to such real property of the obligation set forth, and also a lien in an amount to fully reimburse the City, including interest as above, subject to foreclosure in event of default in payment;

(4) That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner, agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney's fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

(5) That the terms "subdivider" and "owner" shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns, it being the intent of the parties hereto that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it;

(6) Any other provisions required by the City Engineer as reasonably necessary to effectuate this code and the Subdivision Map Act;

(7) The agreement shall not relieve the owner from any other specific requirements. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable articles of the municipal code in effect at the time of construction.

(b) Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the City to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel. The improvements shall be at the subdivider's expense. In the absence of an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

(1) The public health and safety; or

(2) The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.630 Design.
General. The design and layout of all required improvements both on and off site, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards, to the City's Standard Design Criteria, Details and Standard Plans and Specifications, and to such standards as approved by the City Engineer.

(a) Energy Conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, pursuant to Article III of this chapter, shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

(1) Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure.

(2) Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.

(3) In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed.

(4) The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium projects that consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added.

(5) For the purposes of this section, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

(b) Cable Television Service. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map or parcel map is required shall provide appropriate cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. For the purposes of this section, "appropriate cable television systems" means those systems franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located.

This section shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.640 Access.
(a) The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street as required by law. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street.

(b) Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision. Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the City when required. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.650 Public improvement agreement.
Public improvement agreements shall be prepared and signed by the City Manager and approved as to form by the City Attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

(a) Construction of all improvements according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the City Engineer;

(b) Specified times for completion of improvements;

(c) Right by City to modify plans and specifications and to require the subdivider to pay for modifications;

(d) Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

(e) Payment of fees in accordance with any City Council resolution establishing fees and charges;

(f) Improvement security as required by this article;

(g) Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes thereof;

(h) Release and indemnification of the City from all liability incurred by the development and payment of all reasonable attorney's fees that the City may incur because of any legal action arising from the development;

(i) Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by City ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the City Engineer;

(j) Any other provisions required by the City as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this code. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.660 Improvement security.
General. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Sections 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided below.

(a) No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the City Engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

(b) Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the City.

(1) Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The provisions of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(2) An instrument of credit or certificate of deposit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal government with an office located in the nine Bay Area counties and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment.

(3) A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the City, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money.

(c) Amount of Security. A performance bond or security in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee the payment to the subdivider's contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. The foregoing shall not apply to a California nonprofit corporation that is funded by a government agency if the corporation complies with Section 66499.3(c) of the Subdivision Map Act.

(d) The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall provide for:

(1) Ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies;

(2) All utility installation costs or a statement acceptable to the City Engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation;

(3) In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included estimated costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney's fees, which may be incurred in enforcing the obligation secured.

(e) Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the City, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the warranty period of one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than ten percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond, which shall be retained for the one year warranty period.

(f) Release of Improvement Securities.

(1) Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer. If warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

(2) Labor and Materials Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, thirty (30) days after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the City Council or City Engineer, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of claims therefore filed and of which notice has been given to the City Council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given.

(3) Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided:

(A) All deficiencies appearing on the final deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected;

(B) Not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the City Council. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article VIII. Vesting Tentative Maps

17.05.700 Vesting tentative maps.
(a) Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this Subdivision Ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(b) If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by a vesting tentative map, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.710 Procedures.
(a) Filing and Processing. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth for a tentative map in SCCC 17.05.300, except as provided herein:

(1) At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map."

(2) Prior to filing a vesting tentative map, a subdivider shall obtain all discretionary approvals that will be required under the Santa Clara City Code in conjunction with the approval or conditional approval of the vesting tentative map in order to construct the development. An application for a vesting tentative map shall be determined to be incomplete until all other applicable discretionary approvals are processed and acted upon in accordance with the Santa Clara City Code and applicable state law.

(b) Fees. Upon filing a vested tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the Director of Planning and Inspection for the filing and processing of a tentative map.

(c) Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same period, and shall be subject to the same extensions established by the Subdivision Ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

17.05.720 Vesting of development rights.
(a) The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, polices and standards in effect at the time that an application is determined to be complete by the city; provided, that any fees required as a condition of approval of a vesting tentative map, unless otherwise specified, shall be payable at the rates in effect at the time building permits are issued. This section is further governed by Government Code Sections 66474.2 and 665943 and any successor legislation. This article shall not be interpreted to create any rights for subdividers beyond those expressly required by the Vesting Tentative Map Law (Government Code Sections 66498.1 et seq., as may from time to time be amended).

(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a subsequent permit, approval, extension, building permit, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied pursuant to later ordinances, policies and standards if any of the following are determined:

(1) A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community in a condition dangerous to their health or safety;

(2) The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

(c) The rights referred to in this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in SCCC 17.05.710(c). If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

(1) An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map. Where several maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

(2) The initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed.

(3) If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time prior to the expiration of the final map, the rights referred to in this chapter shall continue until the expiration of such building permit or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Article IX. Penalties

17.05.800 Violation a misdemeanor.
Any person who willfully or maliciously violates any provision of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City may enforce any violation of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance as a criminal, civil or administrative action. (Ord. 1780 § 3, 4-8-03).

Chapter 17.10
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

Article I. Purpose

17.10.010    Findings and declaration of intent.

17.10.020    Purpose of development agreement.

Article II. Authority for Adoption

17.10.030    Authority for adoption.

Article III. Definitions

17.10.040    Definitions.

Article IV. Applications and Forms

17.10.050    Forms and information.

17.10.060    Fees.

17.10.070    Qualification as an applicant.

17.10.080    Procedure for development agreement.

17.10.090    Proposed form of development agreement.

17.10.100    Review of application.

17.10.110    Contents of development agreement.

Article V. Hearing Before Planning Commission

17.10.120    Public hearing.

17.10.130    Review – Standard.

17.10.140    Recommendation by Planning Commission.

Article VI. Hearing Before City Council

17.10.150    Setting hearing date by City Council.

17.10.160    Ordinance – Public hearing.

17.10.170    Conduct of hearing.

17.10.180    Consistency with general plan and specific plans.

Article VII. Notice Provisions and
Procedure for Public Hearings Before
Planning Commission or City Council

17.10.190    Notice.

17.10.200    Form and time of notice.

17.10.210    Coordination of development agreement application with other discretionary approvals.

Article VIII. Review – Certificate of Compliance, Termination or Modification

17.10.220    Time for and initiation of review.

17.10.230    Finding of compliance.

17.10.240    Failure to find good faith compliance.

17.10.250    Public hearing.

17.10.260    Findings upon public hearing.

17.10.270    Procedure upon findings.

17.10.280    Certificate of compliance.

Article IX. Amendment or Cancellation of Agreement by Mutual Consent

17.10.290    Initiation of amendment or cancellation.

17.10.300    Procedure.

Article X. Miscellaneous Provisions

17.10.310    Failure to receive notice.

17.10.320    Rules governing conduct of hearing.

17.10.330    Irregularity in proceeding.

17.10.340    Subsequently adopted State and Federal laws.

17.10.350    Architectural review.

17.10.360    Governing rules, regulations, development policies and effect of development agreement.

17.10.370    Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination.

17.10.380    Construction.

17.10.390    Recordation of development agreement, ordinances and notices.

17.10.400    Enforcement of development agreements.

17.10.410    Severability clause.

17.10.420    Judicial review – Time limitation.

17.10.430    Condemnation.

Article I. Purpose

17.10.010 Findings and declaration of intent.
(a) The California Legislature in Section 65864 of the Government Code has found that the lack of certainty in the approval of development projects can result in a waste of resources, escalate the cost of housing and other development to the consumer, and discourage investment in and commitment to comprehensive planning which would make maximum efficient utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public.

(b) The City Council finds and determines that under appropriate circumstances, development agreements will strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning by providing a greater degree of certainty in the process, and through corresponding assurances by the developers, reduce the economic costs to government of development, allow for the orderly planning of public improvements and services and the allocation of costs therefor in order to achieve the maximum utilization of public and private resources in the development process, and assure, to the extent feasible, that appropriate measures to enhance and protect the environment of the City are achieved.

The City Council further finds and determines that the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare will be furthered by the adoption of this chapter in order to provide a mechanism for the enactment of development agreements with flexibility of adding supplementary regulations to development standards for particular projects and to provide a mechanism for allowing expenditures to respond selectively to development proposals, to encourage the achievement of growth management goals, including assurances of adequate public facilities at the time of development, proper timing and sequencing of development, effective capital improvement programming and appropriate development incentives to accomplish the foregoing purposes and aims and the realization of the benefits to be derived therefrom. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-1).

17.10.020 Purpose of development agreement.
Development agreements enacted pursuant to this chapter are to ensure to the qualified applicant for a development project that upon approval of the project, the qualified applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with certain existing policies, rules and regulations, and subject to specified conditions of approval, in order to implement the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter. Development agreements will also ensure that all conditions of approval, including the construction of off-site improvements made necessary by such land developments, will proceed in an orderly and economical fashion to the benefit of the City. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-2).

Article II. Authority for Adoption

17.10.030 Authority for adoption.
This chapter pertaining to development agreements is adopted under the authority of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5, as amended, under the City charter, and the self-rule powers granted to charter cities by the California Constitution. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-3).

Article III. Definitions

17.10.040 Definitions.
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings:

(a) “Developer” means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a development agreement.

(b) “Development agreement” means a development agreement enacted by legislation between the City and a qualified applicant pursuant to Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5.

(c) “Planning Director” means the City Manager or City Manager’s duly authorized designee.

(d) “Qualified applicant” is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a proposed development agreement, determined pursuant to SCCC 17.10.070. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-4).

Article IV. Applications and Forms

17.10.050 Forms and information.
(a) The Planning Director shall prescribe the form of each application, notice, and documents provided for or required under this chapter for the preparation and implementation of development agreements consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(b) The Planning Director may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the Planning Director, City Council, and other agencies to which the applicant is referred under this chapter consider necessary to properly process the application. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-5).

17.10.060 Fees.
The City Council shall, from time to time by separate resolution or resolutions, fix schedules of fees and charges to be imposed for the filing, processing, and recording of each application and document provided for or required under this chapter, which fees and charges as then currently prescribed shall accompany each application made under this chapter.

These fees and charges shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of, any other required fees and charges relative to development of the subject property and shall be for the purpose of defraying the costs associated with City review and action on an application. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-6).

17.10.070 Qualification as an applicant.
(a) Except as provided in SCCC 17.10.080(a), only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant includes an authorized agent of a qualified applicant. The Planning Director may require an applicant to submit proof of his/her interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the qualified applicant. Such proof may include a title report, policy or guarantees issued by a title company licensed to do business in the State of California evidencing the requisite interest of the applicant in the real property. If the application is made by the holder of an equitable interest, the application shall be accompanied by a verified title report and by a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed development agreement executed by the holder of the legal interest. Before processing the application, the Planning Director shall obtain the opinion of the City Attorney as to the sufficiency of the qualified applicant’s interest in the real property to enter into the development agreement as a qualified applicant hereunder.

(b) Other Parties. In addition to the City and qualified applicant, any Federal, State or local governmental agency or body may be included as a party to any development agreement. Any such additional party shall be made a party to the development agreement pursuant to the provisions of the Joint Exercise of Powers Act (Government Code Section 6500 et seq.) providing for joint powers agreements, or provisions of other applicable Federal, State or local law, in order to create a legally binding agreement between such parties. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-7).

17.10.080 Procedure for development agreement.
(a) Initiation by Application. An application for a development agreement may be made to the Planning Director in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.

(1) Application may be made by any qualified applicant.

(2) Application may be made by the Planning Commission or the City Council. If an application is made for a development agreement by the Planning Commission or City Council, the City shall obtain and attach a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed agreement executed by the owner of the subject property.

(b) Contents of the Application. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the City Planning Director and shall be accompanied by a proposed ordinance and development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-8).

17.10.090 Proposed form of development agreement.
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the qualified applicant or as authorized in SCCC 17.10.080. This requirement may be met by designating the City’s then standard form of development agreement and including specified proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form or by submitting a form of development agreement prepared by the qualified applicant and proposed to be used under this chapter. Any such development agreement prepared by a qualified applicant shall contain the provisions required under SCCC 17.10.110, 17.10.340, and 17.10.360 and shall also include the following:

(a) The parties to the development agreement;

(b) The nature of the qualified applicant’s legal or equitable interest in the real property constituting such person as a qualified applicant hereunder;

(c) A description of the development project sufficient to permit the development agreement to be reviewed under the applicable criteria of this chapter. Such description may include, but is not limited to, references to site and building plans, elevations sufficient to determine heights and areas, relationships to adjacent properties and operational data. Where appropriate, such description may distinguish between elements of the development project which are proposed to be fixed under the development agreement, those which may vary and the standards and criteria pursuant to which the same may be reviewed;

(d) An identification of the approvals and permits for the development project enacted to the date of or contemplated by the development agreement;

(e) The proposed duration of the development agreement;

(f) The proposed phasing of the construction, and any public improvements to be required;

(g) A program and criteria for regular periodic review under this chapter;

(h) Proposed provisions providing security for the performance of the qualified applicant under the development agreement;

(i) Any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the Planning Director pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-9).

17.10.100 Review of application.
(a) Upon submission of an application for a development agreement, the Planning Director shall stamp on the application the date it is received. He shall within thirty (30) days after receipt of application review the application and accompanying documentation for legal sufficiency, compliance with technical requirements and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If he finds that the application is complete for processing he shall accept it for filing. The Planning Director shall cause a written notice of acceptance or rejection to be mailed or delivered to qualified applicant. If rejected, the notice must also give the reason for the rejection. If such notice is neither mailed nor delivered within thirty (30) days following receipt of application for the development agreement, the application shall be deemed filed on the thirtieth day following its receipt by the Planning Director.

(b) After the application is accepted for filing or deemed filed, the Planning Director shall then review the application and determine any additional requirements necessary to complete the form of development agreement. After receiving the required information, the Planning Director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the development agreement as proposed, or in an amended form (specifying the nature of the amendments), would implement, be consistent with and in compliance with, the adopted general plan, applicable specific plans, relevant City policies and guidelines for development, and the provisions of this chapter. The Planning Director shall, as part of the review of the application, circulate copies of the proposed development agreement to those City departments and other agencies having jurisdiction over the development project to be undertaken pursuant to the development agreement for review and comment by such City departments and agencies. The City Attorney shall also review the proposed development agreement for legal form and sufficiency and shall approve and/or prepare a proposed ordinance authorizing the City to enter into the development agreement for action by the City Council upon hearing thereof as specified by this chapter. The staff report and recommendation of the Planning Director shall include any appropriate recommendations received, and the proposed form of ordinance prepared and/or approved by the City Attorney.

(c) Upon the completion of such review, the Planning Director shall set the matter for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-10).

17.10.110 Contents of development agreement.
(a) A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the property thereunder, the density and/or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings and improvements, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. A development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the property for the uses and to the density or intensity, height, and size of development set forth in the development agreement and phasing if and to the extent the development agreement so provides. Without limitation as to types of conditions, terms, and restrictions, the development agreement may provide for the phasing of construction of development projects and any improvements with respect thereto, and the development agreement may also provide that the construction shall be commenced and completed within specified times and that the development project, public improvements, or any phase thereof be commenced and completed within specified times.

(b) A development agreement shall include all conditions imposed by the City, and may also include conditions imposed by other agencies, and all obligations agreed to by the City and other parties to the development agreement with respect to the development project thereunder including those conditions authorized by law and/or required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, or the National Environmental Protection Act, and the City’s regulations with respect thereto in order to eliminate or mitigate environmental and traffic impacts caused by or aggravated as a result of the development project proposed under the development agreement.

(c) A development agreement shall contain an indemnity and insurance clause in form and substance acceptable to the City Attorney, requiring the qualified applicant to protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City against claims arising out of the development process; provided, that such a provision does not violate applicable law or constitute a joint venture, partnership or other participation in the business affairs of qualified applicant by the City.

(d) A development agreement shall include appropriate provisions acceptable to the City Attorney providing security for the performance under the development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-11).

Article V. Hearing Before
Planning Commission

17.10.120 Public hearing.
On the date set for hearing or on the date or dates to which the hearing is continued, a development agreement shall be considered at a public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures described in Article VII of this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-12).

17.10.130 Review – Standard.
The Planning Commission may recommend adoption of a development agreement as a method of implementing or providing standards and criteria for any approval of the Planning Commission or permits or approvals issued or made by any other City agency, including but not limited to:

(a) Rezoning and/or conditions imposed upon approval of rezoning;

(b) Issuance of a conditional use permit;

(c) Conditions imposed upon approval of a permit after discretionary review;

(d) Conditions imposed in connection with the adoption of any general plan amendment or specific plan;

(e) Conditions imposed in any planned unit development district;

(f) Site-specific conditions imposed in any other district;

(g) Approval of and/or conditions imposed upon approval of a subdivision or parcel map or maps;

(h) The formation of any assessment district, benefit district, maintenance district or special benefit district or any other procedure, for the installation of required or necessary on-site or off-site improvements or infrastructure; and/or

(i) Mitigation measures imposed upon a development project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act or the National Environmental Protection Act. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-13).

17.10.140 Recommendation by Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall make a report and recommendation in writing to the City Council as follows:

(a) That the development agreement be adopted as proposed;

(b) That the development agreement be adopted with modifications, as proposed by the Planning Commission; or

(c) That the development agreement be denied.

Any action taken by the Planning Commission shall include written findings specifying the facts and information relied upon by the Commission in rendering its decision and recommendation.

The Planning Commission shall make such report of its findings and recommendations to the City Council within thirty-five (35) days after the completion of said hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to so report within said period shall be deemed to be a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission of the development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-14).

Article VI. Hearing Before City Council

17.10.150 Setting hearing date by City Council.
Upon the filing of such report and recommendations on a development agreement by the Planning Commission or upon the expiration of said thirty-five (35) days provided for in SCCC 17.10.140, the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting held at least three days thereafter on which the subject is agendized thereupon set the matter for public hearing before the City Council, and the City Clerk shall give required notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing in the same manner and in the same terms as provided in Article VII of this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-15).

17.10.160 Ordinance – Public hearing.
A development agreement is a legislative act and it shall be enacted or amended by ordinance only after a public hearing before the City Council. The ordinance shall be subject to referendum and refer to and incorporate by reference the text of the development agreement. The development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement and execution of the development agreement by all parties thereto.

Because a development agreement is also a contract which requires the consent of each party in order to become binding, the Council reserves the right to disapprove entering into any development agreement, regardless of the provisions hereof, and the ordinance shall be advisory only and shall not require the acceptance of any development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-16).

17.10.170 Conduct of hearing.
The City Council shall consider the proposed development agreement and the Planning Commission’s recommendation together with any additional public testimony at the public hearing on the date set for said hearing or on the date or dates to which such hearing may be continued from time to time by the City Council.

The City Council may refer the issue back to the Planning Commission for further hearings and recommendations whereupon said Planning Commission shall file its report on reconsideration of the referral from the City Council within thirty (30) days thereafter. The City Council may also act on all or any such issue without reference back to the Planning Commission. The decision of the City Council shall be rendered within forty-five (45) days after the hearing before the City Council or within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the final report from the Planning Commission, whichever is later, unless extended by mutual agreement of the qualified applicant and City Council. Failure of the City Council to act within the forty-five (45) days or extension shall be deemed a rejection of the development agreement. The City Council may:

(a) Approve the development agreement as recommended by the Planning Commission;

(b) Approve the development agreement with or without modifications; or

(c) Reject the development agreement, in whole or in part. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-17).

17.10.180 Consistency with general plan and specific plans.
Before the City Council may approve a development agreement with or without modifications, it must find that its provisions are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plans and relevant City policies and guidelines for development. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-18).

Article VII. Notice Provisions and Procedure for Public Hearings Before Planning Commission or City Council

17.10.190 Notice.
The Planning Director shall give notices of all required public hearings held before the Planning Commission under this chapter. The City Clerk shall give notice of all required public hearings held before the City Council under this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-19).

17.10.200 Form and time of notice.
(a) The notice shall contain:

(1) The date, time, and place of the hearing;

(2) The identity of the hearing body;

(3) A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing;

(4) The location or locations where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be viewed or had;

(5) Other information required by specific provisions of this chapter or which the Planning Director considers necessary or desirable.

(b) The time and manner of giving notice is by:

(1) Publication at least ten days prior to the hearing at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or if there is none, posting at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places in the City.

(2) Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner’s duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant.

(3) Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected.

(4) Mailing of the notice at least ten days prior to the hearing to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection (b)(4) or subsection (b)(2) is greater than one thousand (1,000), the Planning Director, or City Clerk, as applicable, may, in lieu of mailed or written notice, provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.

(c) The Planning Commission or City Council, as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by State law, but failure to comply with any excess notice procedure shall not invalidate a development agreement entered into by the City under this chapter. Pursuant to the excess notice requirements of this subsection (c), it is recommended that notice of each public hearing called under this chapter should be mailed to the chair of the citizens advisory committee at least ten days prior to the hearing.

(d) The notice requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are declaratory of existing law (Government Code Sections 65867, 65090, and 65091). If and when State law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-20).

17.10.210 Coordination of development agreement application with other discretionary approvals.
It is the intent of these regulations that the application for a development agreement will be made and considered simultaneously with the review of other necessary applications, including, but not limited to rezoning, planned commercial, residential or industrial development and conditional use permits. If combined with an application for rezoning, planned development or conditional use permit, the application for a development agreement shall be submitted with said application and shall be processed, to the maximum extent possible, jointly to avoid duplication of hearings and repetition of information. A development agreement is not a substitute for, nor an alternative to, any other required permit or approval, and the qualified applicant or developer must comply with all other required procedures for development approval. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-21).

Article VIII. Review – Certificate of Compliance, Termination or Modification

17.10.220 Time for and initiation of review.
(a) Regular Periodic Review. The City shall review the performance of the developer under a development agreement periodically on a regular basis as determined in the development agreement or by this subsection at least once every twelve (12) months for the term of the development agreement. Ninety (90) days prior to the “established date or dates for regular periodic review” which shall be the anniversary of the effective date of the development agreement, or such other substitute date or dates, mutually agreed to by the qualified applicant or developer and City in writing for such regular periodic reviews, the developer shall submit to the Planning Director evidence of the good faith compliance with the development agreement. If the Planning Director determines that such evidence is insufficient for the Planning Director’s regular periodic review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence, then prior to seventy-five (75) days of the established date or dates for regular periodic review the Planning Director shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer’s failure to submit any evidence or specifying the additional information reasonably required by the Planning Director in order to review the developer’s good faith compliance with the development agreement. The developer shall have thirty (30) days after mailing or delivery of such written notice by the Planning Director in which to respond to the Planning Director. If the developer fails to provide such information to the Planning Director within the thirty (30) day period, the Planning Director shall not find that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement.

(b) Special Review.

(1) Initiation of Review. Reviews which are other than the regular periodic reviews provided for in subsection (a) of this section are defined as special reviews and may be had either by agreement between the developer and City or by initiation of the City by the affirmative vote of the City Council, but in any event shall not be held more frequently than three times a year.

(2) Notice of Special Review. The Planning Director shall begin the special review proceeding by mailing or delivering written notice to the developer that the City intends to undertake a special review for the good faith compliance of developer with the development agreement. He shall mail or deliver to the developer a thirty (30) day notice of intent to undertake such a special review within which thirty (30) days developer shall provide to the Planning Director evidence of good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the Planning Director determines that such evidence is insufficient for the Planning Director’s review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence within the thirty (30) day period, then within forty-five (45) days of giving the notice of intent to undertake a special review, the Planning Director shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer’s failure to submit any evidence or additional information reasonably required by the Planning Director in order to review the developer’s good faith compliance with the development agreement. As with the regular periodic review, the developer shall have thirty (30) days after mailing or delivering of such written notice by the Planning Director in which to respond to the Planning Director. If the developer fails to provide such information to the Planning Director within the thirty (30) day period, developer shall not be found by the Planning Director to have complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-22).

17.10.230 Finding of compliance.
With respect to either a regular periodic review or a special review, if the Planning Director finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement for the period reviewed, the Planning Director, upon request of developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance for such period reviewed, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of Santa Clara County. The issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Planning Director shall conclude the review for the applicable period for which the finding was made and such determination shall be final in the absence of fraud. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-23).

17.10.240 Failure to find good faith compliance.
If the Planning Director does not find, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement, he shall so notify the City Council and the developer. The Planning Director shall specify the reasons for the Planning Director’s determination, the information relied upon in making such decision and any findings made with respect thereto. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council on which the matter is agendized, or to which it is continued, the City Council shall take one of the following actions:

(a) Compliance. Determine on the basis of evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, in which event the Planning Director, upon request of the developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance in accordance with SCCC 17.10.230.

(b) Failure to Find Good Faith Compliance. If the City Council is unable to determine on the basis of the evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the City Council shall do one or more of the following:

(1) Additional Time. Upon receipt of sufficient justification to City Council, grant the developer additional time in which to establish good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement at a subsequent duly called Council meeting; or

(2) Hearing. Set a date for a public hearing on the issue of compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement and the possible conditioning and/or termination or modification of the development agreement in accordance with California Government Code Section 65865.1, which public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with SCCC 17.10.250. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-24).

17.10.250 Public hearing.
The City Council shall, within ninety (90) days of the City Council’s setting a date for a public hearing in SCCC 17.10.240(b)(2), conduct a public hearing at which the developer shall have the opportunity to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement on the basis of substantial evidence presented to the City Council. The burden of proof of this issue is upon the developer. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-25).

17.10.260 Findings upon public hearing.
The City Council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-26).

17.10.270 Procedure upon findings.
(a) Compliance. If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded and such determination is final in absence of fraud.

(b) Noncompliance. If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the City Council may allow the development agreement to be continued by imposition of new terms and conditions intended to remedy such noncompliance or to be otherwise modified, by the mutual consent of the developer and the City or the City Council may unilaterally terminate the development agreement or take other action authorized by Government Code Section 65865.1. The City Council may impose such terms and conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the City. The decision of the City Council shall be final. The rights of the parties after termination shall be as set forth in SCCC 17.10.370.

(c) Ordinance. Any termination, modification or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on and/or the lack thereof, and the reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, make the termination or modifications or imposition of new terms and conditions of the development agreement necessary. The enactment of such an ordinance by the City Council shall be final and conclusive as to its effect on the subject development agreement. Not later than ten days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall be terminated, or the amendments to the development agreement shall become effective, on the effective date of the ordinance or as otherwise provided in such ordinance. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-27).

17.10.280 Certificate of compliance.
If the City Council finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the Planning Director upon request of the developer shall issue a certificate of compliance, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of the County of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-28).

Article IX. Amendment or Cancellation of Agreement by Mutual Consent

17.10.290 Initiation of amendment or cancellation.
A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Any such person may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-29).

17.10.300 Procedure.
The procedure for amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of a development agreement by mutual consent shall be as follows:

(a) Upon receipt by Planning Director of a proposal for an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, a public hearing thereon shall be set and conducted before the City Council within ninety (90) days of receipt of the proposal;

(b) As to prescribed notice of public hearing, where the City introduces the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least ten days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by SCCC 17.10.200 (b)(4);

(c) Any amendment, cancellation or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on, and reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, make the amendments or cancellation of the development agreement necessary. Not later than ten days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall become effective on the effective date of such ordinance unless otherwise indicated therein.

(d) Although approved by the City Council, an amendment to or cancellation of a development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the amendment or cancellation of the development agreement and the execution of such amendment or a written consent to such cancellation by all parties to the development agreement or by their successors in interest. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-30).

Article X. Miscellaneous Provisions

17.10.310 Failure to receive notice.
The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or this chapter to receive such notice shall not affect the authority of the City to enter into nor invalidate a development agreement entered into by the City or other action taken under this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-31).

17.10.320 Rules governing conduct of hearing.
All the public hearings under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and the time limits specified for the conduct of such hearings in this chapter. A copy of any relevant proposed or existing development agreement shall be made available for public review at the City Clerk’s office prior to the date of each hearing thereon. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-32).

17.10.330 Irregularity in proceeding.
Formal rules of evidence or procedure which must be followed in a court of law shall not be applied in the consideration of a proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination under this chapter and the provisions of this chapter shall provide the procedure for such consideration. The qualified applicant or developer has the burden of presenting substantial evidence at each of the public hearings on the proposal and shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in support of the qualified applicant’s or developer’s position. No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court on the ground of the improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court finds that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury resulted if error is shown. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-33).

17.10.340 Subsequently adopted State and Federal laws.
All development agreements shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the laws of the State of California, the Constitution of the United States and any codes, statutes or executive mandates and any court decisions, State or Federal, thereunder. In the event that any such law, code, statute, or decision made or enacted after a development agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement then such provisions of the development agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such law, code, statute, mandate or decision, and every such development agreement shall so provide. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-34).

17.10.350 Architectural review.
Unless otherwise provided in a development agreement, the implementation and execution of all phases of a development agreement shall be subject to architectural reviews pursuant to the applicable provisions of SCCC Title 18. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-35).

17.10.360 Governing rules, regulations, development policies and effect of development agreement.
When approved, the development agreement and any development control maps and all notations, references and regulations which are a part of the development agreement shall be incorporated by reference into and be a part of SCCC Title 18. Development control maps include, but are not limited to, regulations intended to carry out any plan respecting location or type of activities; height, bulk, siting or design of buildings or improvements; location or design of open areas; and landscaping and other comparable regulations. In the case of any conflict with any other provisions of SCCC Title 18, such development agreement provisions shall take precedence. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, or imposed for reasons of health or safety during the term of the development agreement, rules, regulations and official policies of the City governing permitted uses of the land, governing density and governing design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property or to the City in general, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property at the time of execution of the development agreement, nor shall a development agreement prevent the City from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. Each development agreement shall provide, and it is provided in this section, that this section and the provisions thereof do not apply to taxes, imposts, assessments, fees, charges or other exactions imposed by or payable to City unless specifically and to the extent otherwise expressly agreed to by City in the development agreement, and that all of such shall be in amounts fixed at the time they are payable. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-36).

17.10.370 Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination.
In the event that a development agreement is canceled, or otherwise terminated, unless otherwise agreed in writing by City, all rights of the developer, property owner or successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate and any and all benefits, including money or land, received by the City shall be retained by the City. Notwithstanding the above provision, any termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the developer from completing a building or other improvements authorized to be constructed pursuant to a valid operative building permit previously approved by the City and under construction at the time of termination, but the City may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring during and after construction, and neither the developer nor any tenant shall occupy any portion of the project or any building not authorized by an occupancy permit. As used herein, “construction” shall mean work on site under a valid building permit and “completing” shall mean completion of construction for beneficial occupancy for developer’s use, or if a portion of the project is intended for use by a lessee or tenant, then for such portion “completion” shall mean completion of construction except for interior improvements such as partitions, duct and electrical run outs, floor coverings, wall coverings, lighting, furniture, trade fixtures, finished ceilings, and other improvements typically constructed by or for tenants of similar buildings. All such uses shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of SCCC Title 18. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-37).

17.10.380 Construction.
This chapter and any subsequent development agreement shall be read together. With respect to any development agreement enacted under this chapter, any provision of such a development agreement which is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-38).

17.10.390 Recordation of development agreement, ordinances and notices.
(a) Within ten days following complete execution of a development agreement and following effective date of enacting ordinance, the City Clerk shall record with the County Recorder, a fully executed copy of the development agreement and ordinance approving development agreement, which shall describe the land subject thereto. The development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the development agreement shall inure to the parties and all successors in interest to the parties to the development agreement.

(b) If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868 or this chapter, or if the City Council terminates or modifies the development agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 or this chapter for failure of the developer to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder of Santa Clara County. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-39).

17.10.400 Enforcement of development agreements.
Except as provided hereinbelow, a development agreement shall be enforceable by any party thereto notwithstanding any change in any applicable general or specific plan, zoning, subdivision, or building regulation adopted by the City which alters or amends the rules, regulations, or policies specified in SCCC 17.10.360 or in the development agreement itself.

An exception to the certainty intended by execution of a development agreement [as expressed in SCCC 17.10.020] shall be when a change to the development agreement is imposed or required not by City initiated action, but rather by City response to (i) federal or state court or administrative agency determination or (ii) federal or state legislative or administrative agency regulation requirement. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-40).

17.10.410 Severability clause.
Should any provision of this chapter or of a subsequent development agreement be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be either invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this chapter and development agreement shall remain in full force and effect unimpaired by the holding, except as may otherwise be provided in a development agreement. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted and enacted this chapter and each provision thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the provisions, or the applications thereof to any person or place, be declared invalid or unconstitutional. For the purpose of this section, a “provision” is a section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any thereof. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-41).

17.10.420 Judicial review – Time limitation.
(a) Any judicial review of the initial approval by the City of a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1085 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and judicial review of any City action taken pursuant to this chapter, other than the initial approval of a development agreement, shall be writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(b) Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the City taken pursuant to this chapter shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of the decision. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-42).

17.10.430 Condemnation.
All and every part of the development agreements are subject to condemnation proceedings and entering into such agreements are not intended to restrict the exercise of eminent domain. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 7-5-88. Formerly § 8B-43).

Chapter 17.15
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENTS*
Sections:

17.15.010    Definitions.

17.15.020    Tables.

17.15.030    Authority.

17.15.040    Purpose of chapter.

17.15.050    Agreements and design standards.

17.15.060    Acceptance date.

17.15.070    Engineering fees.

17.15.080    Public works extension costs.

17.15.090    Special conditions.

17.15.100    Off-set credits.

17.15.110    On-site dedications, easements, and rights-of-way.

17.15.120    Off-site easements and rights-of-way.

17.15.130    Street improvements.

17.15.140    Perimeter streets.

17.15.150    Frontage roads.

17.15.160    County roads and State highways.

17.15.170    Fencing.

17.15.180    Bridges.

17.15.190    Deferred construction.

17.15.200    Temporary improvements.

17.15.210    Municipal utilities.

17.15.220    Sanitary sewer and storm drains.

17.15.230    Residual parcels.

17.15.240    Deferred charges.

17.15.250    Deferred credits.

17.15.260    Charges for existing improvements.

17.15.270    Cost clearance certification.

17.15.280    Service connection charges.

17.15.290    Water meters.

17.15.300    Amendments to chapter and change of policies.

17.15.310    Standards deemed minimum requirements.

17.15.320    Variances.

17.15.330    Traffic impact fees.

17.15.340    Exception for certain attached accessory dwelling units.

Appendix    A    Tables I through V.

17.15.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in the following subsections, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

(a) “A” definitions:

(1) Assigned sewer capacity (Assigned capacity). “Assigned sewer capacity” means the daily average volume of wastewater in gallons per day (GPD) that may be discharged by a nonresidential user based on the square footage of structures located on the parcel and the specific use of the parcel.

(2) Additional purchased capacity. “Additional purchased capacity” means an amount of sewer capacity in gallons per day added to the assigned sewer capacity for a parcel.

(3) Additional purchased capacity fee. “Additional purchased capacity fee” means the additional purchased capacity multiplied by the sanitary sewer connection charge.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) Bond. “Bond” means any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond or an instrument of credit, in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) Capacity rental fee. “Capacity rental fee” means a monthly fee equal to the excess use multiplied by the sanitary sewer connection charge multiplied by 0.0025 (which is an annual interest rate of three percent times one-twelfth (1/12th) for the monthly excess use fee).

(2) Contingent charge. “Contingent charge” means evidence of the future liability of any property to bear its share of the cost for utilities and public service facilities before acquiring any right to utilize such facilities.

(3) Corner lot reduction. “Corner lot reduction” means a reduction in front footage given to a parcel of land fronting on the intersection of two streets for which frontage fees are levied; this reduction shall be one-half of the total street frontage, not to exceed one hundred (100) feet.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) Developed land. “Developed land” means land on which is constructed all frontage improvements and on-site facilities and for which all on-site and off-site facilities were previously paid.

(2) Developer. “Developer” means any person who causes land to be divided into two or more parcels for himself or others, or is engaged in the development of property, in whole or in part, by the placing of any improvements thereon, whether the property was previously developed in whole, in part, or at all.

(3) Development site. “Development site” means the entire area considered for development, including public streets and rights-of-way within or on the perimeter of the development.

(e) “E” definitions:

(1) Excess use fee. “Excess use fee” means the sum of the incremental purchased capacity fee and the capacity rental fee.

(2) Excess use. “Excess use” means the daily average wastewater discharge volume for a nonresidential sewer user, or multiple users, on a parcel that exceeds the assigned capacity and any and all additional purchased capacity for that parcel in any given billing period.

(f) Reserved for future use.

(g) Reserved for future use.

(h) Reserved for future use.

(i) “I” definitions:

(1) Incremental purchased capacity. “Incremental purchased capacity” means one-one hundred twentieth (1/120th) of the excess use for the month.

(2) Incremental purchased capacity fee. “Incremental purchased capacity fee” means incremental purchased capacity multiplied by the sanitary sewer connection charge.

(3) Institution. “Institution” means a governmental or nonprofit organization of a public character performing functions of schools or churches to the extent that such are not engaged in residential, commercial, or industrial activities.

(4) Intervening property. “Intervening property” means property located between the existing City utilities and public service facilities and the property under development.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) Labor cost. “Labor cost” means the cost for labor performed by the City, and shall include direct (wages and equipment) and indirect (overhead) costs.

(m) “M” definitions:

(1) Material cost. “Material cost” means the cost for material furnished by the City, and shall include direct material cost plus overhead.

(2) Milling area. “Milling area” means an area where people tend to congregate upon entering or leaving the premises.

(n) “N” definitions:

(1) Net acre. “Net acre,” as used herein for the calculation of fees and charges, means that area of the development site which remains after the dedication of land for street, flood control, and other public purposes.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) Off-site facility. “Off-site facility” means any facility installed outside of a development site and an on-site facility.

(2) On-site facility. “On-site facility” means any facility installed in, over, under, or upon the public streets or rights-of-way within or on the perimeter of development site.

(3) Oversize facility. “Oversize facility” means a facility with added capacity designed to serve off-site properties.

(p) Reserved for future use.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) Reserved for future use.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) Sewer lateral. “Sewer lateral” (same as “Sewer service lateral”) means the sewer connection piping used to convey sewage from a building or facility on a parcel (private or public property) to the City-owned sewer main. Each sewer lateral is owned by the entity that owns the property or facility from which that sewer lateral serves to convey sewage.

(2) Sewer main. “Sewer main” means City-owned pipes that are part of the City’s sewer collection system, located in the City right-of-way or easement used to convey sewage to the sewage treatment plant.

(t) Reserved for future use.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) Reserved for future use.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) “Z” Definitions.

(1) Zoning Ordinance. “Zoning Ordinance” means “the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara,” or successor ordinance as it is amended from time to time. (Ord. 1778 § 2, 12-3-02; Ord. 1802 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1881 § 1, 5-10-11).

17.15.020 Tables.
Pursuant to SCCC 17.15.300, Amendments to chapter and change of policies, the tables referred to herein will be as established and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Said resolution(s) pertaining to the respective tables shall be maintained and made available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. For convenience of reference, copies of the respective tables appear at the end of this chapter. After adoption of said resolution(s), and amendments thereto, said tables are deemed incorporated by reference into this chapter. (Ord. 1581 § 1, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-1.17).

17.15.030 Authority.
This chapter is enacted in pursuance of Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State, and Section 400 of Article IV of the Charter of the City, approved by the State Legislature on April 25, 1951, as Chapter 83, Statutes of 1951, page 4401. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-2).

17.15.040 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to officially define certain policies, requirements, and procedures for the development of property in the City, in order to:

(a) Establish minimum standards for the improvement of streets and easements of the City as a condition precedent to acceptance of dedications thereof.

(b) Cause the installation of utilities and public service facilities necessary to properly serve the property developed.

(c) Provide for the current financing of such facilities on a “pay-as-you-go” basis.

(d) Provide for the collection of charges for the use of certain facilities from property owners benefited by such installations.

(e) Spread the cost of required public improvements upon the property benefited in the manner contemplated by law.

(f) Prevent the dissipation or improper use of City’s general operating and maintenance funds in providing these improvements or in maintaining faulty installations.

(g) Protect the living standards, public safety, and common welfare of the general public.

(h) To facilitate the implementation of the intent expressed in the City’s comprehensive zoning plan in the Zoning Ordinance to minimize congestion on the public streets and highways.

(i) To effectuate the intent of the City in adopting official plan lines as they are established and as they are modified from time to time pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.

(j) To facilitate and insure for the public benefit the acquisition of minimum street widths as they are established and as they are modified from time to time pursuant to this chapter.

(k) To require the dedication and installation of improvements necessary to accomplish the purpose of the comprehensive zoning plan entitled “the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara” and to accomplish the purposes hereinabove set forth, in accordance with the law.

(l) To facilitate the promotion of efficient urban design arrangement and secure economy in governmental expenditures provided in “the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara.” (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-3).

17.15.050 Agreements and design standards.
In consideration for the acceptance by the City of required utilities and public service facilities, for providing the necessary connecting system, general plant and appurtenances and for contributing labor and material, as provided for in this chapter or any resolution passed and adopted pursuant thereto, developers shall be required to enter into an agreement covering the cost, type, quality, standard, and character of installing same in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. For the purpose of design, the estimated useful life of the prescribed utilities and public service facilities shall be at least as set forth in Table I. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1581 § 2, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-4).

17.15.060 Acceptance date.
All utilities and public service facilities which may be the subject of the agreement specified in SCCC 17.15.040 will be accepted for maintenance and operation by the City not later than thirty (30) days after certification of completion by the City Manager, providing that all conditions of such agreements are fulfilled. The repair and correction of any defects or deficiencies due to workmanship or materials which are discovered within one year from date of acceptance by the City shall be the responsibility of the developer. A bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or ten percent of the cost of the improvement, whichever is less, shall be deposited with the City for the purpose of guaranteeing that such repairs and corrections will be made upon notification to the developer of such deficiencies. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-5).

17.15.070 Engineering fees.
Developers of all properties shall be required to pay a minimum engineering fee, which includes all charges except overtime, for engineering and inspection services rendered by the City. The engineering fee shall be computed at the rate of four and one-half percent of the total cost of all public works facilities and improvements, except water and electrical utilities installed by the developer, or the amount provided for in subsection (i) in Table II, whichever is greater. In addition, the developer shall pay all payroll costs for engineering and inspection services requested by the developer outside of the regular City work hours. Such fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1581 § 3, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-6).

17.15.080 Public works extension costs.
Developers shall be required to furnish bonds to secure the installation of and/or pay for extending the prescribed utilities and public works improvements and facilities according to Table II. The bonds and/or payment required herein shall be furnished to the City at such time as the parcel map or tract map is accepted or at such other time as determined by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1581 § 4, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-7).

17.15.090 Special conditions.
Whenever extraordinary conditions or circumstances are encountered in the development of property which are not provided for by the terms of this chapter, the cost proration of the same, if any, shall be stipulated and included with other commitments in the development agreement entered into between the City and the developer. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-8).

17.15.100 Off-set credits.
Wherever it can be shown by developer that any land has previously borne or contributed to the cost of any existing facilities required by this chapter, a credit will be allowed by the City as an off-set to the charges made therefor. Developed lands and individual parcels which at one time had been developed shall be considered developed for off-set credit purposes, and shall be given credit in accordance with the land use of the particular land at the time of its original development against the charge established pursuant hereto for the present proposed use. When conformance with the requirements of this chapter requires the removal and reconstruction of existing curb or sidewalk, the developer shall receive credit for these existing improvements at the rate of charges for existing improvements listed in SCCC 17.15.260. This credit shall be paid to developer upon completion and acceptance of the improvements required. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78. Formerly § 21A-9).

17.15.110 On-site dedications, easements, and rights-of-way.
(a) The developer shall grant to the City, without cost, all easements and/or rights-of-way (excluding easements and rights-of-way for street purposes that are provided for in subsection (b) of this section) necessary (1) for serving the property of the developer and (2) for the installation of utilities, flood-control improvements, and public service facilities.

(b) The developer shall also grant to the City, without cost, all easements and/or rights-of-way for street purposes necessary for serving the property of the developer and to install required street improvements in accordance with actions listed in Table III.

(c) Off-set credits shall be allowed the developer for existing street improvements previously paid to the City in accordance with the provisions of SCCC 17.15.100 and 17.15.260. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78; Ord. 1408 § 1, 9-30-80; Ord. 1486 § 1, 12-6-83; Ord. 1581 § 5, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-10).

17.15.120 Off-site easements and rights-of-way.
Where purchase of an easement or right-of-way is necessary to extend City facilities to the developer’s property, the developer shall advance all of the cost of its acquisition; provided, however, City may advance one-half of the cost of acquiring the easement or right-of-way if City deems the acquisition of same is sufficiently beneficial to the permanent City system. The costs advanced by the developer shall be reimbursable in accordance with SCCC 17.15.240 and 17.15.250, unless otherwise provided for in the property development agreement. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-11).

17.15.130 Street improvements.
(a) Except for frontage roads, which shall have a minimum width of thirty-six (36) feet between curb faces, the minimum street width between curb faces shall be forty (40) feet for residential areas, sixty-four (64) feet for commercial areas and forty-eight (48) feet for industrial areas. Where the City street system plan calls for a wider roadway, the City shall bear the cost of paving any extra width required.

All streets shall be equipped with paving, curbing, sidewalks, lighting fixtures, street name signs, and street trees, as required in Table II, and standard street barricades, with exceptions as indicated in this chapter. Such facilities shall be installed in accordance with specifications and standards of design of the City specifications, as are most recently adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Three copies of such specifications are to be kept on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk.

(b) The developer shall clean and maintain all streets, alleys, roads, courts, sewers, and drains free from construction debris and dirt prior to acceptance by the City and at such other times during construction as the Director of Public Works or City Engineer deems necessary to prevent creating a public nuisance. In event developer fails to clean and maintain said improvements within forty-eight (48) hours after notification by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, the City may proceed to have the improvements cleaned and maintained and the developer shall pay all costs incurred by City prior to acceptance of improvements.

(c) The developer is required to furnish street trees in residential areas. The cost for each street tree is set forth in subsection (g) of Table II. This obligation is met by the developer paying to the City for each street tree required and planted by the City in residential areas, unless otherwise provided for in the property development agreement. A minimum of one tree shall be required for each fifty (50) feet of frontage.

(d) The developer shall provide traffic control improvements such as additional lanes, traffic islands and medians, traffic signals (new, modified or relocated), and intersectional safety lighting necessitated by a proposed development. The cost for such traffic control improvements shall include, but is not limited to, plans, specifications, equipment, material, labor and City inspection costs. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 2, 2-7-78; Ord. 1456 § 1A, 8-31-82; Ord. 1480 § 1, 9-27-83; Ord. 1542 § 1, 5-27-86; Ord. 1581 § 6, 3-1-88; Ord. 1773 § 2, 8-20-02. Formerly § 21A-12).

17.15.140 Perimeter streets.
The developer shall dedicate and improve, at his/her expense, all perimeter streets to at least one-half width. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-13).

17.15.150 Frontage roads.
Frontage roads shall be dedicated and improved by the developer, at his/her expense, to the full width. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-14).

17.15.160 County roads and State highways.
The developer shall install all street improvements on any abutting County roads and State highways in like manner and on the same basis as major City streets; provided, that in the case of non-access roads and highways, the developer shall provide curb, gutter and sidewalk where required by the City. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-15).

17.15.170 Fencing.
Each developer shall be required to furnish and install all fences along lot lines of houses, with any development site, backing up to an existing or future:

(a) Major City street, expressway, parkway, thoroughfare, or railroad right-of-way.

(b) Commercial area, or development site entrance way.

(c) Proposed or existing ditch or natural channel.

(d) Hazard creating a public nuisance. Such fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the City, and shall be privately maintained. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78. Formerly § 21A-16).

17.15.180 Bridges.
Bridges of primary benefit to the developer, as determined by the City Council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the developer without reimbursement from the City. The sharing of expense between the City and the developer for the construction of bridges which are not of primary benefit to the developer, as determined by the City Council, shall be by special agreement between the City and the developer. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-17).

17.15.190 Deferred construction.
Whenever it is deemed necessary by the City to defer the construction of any improvement required by this chapter because of incompatible grades, future planning, or for other reasons, the developer shall satisfy his/her responsibility therefor by one of the following methods as selected by City:

(a) Pay to City his/her share of all costs of improvements involved. Said costs shall be nonrefundable.

(b) Execute a covenant running with land and lien to guarantee payment for completing improvements (deferred by covenant) at the time City requires the installation of said facilities. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78. Formerly § 21A-18).

17.15.200 Temporary improvements.
The developer shall pay all costs for all temporary improvements and shall maintain the same, except as may be provided under SCCC 17.15.090. Prior to the construction of any temporary facility, the developer shall file with the City a suitable bond, which bond shall insure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and removed. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-19).

17.15.210 Municipal utilities.
(a) On-site water facilities shall be furnished and installed by the City, and the developer shall pay to the City the charges established in SCCC 17.15.260, 17.15.280 and 17.15.290 which charges are generally based upon the on-site costs of supplies and material.

(b) The fees for installation of electric facilities in the respective development categories (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, mobile home park, etc.) shall be as provided for in Table II.

On-site electric facilities including power distribution, signal, and communications systems in all developments shall be furnished and installed as detailed in subsection (b)(1) and (2) of this section, except as otherwise provided for in appropriate City Council-approved rate schedules which the applicant for electric service may wish to choose:

(1) Overhead Facilities. All overhead facilities, including services and meters, shall be furnished and installed by the City.

(2) Underground Facilities.

(A) Developer. The developer shall provide the City, in accordance with then current City standards and specifications, all trenching, backfill, resurfacing, landscaping, conduit, junction boxes, vaults, street light foundations, equipment pads and subsurface housings required for power distribution, street lighting, and signal communications systems, as required by the City in the development of frontage and on-site property. Upon completion of improvements satisfactory to the City, the City shall accept the work. Developer shall further install at his/her cost the service facilities, consisting of service wires, cables, conductors, and associated equipment necessary to connect a customer to the electrical supply system of and by the City.

(B) City. After completion of the facilities installed by developer, the City shall furnish and install all cable, switches, street lighting poles, luminaires, transformers, meters, and other equipment that it deems necessary for the betterment of the system.

(c) The City will construct the necessary off-site facilities to deliver electric power and water facilities to the development site unless special conditions exist, in which case, they will be provided on a cost proration basis stipulated in the development agreement as provided for in SCCC 17.15.090 and/or on a deferred credit basis as provided for in SCCC 17.15.250.

(d) Street lighting poles and luminaires (“street lights”) served from overhead and underground electric power facilities shall be furnished and installed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. For street lights served from overhead systems, new or existing, developer shall pay the City as provided for in subsection (h) of Table II.

For new street lights to be served by means of an underground system, where the development totals ten acres or under, developer shall pay the amount provided for in subsection (h) of Table II per front foot of street frontage; where the development is in excess of ten net acres, developer shall pay the amount provided for in subsection (h) of Table II per net acre. For existing street lights served underground, developer shall pay the amount provided for in subsection (h) of Table II per front foot of street frontage.

(e) The character of electric and water service to all classes of property shall conform to the requirements of the rules and regulations for electric and water service, respectively, except as modified from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Three copies of such rules and regulations for electric and water service are on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk and are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, the same as if fully set forth in this chapter. They are subject to modification from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(f) The developer shall pay to the City the charges shown in Table II-A. (See also Table II, item (h), which is generally based upon the on-site costs of supplies and materials furnished and installed by the City). (Ord. 1542 §§ 2, 3, 5-27-86; Ord. 1581 § 7, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-20).

17.15.220 Sanitary sewer and storm drains.
(a) On-Site Sanitary and Storm Drains. On-site sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be installed by the developer and shall in no event be less than the minimum sizes shown in Table II, unless a lesser size is authorized as hereinafter provided. Whenever engineering studies and investigations of the City indicate that the minimum sizes shown in Table II are larger than required to serve the development and area, the Director of Public Works/City Engineer shall have the power to waive such minimum sizes and approve sizes compatible with aforementioned engineering studies and investigations.

The developer shall, at his/her sole expense, install all public facilities including any oversizing as required by the City. The developer shall be reimbursed by the City in accordance with unit prices established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, which reimbursement shall be set forth in the development agreement, if any, entered into between the developer and the City. There shall be no reimbursement for laterals.

(b) Storm Drainage Outlet Charge. The developer shall pay the City a storm drainage outlet charge. The revenue from the drainage fee shall be used for the purpose of defraying the estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for removal of surface and storm waters from the herein referenced local drainage areas. The base charge for all classes of property shall be as set forth in subsection (o) of Table II.

(1) Reference is hereby made to the drainage plan adopted for the City of Santa Clara, which contains an estimate of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) as the total cost of constructing the local drainage facilities required by the plan, and a map of the drainage area, showing boundaries and the location of major planned drainage facilities, which is on file in the office of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer. The drainage fee which the developer shall pay is based on this drainage plan, using the estimates compiled at current prices.

(2) The drainage plan has been determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and Flood Control District of Santa Clara County to be in conformity with the County-wide general drainage plan of said County.

(3) The City Council finds that development of property within the planned local drainage area will require construction of the facilities described in the drainage plan, and that the fees are fairly apportioned within the local drainage area on the basis of the benefits conferred on property available for development and on the need for local drainage facilities created by the proposed development of other property within the local drainage area. The estimated costs are based upon these findings.

(4) The fee as to any property proposed for development within the local drainage area does not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total estimated costs of all facilities within the local drainage area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis paid.

(5) The drainage facilities planned are in addition to existing local drainage facilities serving the area at the time of the adoption of the drainage plan for the area.

(6) The drainage fees required by this section shall be paid into a “planned local drainage facilities fund.” Moneys in this fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of local drainage facilities within the planned local drainage area, from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering and administrative services to form the district and design and construct the facilities.

(c) Sanitary Sewer Outlet Charge. The developer shall pay the City a sanitary sewer outlet charge. The revenue from the sanitary sewer outlet charge shall be used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, replacement and debt retirement of off-site sewerage facilities. The City Council shall determine the amounts and rate schedules for the sewer outlet charge authorized hereunder.

(d) Institutional “In Lieu” Sanitary and Storm Outlet Charge. In lieu of the foregoing storm and sanitary sewer outlet charges, provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, at the sole option of the City, developers of institutional property may pay a flat fee of the lesser amounts shown in subsections (m) and (o) of Table II (Institutional fee schedule) per net acre for each item. Said payments shall be treated as the equivalent of the storm drain and sanitary sewer outlet charges, but the developer shall install the required facilities without receiving on-site credits therefor and reimburse the City by payment of the charges set forth in SCCC 17.15.260 for any existing sanitary sewer and storm drain facilities.

(e) Sanitary Sewer Connection Charge (Sewage Treatment Plant Expansion Connection Charge). In addition to the above charges, there shall be a sanitary sewer connection charge whenever property is either (1) initially connected to the sewer system or (2) requires a new connection to the sanitary sewer system or (3) involves a change in land use or development on the real property that results in an increase of sewage to the City sewer system. The purpose of this connection charge is to finance capital and debt retirement costs associated with the sewage treatment facilities which are allocated to unused or future capacity. The charges shall be in accordance with Paragraph A of Table V.

(f) Alternative Method of Collecting a Flow Component of the Sanitary Sewer Outlet Charge (for Sewer Conveyance) and the Sanitary Sewer Connection Charge (Sewage Treatment Plant Expansion Connection Charge).

(1) Applicability.

(A) The Director of Water and Sewer Utilities may periodically review water usage and/or wastewater discharge volume as recorded by the Finance Department for nonresidential or industrial customers. Based on such review, if the actual daily average wastewater discharge volume exceeds the assigned sewer capacity, the payment of an excess use fee will be required.

(B) Only nonresidential sewer users with water use greater than a monthly average of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day or, by approval of the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities, those sewer users that submit a written request to use this method, will be subject to additional purchased capacity fee, capacity rental fee and/or incremental purchased capacity fee.

(2) Assigned Sewer Capacity (Assigned Capacity).

(A) The amount of assigned capacity shall be either the sewer capacity that is recorded by the City of Santa Clara Engineering Department for sewer capacity purchased since 1983, or shall be calculated based on the building square footage of record that exists on a single parcel of land represented by an assessors parcel number (APN) on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. The square footage of record multiplied by the City’s estimated discharge factor for the use shall yield a calculated assigned capacity.

(B) Assigned capacity will reside with the parcel and is not transferable other than by conveyance to a new owner through the sale or transfer of the parcel.

(C) In the event that the parcel owner disputes the calculated assigned capacity the parcel owner may appeal the assigned capacity to the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities by written notification to the City of Santa Clara no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after notification of determination of an assigned capacity. If the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities finds that the property owner’s appeal has merit based on data and information presented, the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities has authority to adjust the assigned capacity in accordance with the findings.

(D) In instances where multiple sewer uses or users exist on a single parcel (as represented by a single assessors parcel number), the assigned capacity for the parcel will be equal to the sum of the assigned capacities (either per City records or by calculation) for each use.

(3) Capacity Rental Fee. The capacity rental fee shall be calculated based on the amount of average daily wastewater discharge in excess of the assigned capacity for a property using the following formula: Capacity Rental Fee = (0.03/12) x (Average Discharge Volume - Assigned Capacity) x Capacity Fee.

(4) Additional Sewer Capacity Fee. Additional sewer capacity fee shall be calculated based on the amount of the average daily wastewater discharge in excess of the assigned capacity for a parcel using the following formula: Additional Sewer Capacity Fee = (Average Discharge Volume - Assigned Capacity) x (Capacity Fee).

(A) In lieu of purchasing the additional sewer capacity, an incremental sewer capacity fee (incremental fee) may be paid to allow for payment of the additional sewer capacity fee over ten years. The incremental fee shall be calculated at one-one hundred twentieth (1/120th) of the additional sewer capacity fee; or using the following formula: Incremental Sewer Capacity Fee = (Average Discharge Volume - Assigned Capacity) x (Capacity Fee/120).

(B) When an additional sewer capacity fee or an incremental fee is paid, the assigned sewer capacity for the parcel will be increased by an amount equal to the additional or incremental purchased capacity.

(C) A sewer user may at any time elect to pay all or part of an additional sewer capacity fee to obtain a desired assigned capacity. However, at a minimum, all who are covered by this section must pay the monthly incremental sewer capacity fee.

(D) Capacity rental fees, additional sewer capacity fees or incremental fees shall not be refunded if the discharge volume decreases to less than the assigned capacity. The assigned capacity for each APN shall remain on record with the City.

(5) Request for Waiver of Excess Use Fee. Upon application of the parcel owner or sewer user, the Director of Water and Sewer Utilities may waive all or part of a capacity rental fee and/or incremental sewer capacity fee if it is found that the excessive usage was the result of a temporary condition that has been eliminated or reduced. The property owner must submit a written request with adequate documentation for a waiver within thirty (30) days of notification that excess use fees have been incurred.

(g) Reimbursement for Off-Site Construction. The developer shall construct all off-site sanitary sewers and storm drains required to properly service his/her lands. The developer shall be reimbursed by the City in accordance with the standard unit prices established from time to time by resolution of the City Council if the construction complies with the plans and specifications and is accepted as a part of the permanent system approved by the City. Reimbursement shall be set forth in the development agreement, if any, and in accordance with SCCC 17.15.090, this section, and SCCC 17.15.250, as applicable. The design of all sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer. (Ord. 1778 § 3, 12-3-02; Ord. 1819 §§ 1, 2, 7-10-07; Ord. 1881 § 2, 5-10-11).

17.15.230 Residual parcels.
The developer shall, concurrently with the development of any lands, construct all required public works facilities and pay all fees and charges set forth in this chapter for any residual parcel created by the development of such lands. For the purposes of this section, a residual parcel is any parcel of land having street frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet along any street within or abutting such development, or comprising an area of less than 18,000 square feet. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-22).

17.15.240 Deferred charges.
Whenever any property or parcel of land not under development is directly benefited by the installation of any of the required facilities, utilities or public works improvements, the City may advance the costs of same and defer the collection of such charges until such time as said property is developed. Said charges shall be satisfied before any parcel map, tract map, building permit or service connection for such property is granted or accepted by the City. Engineering diagrams showing property benefited shall be furnished the building inspection and accounting divisions of the City, showing the amounts of such deferred charges. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-23).

17.15.250 Deferred credits.
If for any reason, the City is not in a position to advance the costs of the required rights-of-way, facilities, utilities or public works improvements for intervening properties or parcels of land, the developer shall advance such costs for which the City will enter a deferred credit upon its books and records in favor of the developer advancing such costs, to be repaid to the developer (less ten percent) for handling, clerical, billing and collection costs), payable upon collection by the City of the charges prescribed by SCCC 17.15.240. In the event that the City is unable to collect such funds within ten years after the date of advancement, the right of reimbursement of the funds not collected shall lapse at the end of such ten-year period. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-24).

17.15.260 Charges for existing improvements.
Whenever existing facilities, utilities or other public works improvements have been installed without cost to a property, the developer of such property must pay the City the schedule of charges provided for in Table IV when the development of such property occurs before any service connection is made to such property.

The unit charges shown in Table IV for sanitary sewers and storm drains are not necessarily sufficient, and the developer shall, in any case, pay the charges as calculated from Table IV, or the fee prescribed in SCCC 17.15.220, whichever is greater. In the case of corner lot development, the appropriate frontage charges will be reduced per formula defined in SCCC 17.15.010. Whenever it is necessary to install facilities upon or along an easement, the frontage charges to be paid shall be the same as though the easement was a street.

In addition to the above charges, the developer shall install all “on-site” trenching and backfilling, equipment pads and bases, vaults and splicing chambers, and conduits and ducts including encasements. The developer shall also install all “on-site” service facilities up to the utility connection points.

The standard underground street lighting facilities shall be furnished and installed by the City, and the developer shall pay to the City four dollars and twenty cents ($4.20) per front foot for the underground street lighting system.

Whenever the development of any property requires the installation of any of the above facilities, the same shall be installed, and may be installed by the City at the above unit charges, subject to the provisions of SCCC 17.15.090 and 17.15.240. The developer may install said facilities only after receipt of approval by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer of the plans and specifications for the same.

Whenever improvements serve only the property on one side of a street, highway or roadway, or whenever the property on both sides is required to be served by improvements to be duplicated along each side, then the developer of such property shall pay double the charge rate stated in Table IV for each of such improvements. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 3, 2-7-78; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456 § 1G, 8-31-82; Ord. 1485 § 1, 11-29-83; Ord. 1511 § 3, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542 § 7, 5-27-86; Ord. 1558 § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. 1581 § 9, 3-1-88; Ord. 1773 § 6, 8-20-02. Formerly § 21A-25).

17.15.270 Cost clearance certification.
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot, the frontage of which does not abut on a public street or thoroughfare which has been improved in accordance with the minimum standards for such improvements required by the City. No building permit shall be issued and no building erected on any lot unless said lot has satisfied its requirements for providing the right-of-way and/or easements and the improvements as required in this chapter.

Exception: Those projects which have received planned development zoning approval, or have been otherwise approved in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance, may be exempted from this section.

Before any building permit shall be issued or service connection made, a certificate shall be obtained from the City, showing that the liability such property has for all facilities or improvements has been satisfied. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-26).

17.15.280 Service connection charges.
(a) Water service connections to provide water service shall be installed by the City. A charge to cover the cost of service connections shall be paid by the developer in accordance with Paragraph B of Table V. These Table V charges shall be in addition to the frontage (subsection (k) of Table II) and meter charges set forth in Paragraph E of Table V. Such fees shall be due and payable upon demand by the City.

(b) Whenever fire service is necessary for a development, the developer shall pay a fee in accordance with Paragraph C of Table V.

(c) Sanitary sewer laterals shall be installed by the developer under permit from the City or by the City recognizing that in some instances the City shall deem it necessary to install sewer laterals with its forces. Whenever sewer laterals are installed by the City, the developer shall pay a fee in accordance with Paragraph D of Table V.

(d) Where the developer installs the sewer service lateral from the main to the property line, the City shall make the tap (connection) on the sewer main and inspect the entire lateral installation. The developer shall pay a fee, in addition to street opening permit costs, in accordance with Paragraph E of Table V.

(e) Storm drain laterals shall be installed by the developer under permit from the City. Connections of laterals to the City storm drain shall be made by the developer and shall be in conformance with existing policies stipulated in Engineering Department design criteria. The inspection fee shall be as provided for in subsection (i) of Table II. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-74; Ord. 1372 § 4, 2-7-78; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456 § 1H, 8-31-82; Ord. 1511 § 4, 10-30-84; Ord. 1511 § 5, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542 § 8, 5-27-86; Ord. 1581 § 10, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-27).

17.15.290 Water meters.
The developer shall pay the charges provided for in Paragraph E of Table V, as applicable, for the installation of water meters, prior to the installation thereof. (Ord. 1321 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1456 § 1J, 8-31-82; Ord. 1581 § 11, 3-1-88. Formerly § 21A-28).

17.15.300 Amendments to chapter and change of policies.
The City reserves the right to revise, amend and change any of the policies contained in this chapter as deemed necessary and equitable by the City Council. All existing City policies in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded. The City further reserves the right from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, to revise, amend and change any of the standards, costs, prices, fees, and charges prescribed or established by this chapter and establish pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75. Formerly § 21A-29).

17.15.310 Standards deemed minimum requirements.
The standards established by this chapter are minimum standards only, and the City Council reserves the right to require higher standards in the event that the City Manager of the City shall find that the minimum standards established by this chapter are not adequate, suitable, or proper because of traffic patterns, the location, soil structure or any other cause in the area in which the improvement of facility is located. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1435 § 1, 10-27-81. Formerly § 21A-30).

17.15.320 Variances.
It shall be unlawful to develop, redevelop or improve property with lower standards than those prescribed or established by this chapter, or lower than those established pursuant to this chapter. However, where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and effects inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, the City Council may grant a variance subject to the following findings:

(a) That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the particular developed land or development site.

(b) That the granting of a variance shall not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort or general welfare of the persons living on or in the neighborhood of the developed land or development site, and the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood.

In the event that the City Council makes the findings prescribed above and grants a variance, the approval of said variance shall be subject to such terms and conditions as imposed by the City Council, if any. (Ord. 1435 § 1, 10-27-81. Formerly § 21A-31).

17.15.330 Traffic impact fees.
(a) Intent and Purpose. The City Council of the City of Santa Clara does hereby find and declare:

(1) The City, pursuant to the home rule provisions of Article 11, Section 5, of the California Constitution, may make and enforce all ordinances and regulations with respect to municipal affairs.

(2) The City, pursuant to Article 11, Section 7, of the California Constitution, may make and enforce all local ordinances not in conflict with general laws.

(3) The purpose of this section is to implement, in part, the circulation element of the City of Santa Clara general plan, the five-year financial study, and the traffic mitigation program (revised May 1988), as each will be amended from time to time, and which establish objectives for future traffic impact measures in the City.

(4) Development within the city has placed and will continue to place severe demands on the existing City traffic circulation system (hereinafter “traffic system”). The City’s traffic mitigation program, as amended from time to time, describes the capital improvements the City deems necessary to alleviate existing traffic congestion, and it attempts to anticipate the traffic impacts generated by projected future development.

(5) The City intends to cause improvements to its traffic system to alleviate existing traffic problems and thereby cause an acceptable level of service to exist. The improvements to the City’s existing traffic system will be accomplished through funding sources other than traffic impact fees.

(6) New development will impose additional burdens on the existing traffic system and on the proposed improvements thereto. Without new development, the proposed improvements funded by sources other than traffic impact fees would bring the existing traffic system up to an acceptable level of service as determined by the City’s Engineering Department.

(7) The traffic mitigation program expresses a policy concerning the acquisition, construction, and improvement of public facilities related to the traffic system and it identifies proposed sources for financing said improvements.

(8) Development, consisting of the erection of, construction of, additions to, alterations of, or conversion to, office buildings, industrial buildings, hotels and motels, has a significant impact on traffic congestion in the City at peak traffic hours – which occur in the late afternoon.

(9) In order to implement the traffic mitigation program, it is necessary that new development pay traffic impact fees for the deterioration caused to the traffic system’s level of service (either between levels of service or within a level of service) which otherwise would be achieved by the proposed traffic system improvements funded by sources other than the traffic impact fees.

(10) The traffic impact fees collected will be used for the purposes and projects identified in the traffic mitigation program, as it is amended from time to time, based upon a priority rank determined by the City. The traffic impact fees are for “off-site facilities” as that term is defined in SCCC 17.15.010.

(11) The traffic system improvements, or portions thereof, to be funded from traffic impact fees are necessary to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare of the persons occupying and/or traveling to and from the new development(s) subject to the traffic impact fees.

(12) The traffic system improvements, or portions thereof, financed by traffic impact fees will enhance the economic value of new development by (a) providing to persons occupying and/or traveling to and from said new development traffic safety and convenience in the vicinity of the new development and thereby reducing the probability of bodily injury and property damage from traffic-related accidents, (b) improving the response capability of emergency services, such as police, fire and emergency medical response vehicles to the new development, and (c) enhancing and promoting aesthetic and environmental quality on or near the new development by making said access to said development less time-consuming and more efficient.

(b) Definitions. When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases will be defined as set forth below. When examples are given, they are illustrative only, and they are not intended to be an exhaustive itemization of all potentially includable items.

(1) “Building” means any structure (as defined in Section 420 of the Uniform Building Code) used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

(2) “Building permit” means the permit issued or required for the construction or improvement of any structure in connection with the development of land pursuant to and as defined by the Uniform Building Code.

(3) “Construct” means the putting together, assembling, erection or altering of construction materials, components or modules into a structure, or portion of a structure, and includes initial construction, reconstructing, enlarging or altering any structure.

(4) “Costs” means amounts spent or authorized to be spent in connection with the planning, financing, acquisition and development of the traffic mitigation program including, without limitation, the costs of land, construction, engineering, administration, financing costs, legal and financial consulting fees, and incidental expenses.

(5) “Hotel use” means an establishment consisting of one building or a group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging accommodations, a majority of which are designed for use by transients, travelers, or temporary guests. Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises, telephone and secretarial or desk service, meal and beverage service, meeting rooms, incidental merchandise sales, barber and beauty shops, kitchens, and other incidental services and facilities. The determination will be made from the uses identified as hotel or motel in the traffic impact fee schedule. (See definition of “traffic impact fee schedule” in subsection (b)(12) of this section.)

(6) “Industrial use” means a business involving manufacture, assembly, packaging, storage, distribution, or wholesaling of a physical product. The determination will be made from the uses identified as an industrial use in the traffic impact fee schedule.

(7) “New development” means any new construction, addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure or conversion to a use with traffic impact fees or higher traffic impact fees.

(8) “Office/R&D use,” in general, means any structure or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a business entity which will primarily provide clerical, professional or business services, and/or research and development activities for the business itself, or which will primarily provide clerical, professional or business services, and/or research and development activities to the public or other business entities. The structure or portion thereof may also include light fabrication areas in the manner of conducting business. The determination will be made from the uses identified as an office/R&D use in the traffic impact fee schedule.

(9) “Peak traffic hours” means 4:00 P.M. to 7:00 P.M.

(10) “Person” means any individual, domestic stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, business or common law trust, society, legal entity, or any other manner of owning property or conducting business.

(11) “Retail use” means an establishment that buys and sells commodities and services with off-street parking provided on the site. This includes a group of establishments that is planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit.

(12) “Residential use, multifamily” means a building or portion thereof used and designed as a residence for two or more families living independently of each other, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including automobile courts, motels, hotels, or boarding houses. Each unit in the structure is separated from other units by one or more common, fire-resistant walls.

(13) “Residential use, single-family” means a detached building, including sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities, which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit on an individual lot designed for and/or occupied by one household.

(14) “Square feet” or “square footage” means the square feet on each floor of a building, measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, and will include, but not be limited to, rooms, offices, work areas, restrooms, halls, stairways, elevator shafts, service and mechanical equipment rooms, basement, closet, cellar or attic areas. Parking facilities accessory to a permitted or conditional use and located on the same site are excluded from gross square footage calculations.

(15) “Traffic impact fee schedule” refers to the document, as amended from time to time, on file in the City’s Public Works Department used to determine applicability of the traffic impact fees to particular land uses. If a proposed building use, or use within a portion of the building, does not fall under a use listed in said schedule, but, in the Director of Public Works or City Engineer’s opinion, closely corresponds to a use listed in said schedule, the traffic impact fees will be imposed.

(16) “Warehousing, utilities and communications use” means any structure or portion thereof primarily used for the storage of materials or containing electromechanical and/or industrial space/equipment or facilities used for radio, cellular, television, radar transmissions or any similar technology development yet unforeseen. This includes data centers.

(c) Imposition of Traffic Impact Fees.

(1) Imposition of Fee. Traffic impact fees, for the area(s) designated by resolution of the City Council and at the rates set forth by resolution of the City Council, are hereby imposed upon every person (person having equitable or legal title, or other interest as owner, lessee, or otherwise) who causes new development, as defined hereinabove, to be used for office/R&D; warehousing, utilities and communications; industrial; hotel or motel; retail; single-family residential; or multifamily residential usage, as each is defined herein.

Mixed uses within a building or on a particular floor will have the traffic impact fees imposed on the area devoted to each use category of the traffic impact fee schedule as determined by the City Engineer. The floor space not in actual use, i.e., restrooms, hallways, etc., will be prorated for imposition of traffic impact fees on the basis of the mixed-use situation existing in the remainder of the building or on the floor.

(2) Exceptions. The traffic impact fees need not be paid for the following:

(A) Public Office Buildings. Those portions of City buildings utilized for governmental purposes and other governmental entity buildings utilized solely for governmental purposes and which otherwise are legally exempt from said fees.

(B) Reconstructed Buildings. Building reconstruction, unless the building use category (1) is changed to a use subject to the traffic impact fees, (2) a use change entails higher traffic impact fees, (3) and/or the gross square footage of an otherwise nonexempt building is increased, in which case the traffic impact fees apply to the expanded area.

(C) Other uses exempted by City Council resolution.

(3) Time of Payments. The payment of the traffic impact fees shall be as set forth by resolution of the City Council.

(4)(A) Periodic Adjustments to Traffic Impact Fees. The traffic impact fees shall be adjusted periodically to reflect the current status of traffic impact requirements, projected development square footage, construction and land costs, and other factors. The Director of Public Works or City Engineer shall make an annual review, or more frequent review if he/she deems it necessary, of the traffic mitigation program and make recommendations for amendment, if any. Among the purposes of said periodic review will be the adjustment of the traffic impact fee schedule in light of the traffic mitigation program scope and costs. The review will be submitted with recommendations to the City Council. After receiving said report and making it available for public distribution and review, the City Council shall give notice and, no less than ten days after public notice has been given, conduct a public hearing in which it shall consider these reports, receive testimony and information from any interested members of the public, and receive such other evidence as it may deem necessary. At the conclusion of that hearing, the City Council shall determine what changes, if any, are to be made to the traffic mitigation program with respect to projections of new development, the traffic system projects proposed, the estimated cost of construction, and/or adjustments to the traffic impact fees.

(B) Annual Escalator. Unless otherwise modified by the City Council, traffic impact fees will automatically adjust for inflation annually at the start of each fiscal year, using the latest Construction Cost Index for San Francisco, published by Engineering News Record (ENR). If this index ceases to exist, the Director of Public Works shall substitute another construction cost index, which in his or her judgment is as nearly equivalent to the original index as possible. The automatic fee adjustment will occur when the City conducts its annual update of the municipal fee schedule, unless it is otherwise modified by the City Council during their approval of the municipal fee schedule.

(5) Use of the Proceeds from the Traffic Impact Fees. The sums derived from the collection of the traffic impact fees, and any interest thereon, shall be held by the City’s Director of Finance and shall be distributed according to the fiscal and budgetary policies of the City. Said funds are to be used for the projects identified in the traffic mitigation program, as amended from time to time. In no case shall any of the moneys be used for regular street maintenance.

(6) Provisions of Section Are Not Exclusive. The provisions of this section are intended to establish an alternative method for spreading the costs of certain public improvements against the land that will be primarily benefited thereby; the provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the powers of the City Council to utilize any other method for accomplishing this purpose. This shall be in addition to any other requirements which the City Council is authorized to impose as a condition to approving development pursuant to State and local law.

(7) Developer Construction of Facilities. The traffic impact fees are the minimum to be paid by new development. The traffic impact fees are to be initially paid in all circumstances. However, if because of special conditions caused by a particular new development a development is required (pursuant to SCCC 17.15.090 and/or 17.15.310) to construct off-site traffic system facilities, the development will be reimbursed for said construction costs up to the costs of said construction or the traffic impact fees paid, whichever is less. To be entitled to said reimbursement, the new development must prove its claimed construction costs to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, or designee.

(8) Appeal from Decisions of City Staff. An appeal from a City staff decision shall be made within seven calendar days of the decision to the City Council. Written application for the appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office. The application shall state the factual basis of the appeal. The City Council will hear the appeal application at a public hearing to be conducted within thirty (30) calendar days of filing of the application. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 5-24-88; Ord. 1773 §§ 7, 8, 9, 8-20-02; Ord. 1986 §§ 1–4, 8-21-18. Formerly § 21A-32).

17.15.340 Exception for certain attached accessory dwelling units.
(a) Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the City shall not require the installation of new or separate utility connections directly between an accessory dwelling unit and the utilities, or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge, when a new accessory unit is constructed, if the accessory unit is contained within the existing building envelope of an existing single-family residence or accessory structure, the accessory unit has exterior access independent from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.

(b) For all accessory dwelling units not described in subsection (a) of this section, the construction of accessory units shall be subject to standard utility connection requirements and charges. The City shall establish prorated charges for accessory dwelling units in the municipal fee schedule. (Ord. 1968 § 7, 8-22-17).

Appendix A Tables I through V.
 

Please Note

The following Tables I, II, II-A, III, IV, and V are not officially part of the City Code. However, they appear here at the end of Chapter 17.15 [Property Developments] for convenience of reference.

Pursuant to SCCC 17.15.020, the content of these Tables is amended from time to time by City Council resolution. For the most recent Table information, the City Clerk’s office should be consulted.

Tables I through V, inclusive, reflect the changes made through the latest resolutions noted at the end of each table.

 

Table I

Facility

Estimated Life

Street improvements

25 years

Sidewalks

25 years

Street signs

25 years

Street trees

50 years

Street lighting fixtures

25 years

Electric system installation

25 years

Water system installations

50 years

Sanitary sewer system installation

50 years

Storm drain system installation

50 years

(Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1581 § 2, 3-1-88; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 7232 § 1, 6-7-05; Res. 7331, 6-6-06. Formerly § 21A-4).

 

Table II 

 

Section

Residential

Items

Developer

City

(a)    Easements and rights-of-way “on-site”

17.15.110

100%

-0-

(b)    Easements and rights-of-way “off-site”

17.15.120

100%

-0-

(c)    Street pavement

17.15.130

100%: 40 ft. minimum width.1

All required extra width.

(d)    Street curbing

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(e)    Sidewalk

17.15.130

100%: 4-1/2 ft. minimum width.2

-0-

(f)    Street name signs

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(g)    Street trees (developer may install street tree(s) at own expense subject to City Street Department approval of type and location)

17.15.130

$492.00 per tree. None required for trailer courts and mobile homes.

-0-

(h)    Street lighting:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

$6.60 per front foot.

All additional.

    Underground

 

$16.22 per front foot up to and including 10 net acres; or $2,475 per net acre over 10 net acres. Installation of all subsurface appurtenances.

All cables, switches, luminaires, electroliers.

    Existing

 

$24.09 per front foot.

 

(i)    Engineering fees:

17.15.070

 

 

    Plan review

17.15.280

Public improvements cost up to $15,000 – $373.00/plans set (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plans set for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

Perform plan check.

 

 

Public improvements cost over $15,000 – $1,306/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Inspection

 

Public improvements cost:

Perform inspection.

 

 

$0 – $15,000

$373.00

 

 

 

$15,001 – $25,000

$1,493

 

 

 

$25,001 – $50,000

$3,731

 

 

 

$50,001 – $100,000

$6,218

 

 

 

$100,001 – $200,000

$9,948

 

 

 

$200,001 – $500,000

$21,139

 

 

 

$500,001 – $1,000,000

$42,278

 

 

 

Greater than $1,000,000, for every additional $500,000 or fraction thereof

$13,678

 

(j)    Electric utility improvements:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

Single-family – $1,065 per lot.

Multiple-family, condominiums and planned unit developments – $655.00 per living unit.

All additional.

    Underground

 

Single-family – $1,570 per lot.

Multiple-family, condominiums and planned unit developments – $1,400 per living unit.

Installation of all subsurface appurtenances and service facilities.

All cables, switches, transformers, meters, etc.

    Plan review

 

$318.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$47.31/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks. (Applies to permits that have no electric service request and review for conflicts with existing electric infrastructure.)

Perform plan check.

(k)    Water utility

17.15.210

$92.00 per front foot.

Furnish and install main.

    Plan review

 

Public improvements cost up to $15,000 – $278.00/plans set (fee includes 3 checks), plus $92.00/plans set for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

Public improvements cost over $15,000 – $973.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks), plus $92.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

(Applies to permits that have no water service request and review for conflicts with existing water infrastructure.)

Perform plan check.

(l)    Sanitary sewers “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 8" minimum. Plus connection charges (see Table V-A).

Maximum unit credits earned.

(m)    Sanitary sewer outlet charge

17.15.220

Single-family, duplexes and multiple dwellings – $405.00 per unit or $1,522 per lot or $6,892 per net acre (greater of). Condominiums, planned unit developments – $405.00 per unit or $6,892 per net acre (greater of). Trailer courts and mobile homes – $569.00 per lot or $6,892 per net acre (greater of). Plus $4,218 per dwelling unit and $2,653 per accessory dwelling unit.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(n)    Storm drains “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 12" minimum.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(o)    Storm drains outlet charge

17.15.220

$6,892 per net acre.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(p)    Street plan review:

 

 

Perform plan check.

    Street maintenance

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Parkways and boulevards

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

Note:    When front footage calculations are required for distribution of costs, a corner lot reduction as defined in SCCC 17.15.010 shall be used.

1    100% – 40 ft. minimum width when zoned residentially. If street improvements exist in the residential area, charges shall be on the basis of per front foot (see Table IV).

2    5-1/2 ft. minimum in blocks where utility poles are adjacent to curb.

 

Table II 

Items

Section

Commercial and Industrial

Developer

City

(a)    Easements and rights-of-way “on-site”

17.15.110

100%

-0-

(b)    Easements and rights-of-way “off-site”

17.15.120

100%

-0-

(c)    Street pavement

17.15.130

100%: Commercial – 64 ft. minimum width.

Industrial – 48 ft. minimum width.

All required extra width.

(d)    Street curbing

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(e)    Sidewalk

17.15.130

100%: Commercial – 9-1/2 ft. minimum width. Industrial – Install as required.

-0-

(f)    Street name signs

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(g)    Street trees

17.15.130

Install as required.

-0-

(h)    Street lighting:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

$6.60 per front foot.

All additional.

    Underground

 

$16.22 per front foot up to and including 10 net acres; or $2,475 per net acre over 10 net acres. Installation of all subsurface appurtenances.

All cables, switches, luminaires, electroliers.

    Existing

 

$24.09 per front foot.

 

(i)    Engineering fees:

17.15.070

 

 

    Plan review

17.15.280

Public improvements cost up to $15,000 – $373.00/plans set (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plans set for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

Perform plan check.

 

 

Public improvements cost over $15,000 – $1,306/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Inspection

 

Public improvements cost:

Perform inspection.

 

 

$0 – $15,000

$373.00

 

 

 

$15,001 – $25,000

$1,493

 

 

 

$25,001 – $50,000

$3,731

 

 

 

$50,001 – $100,000

$6,218

 

 

 

$100,001 – $200,000

$9,948

 

 

 

$200,001 – $500,000

$21,139

 

 

 

$500,001 – $1,000,000

$42,278

 

 

 

Greater than $1,000,000, for every additional $500,000 or fraction thereof

$13,678

 

(j)    Electric utility improvements:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA).

All additional.

    Underground

 

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA). Installation of all subsurface appurtenances and service facilities.

All cables, switches, transformers, meters, etc.

    Plan review

 

$318.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$47.31/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks. (Applies to permits that have no electric service request and review for conflicts with existing electric infrastructure.)

Perform plan check.

(k)    Water utility

17.15.210

$92.00 per front foot.

Furnish and install main.

    Plan review

 

Public improvements cost up to $15,000 – $278.00/plans set (fee includes 3 checks), plus $92.00/plans set for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

Public improvements cost over $15,000 – $973.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks), plus $92.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

(Applies to permits that have no water service request and review for conflicts with existing water infrastructure.)

Perform plan check.

(l)    Sanitary sewers “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 10" minimum. Plus connection charges (see Table V-A).

Maximum unit credits earned.

(m)    Sanitary sewer outlet charge

17.15.220

$1,522 per lot or $6,892 per net acre (greater of). Plus $8.60 per gallon per day of sanitary sewer discharge (as calculated by the City using the Santa Clara Water Pollution Control Plant – Specific Use Codes and Sewage Coefficient Table).

Maximum unit credits earned.

(n)    Storm drains “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 15" minimum.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(o)    Storm drains outlet charge

17.15.220

$6,892 per net acre.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(p)    Street plan review:

 

 

Perform plan check.

    Street maintenance

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Parkways and boulevards

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

Note:    When front footage calculations are required for distribution of costs, a corner lot reduction as defined in SCCC 17.15.010 shall be used.

 

Table II 

Items

Section

Institutional

Developer

City

(a)    Easements and rights-of-way “on-site”

17.15.110

100%

-0-

(b)    Easements and rights-of-way “off-site”

17.15.120

100%

-0-

(c)    Street pavement

17.15.130

100%: 40 ft. minimum width.3

Industrial – 48 ft. minimum width.

All required extra width.

(d)    Street curbing

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(e)    Sidewalk

17.15.130

100%: 4-1/2 ft. minimum width4; 9-1/2 ft. width in all milling areas.

-0-

(f)    Street name signs

17.15.130

100%

-0-

(g)    Street trees

17.15.130

Install as required.

-0-

(h)    Street lighting:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

$6.60 per front foot.

All additional.

    Underground

 

$16.22 per front foot up to and including 10 net acres; or $2,475 per net acre over 10 net acres. Installation of all subsurface appurtenances.

All cables, switches, luminaires, electroliers.

    Existing

 

$24.09 per front foot.

 

(i)    Engineering fees:

17.15.070

 

 

    Plan review

17.15.280

Public improvements cost up to $15,000 – $373.00/plans set (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plans set for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

Perform plan check.

 

 

Public improvements cost over $15,000 – $1,306/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks), plus $124.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Inspection

 

Public improvements cost:

Perform inspection.

 

 

$0 – $15,000

$373.00

 

 

 

$15,001 – $25,000

$1,493

 

 

 

$25,001 – $50,000

$3,731

 

 

 

$50,001 – $100,000

$6,218

 

 

 

$100,001 – $200,000

$9,948

 

 

 

$200,001 – $500,000

$21,139

 

 

 

$500,001 – $1,000,000

$42,278

 

 

 

Greater than $1,000,000, for every additional $500,000 or fraction thereof

$13,678

 

(j)    Electric utility improvements:

17.15.210

 

 

    Overhead

 

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA).

All additional.

    Underground

 

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA). Installation of all subsurface appurtenances and service facilities.

All cables, switches, transformers, meters, etc.

    Plan review

 

$318.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$47.31/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks. (Applies to permits that have no electric service request and review for conflicts with existing electric infrastructure.)

Perform plan check.

(k)    Water utility

17.15.210

$92.00 per front foot.

Furnish and install main.

(l)    Sanitary sewers “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 10" minimum. Plus connection charges (see Table V-A).

All required oversize.

(m)    Sanitary sewer outlet charge

17.15.220

$6,892 per net acre or, if allowed, $2,284 per net acre. Plus $8.60 per gallon per day of sanitary sewer discharge (as calculated by City using the Santa Clara Water Pollution Control Plant – Specific Use Codes and Sewage Coefficient Table).

Maximum unit credits earned, if $6,892 per net acre charged; otherwise, none.

(n)    Storm drains “on-site”

17.15.220

100%: 15" minimum.

Maximum unit credits earned.

(o)    Storm drains outlet charge

17.15.220

$6,892 per net acre or, if allowed, $2,284 per net acre.

Maximum unit credits earned, if $6,892 per net acre charged; otherwise, none.

(p)    Street plan review:

 

 

Perform plan check.

    Street maintenance

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

    Parkways and boulevards

 

$122.00/plan sheet (fee includes 3 checks).

$25.00/plan sheet for 4th and each of the subsequent checks.

 

Note:    When front footage calculations are required for distribution of costs, a corner lot reduction as defined in SCCC 17.15.010 shall be used.

3    100% – 40 ft. minimum width when zoned residentially. If street improvements exist in the residential area, charges shall be on the basis of per front foot (see Table IV).

4    5-1/2 ft. minimum in blocks where utility poles are adjacent to curb.

(Ord. 1312, 5-6-75; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456 § 2, 8-82; Ord. 1485 § 1, 11-29-83; Ord. 1511 § 1, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542 § 9, 5-27-86; Ord. 1558 § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. 1581 §§ 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 3-1-88; Res. 5628, 7-2-91; Res. 5715, 6-24-92; Res. 5829, 7-6-93; Res. 5913, 6-21-94; Res. 6027, 6-13-95; Res. 6188, 6-11-96; Res. 6307, 6-10-97; Res. 6440, 6-9-98; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 6709, 6-20-00; Res. 6813, 6-12-01; Res. 7031, 6-10-03; Res. 7136, 6-8-04; Res. 7232 § 1, 6-7-05; Res. 7331, 6-6-06; Res. 7418, 6-5-07; Res. 7631, 6-9-09; Res. 7643, 6-23-09; Res. 7740, 6-15-10; Res. 7741, 6-15-10; Res. 7859, 6-14-11; Res. 7941, 6-12-12; Res. 8226, 4-21-15; Res. 8322, 5-10-16; Res. 8423, 4-18-17; Res. 8518, 5-8-18).

 

Table II-A 

Type of Users

Electric Power Facilities

Overhead

Underground

(1)    Residential developments:

 

 

    Single-family residential lots

$1,065 per lot

$1,570 per lot

    Multiple-family residential lots including condominiums and planned unit developments

$655.00 per living unit

$1,400 per living unit

(2)    Commercial, institutional and industrial developments:

 

 

    Commercial and institutional

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA)

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA)

    Industrial

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA)

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA)

(3)    Individual, single-family residential lot developments within city limits, as described in Chapter CCCV, 1866 Statutes of California:

Redevelopment

New development

    Single-family residential lots

No charge

$1,570 per lot

Note:    Any redevelopment, other than overhead-serviced, single-family residence lots, shall be considered as new development under (1) or (2) above.

(Ord. 1312, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456 § 1C, 8-31-82; Ord. 1485 § 1, 11-29-83; Ord. 1511 § 2, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542 § 9, 5-27-86; Ord. 1558 § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. 1581 §§ 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 3-1-88; Res. 5628 – fees effective 7-2-91; Res. 5829, 7-6-93; Res. 5913, 6-21-94; Res. 6027, 6-13-95; Res. 6188, 6-11-96; Res. 6440, 6-9-98; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 6813, 6-12-01; Res. 7031, 6-10-03; Res. 7941, 6-12-12; Res. 8226, 4-21-15; Res. 8322, 5-10-16; Res. 8423, 4-18-17; Res. 8518, 5-8-18).

 

Table III

Action

Dedication Required

Street Improvements Required

Final Map

Yes

Yes

Parcel Map

Yes

Yes

Zoning

Yes

Yes

Residential: Any single private improvement or any series of private improvements made within a three-year period involving 800 or more square feet of any new construction, addition, or reconstruction.*

Yes

Yes

Nonresidential: Any single private improvement or any series of private improvements made within a three-year period valued at $200,000 or more.

Yes

Yes

Dedication of easements and rights-of-way for street purposes, including the installation of street improvements, may not be required by the City in connection with:

(a) Residential. The granting of building permit(s) involving:

(1) Any single private improvement less than 800 square feet of any new construction, addition, or reconstruction*; or

(2) Any series of private improvements made within a three-year period that are cumulatively less than 800 square feet of any new construction, addition, or reconstruction.*

(b) Nonresidential. The granting of building permit(s) involving:

(1) Any single private improvement valued at less than $200,000; or

(2) Any series of private improvements made within a three-year period that are cumulatively valued at less than $200,000.

Provided further, if the Planning Commission finds, on appeal, that the proposed activity has a significant impact on the immediate area, the developer shall be required to grant to the City, without cost, all dedications required for street purposes, including the installation of street improvements to serve the property of the developer.

*    Reconstruction is any work involving the removal of at least 50 percent of exterior wall(s). Interior remodeling is not reconstruction.

(Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 1, 2-7-78; Ord. 1408 § 1, 9-30-80; Ord. 1486 § 1, 12-6-83; Ord. 1581 § 5, 3-1-88; Res. 6027, 6-13-95; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 7136, 6-8-04; Res. 7232 § 1, 6-7-05; Res. 7663, 8-25-09).

 

Table IV

Existing Improvements

Facility

Unit Charge

(a)    Cost of acquisition of right-of-way and/or easements

Original cost per square foot.

(b)    Street improvements:

Residential

Commercial

Industrial, trailer courts and mobile homes

 

$96.80 per front foot.

$205.40 per front foot.

$147.80 per front foot.

(c)    Street curbing

$35.30 per front foot.

(d)    Sidewalk improvements

$14.10 per square foot.

(e)    Street name signs

$0.25 per front foot.

(f)    Street lighting:
Overhead
Underground

$6.60 per front foot.

$24.09 per front foot.

(g)    Electric system:

(See SCCC 17.15.090, 17.15.210 and Table II-A)

Overhead residential

 

Underground

 

Single-family

$3,085 per lot.

Multiple-family

$1,649 per unit.

Commercial and institutional

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA).

Industrial

$126.00 per KVA (up to 4,500 KVA) and $170.00 per KVA (greater than 4,500 KVA).

(h)    Water mains

$92.00 per front foot.

(i)    Sanitary sewers

$35.25 per front foot.

(j)    Storm drains

$35.25 per front foot.

(Ord. 1312 § 1, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372 § 3, 2-7-78; Ord. 1386 § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456 § 1G, 8-31-82; Ord. 1485 § 1, 11-29-83; Ord. 1511 § 3, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542 § 7, 5-27-86; Ord. 1558 § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. 1581 § 9, 3-1-88; Res. 5628, 7-2-91; Res. 5715, 6-24-92; Res. 5829, 7-6-93; Res. 5913, 6-21-94; Res. 6027, 6-13-95; Res. 6188, 6-11-96; Res. 6307, 6-10-97; Res. 6440, 6-9-98; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 6709, 6-20-00; Res. 6813, 6-12-01; Res. 7031, 6-10-03; Res. 7136, 6-8-04; Res. 7232 § 1, 6-7-05; Res. 7331, 6-6-06; Res. 7418, 6-5-07; Res. 7631, 6-9-09; Res. 7740, 6-15-10; Res. 7859, 6-14-11; Res. 7941, 6-12-12; Res. 8226, 4-21-15; Res. 8322, 5-10-16; Res. 8423, 4-18-17; Res. 8518, 5-8-18).

Table V

A.

SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION SCHEDULE

(Wastewater Treatment Plant Capacity Fee)

RESIDENTIAL:    One thousand one hundred eighty-seven dollars ($1,187) per dwelling unit and seven hundred forty-seven dollars ($747.00) per accessory dwelling unit.

NONRESIDENTIAL:    Four dollars and forty-seven cents ($4.47) per gallon per day for sewer flow capacity as computed on the basis of projected land use as determined by the City.

The above charges shall be applicable to all projects for which building permits are issued on and after January 1, 1984. (SCCC 17.15.220(e))

B.

WATER SERVICE CONNECTION

SERVICE SIZE

WATER SERVICE CONNECTION FEE

WATER METER FEE AND BACKFLOW PREVENTER DEVICE FEE

TOTAL WATER DEPT FEE

SERVICE LATERAL

5/8" x 3/4"

$13,912

$343

$14,255

1"

$13,912

$458

$14,370

1.5"

$13,912

$1,030

$14,942

2"

$13,912

$1,192

$15,104

3"

(2-2" meters & RPs)

$30,422

$2,384

$32,806

4"

$30,422

$2,603

$33,025

4"

(dual meters & RPs)

$30,422

$5,206

$35,628

6"

$30,422

$3,463

$33,885

6"

(dual meters & RPs)

$30,422

$6,926

$37,348

8"

$30,422

$6,623

$37,045

8"

(dual meters & RPs)

$30,422

$13,246

$43,668

10"

Estimated

Estimated

Estimated

Public Works Department encroachment permit fees are not included.

1. Charges for other sizes of service shall be based on the cost of material expended for each installation.

2. Where not applicable, deduct itemized costs from total fee. Where backflow preventer for 5/8" x 3/4" and 1" water service size is not applicable, deduct $234.

3. Where the City or entity with jurisdiction prohibits the open trenching of a public street, there will be additional charge for the necessary boring.

4. Water upgrade fees shall be based on cost of material and labor expended for each installation. (SCCC 17.15.280(a))

C.

FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION

SERVICE SIZE

SERVICE INSTALLATION

BACKFLOW PREVENTER (DEVICE)

DCDA

RPDA

2"

$14,098

–

–

4"

$30,422

$2,338

$3,188

6"

$30,422

$3,418

$4,175

8"

$30,422

$6,149

$7,452

10"

$30,422

$8,656

$9,703

Special Fire Hydrant

$22,464

 

 

 

SERVICE SIZE

SERVICE UPGRADE

BACKFLOW PREVENTER (DEVICE)

DCDA

RPDA

2"

–

–

–

4"

$12,429

$2,338

$3,188

6"

$12,429

$3,418

$4,175

8"

$12,429

$6,149

$7,452

10"

$12,429

$8,656

$9,703

Public Works Department encroachment permit fees are not included.

1. Charges for other sizes shall be based on the cost of material and labor expended for each installation.

2. Where Fire Marshal requires that developer provide on-site fire protection and will accept in lieu thereof a municipal hydrant located in the public right-of-way, City may, at its option, install at developer’s expense such hydrant at less than the normal hydrant spacing. (SCCC 17.15.280(b))

D.

SEWER SERVICE LATERALS

(By City Forces)

SEWER SERVICE SIZE

SEWER LATERAL INSTALLATION

4"

$31,583

6"

$31,583

8"

$31,326

Public Works Department encroachment permit fees are not included.

1. Sewer laterals are normally installed by the developer unless unusual or special conditions warrant City installing the lateral.

2. The above costs provide for a lateral from the sewer main to the property line only.

3. For four-inch sewer lateral cleanout installation at right-of-way line, add $1,326.

4. For six-inch or larger sewer lateral cleanout installation at right-of-way line, add $6,565.

5. Where the City or entity with jurisdiction prohibits the open trenching of a public street, an additional charge shall be made for the necessary boring.

6. Charges for sizes other than listed above and any necessary boring shall be based on the cost of material and labor expended for each installation. (SCCC 17.15.280(c))

(Ord. 1312, 5-6-75; Ord. 1372, 2-7-78; Ord. 1386, 8-28-79; Ord. 1456, 8-31-82; Ord. 1511, 10-30-84; Ord. 1542, 5-27-86; Ord. 1558, 11-4-86; Ord. 1581, 3-1-88; Res. 5628 – fees effective 7-2-91; Res. 5829, 7-6-93; Res. 5913, 6-21-94; Res. 6027, 6-13-95; Res. 6188, 6-11-96; Res. 6307, 6-10-97; Res. 6440, 6-9-98; Res. 6588, 6-15-99; Res. 6709, 6-20-00; Res. 6813, 6-12-01; Res. 7031, 6-10-03; Res. 7136, 6-8-04; Res. 7232 § 1, 6-7-05; Res. 7331, 6-6-06; Res. 7418, 6-5-07; Res. 7631, 6-9-09; Res. 7643, 6-23-09; Res. 7740, 6-15-10; Res. 7859, 6-14-11; Res. 7941, 6-12-12; Res. 8226, 4-21-15; Res. 8322, 5-10-16; Res. 8423, 4-18-17; Res. 8518, 5-8-18).

Chapter 17.20
PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL STADIUM GROUND LEASE
Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Required terms for a ground lease for a stadium.

17.20.030    Council determinations.

17.20.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to further the City’s goal of creating an enhanced entertainment destination in the Bayshore North Redevelopment Project Area by providing for the development and operation of a stadium suitable for professional football and other events (the “stadium”) in a manner that will provide a long-term revenue stream to the City. (Measure J § 3, 6-8-10).

17.20.020 Required terms for a ground lease for a stadium.
Any ground lease by the City of Santa Clara (“City”) of City property for the development and operation of a stadium shall be consistent with all of the following minimum requirements:

(a) Any ground lease of City property for development and operation of a stadium (“ground lease”) shall be to a joint powers authority created by the City and the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Santa Clara (the “Agency”) to be known as the Santa Clara Stadium Authority (the “Stadium Authority”), so that the City maintains ownership of the fee interest in the site.

(b) The City shall not use or pledge any money from the City’s general fund or enterprise funds for the development of the stadium; provided, however, that if the City decides to relocate or reconfigure the electrical substation in the vicinity of the stadium site, the ground lease or other agreements may provide that the City shall be responsible for the cost of that relocation or reconfiguration.

(c) The City shall not subordinate its interest in the stadium site or in any other property or in the ground rent to any financing or subsequent refinancing of the stadium, and no City general fund monies or enterprise fund monies may be pledged as collateral for any Stadium Authority financing or subsequent refinancing.

(d) The ground lease shall provide that the initial term of the ground lease shall be for forty (40) years.

(e) The ground lease shall require that construction of the stadium shall not commence unless a private party (the “private tenant”) has entered into a lease of the stadium or the stadium site from the Stadium Authority (the “private tenant’s lease”) that provides for use of the stadium as the home of one or two professional football teams and other events. Professional football games and other events associated with professional football that are conducted pursuant to the private tenant’s lease are hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “NFL events.”

(f) The ground lease shall require payment by the Stadium Authority to the City’s general fund of fixed base rent totaling forty million eight hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($40,875,000.00), in nominal dollars, over the initial forty (40) year term of the ground lease, with annual fixed base rent commencing in the first year of stadium operations and increasing periodically over the term of the ground lease to a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) beginning in the eleventh (11th) year of stadium operations. The ground lease shall require that if a second professional football team (a “second team”) makes a long-term commitment to play its home games at the stadium, the minimum annual fixed base rent payable to the City’s general find under this subsection shall be increased by one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) commencing in the first year the second team plays its home games at the stadium.

(g) In addition to the fixed base rent, the ground lease shall require payment by the Stadium Authority into the City’s general fund of performance-based rent which, together with the fixed base rent, the City Council has determined is projected to provide fair market rent to the City. Performance-based rent shall be pursuant to a formula that provides for sharing of the revenues less expenses of non-NFL events at the stadium. As used herein, the term “non-NFL events” means events such as concerts and sporting events that are approved by the Stadium Authority and the private tenant, excluding NFL events. The fixed base rent and performance-based rent payable by the Stadium Authority to the City under the ground lease, as provided in this subsection and subsection (f) of this section, are referred to in this chapter as “ground rent.”

(h) The ground lease shall require that contributions to the construction costs of the stadium by the Agency shall not exceed forty million dollars ($40,000,000.00), exclusive of debt service and other financing costs and payments to the City for development fees. The ground lease shall also provide that if a second team makes a long-term commitment to play its home games at the stadium, the City or Agency shall receive the amounts the Agency actually contributed toward the construction costs of the stadium in accordance with this subsection, exclusive of debt service and other financing costs. The City or Agency shall also receive any amounts paid by the Agency to the City for development fees for the stadium.

(i) Neither the ground lease nor any other agreements related to the development of the stadium shall rely upon the imposition of any new or increased taxes for the development, operation, or maintenance of the stadium; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not apply to a special tax based on hotel room revenue in a financing district that is approved by a vote of the requisite number of affected hotel land owners within the district. If hotel land owners in the district approve such a special tax on hotel revenue, such tax proceeds may be pledged to provide up to thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000.00), exclusive of debt service and other financing costs, toward development of the stadium and related infrastructure and any remaining tax proceeds may be used for other eligible financing district purposes.

(j) Neither the City nor its Redevelopment Agency shall be liable for the obligations of the Stadium Authority, including operating and maintenance expenses of the stadium; provided, that the City may elect to pay operating and maintenance expenses of events conducted or approved by the City that are not NFL events or non-NFL events.

(k) The private tenant’s lease shall require the private tenant to pay any cost overruns incurred in construction of the stadium. For this purpose, “cost overruns” means any actual costs that exceed funds available to the Stadium Authority from the sources identified in the development budget approved by the Stadium Authority and any other sources available to the Stadium Authority to fund the construction costs of the stadium.

(l) The private tenant’s lease shall require the private tenant to pay rent to the Stadium Authority that the City Council has determined will provide the Stadium Authority with funds required to pay the ground rent and operating and maintenance expenses of the stadium. For this purpose, operating and maintenance expenses shall include, without limitation, day-to-day expenses of operating and maintaining the stadium, deposits to a reserve for capital improvements, and reimbursement of reasonable costs incurred by the City in providing public safety and traffic management related to NFL events and non-NFL events, but shall not include expenses of events that are conducted by the City or Stadium Authority that are not approved by the private tenant.

(m) The ground lease shall require that following the opening of the stadium the City shall receive, in addition to the ground rent, a fee equal to thirty-five cents ($0.35) per ticket on each ticket for professional football games in the stadium up to a maximum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per year (the “senior and youth program fee”). The senior and youth program fee is to be used for City programs for parks and recreation and libraries, such as senior activities and the youth championship team fund. (Measure J § 3, 6-8-10).

17.20.030 Council determinations.
SCCC 17.20.020 is the legislative policy of the City and provides the ways and means of accomplishing that legislative policy. Where SCCC 17.20.020 provides for any determination or approval by the City Council, such determination or approval shall be made by the City Council taking into account the purposes and findings of the voter-approved measure enacting this chapter, and shall be made on or before the Council’s approval of an agreement that commits the City to enter into a ground lease. (Measure J § 3, 6-8-10).

Chapter 17.25
BAYSHORE NORTH PROJECT ENHANCEMENT AUTHORITY
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

17.25.010    Public uses and purposes.

17.25.020    Legislative finding and declaration.

17.25.030    Purpose.

17.25.040    Municipal affair.

17.25.050    Effect of chapter upon other law.

17.25.060    Application of planning, zoning, etc., laws and ordinances.

17.25.070    Partial invalidity.

17.25.080    Effect of definitions.

17.25.090    Authority.

17.25.100    Obligee of the Authority – Obligee.

17.25.110    State public body.

17.25.120    Project.

Article II. Bayshore North Project Enhancement Authority

17.25.130    Establishment.

17.25.140    Resolution of need for Authority to function.

17.25.150    Evidence of establishment and authorization.

17.25.160    City Council as Authority and officers.

17.25.170    Meetings – Vote necessary to act.

17.25.180    Meeting expenses.

17.25.190    Administrative expenses.

17.25.200    Reports.

17.25.210    Financial statements.

17.25.220    Failure to function – Suspension of Authority.

17.25.230    Restoration of Authority.

17.25.240    Termination of Authority and winding up affairs.

Article III. Powers

17.25.250    Corporate powers.

17.25.260    Acquisition and disposal of property – Projects – Insurance.

17.25.270    Maintenance and management.

17.25.280    Establishment and operation of property.

17.25.290    Receipt and expenditure of funds.

17.25.300    Investments.

17.25.310    Borrowing.

17.25.320    Exercise of powers.

17.25.330    Necessary or convenient acts.

17.25.340    Use of services and facilities of City.

17.25.350    Managing agency agreements.

17.25.360    Grants and loans for public purposes.

17.25.370    Contributions from City prohibited.

Article IV. Revenue Bonds

17.25.380    Bonds.

17.25.390    Power to borrow and issue bonds – Nature of bonds.

17.25.400    Limited liability.

Article V. Rights of Obligees

17.25.410    Enforcement of rights.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

17.25.010 Public uses and purposes.
Planning, maintaining, improving, protecting and promoting the sound economic development of the area of the city located within the Bayshore North Project Area and the performance of all undertakings incidental or advantageous thereto are public uses and purposes for which public money may be spent and are governmental functions. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.020 Legislative finding and declaration.
The Council finds and declares as follows:

(a) That it is the policy of the City of Santa Clara to protect and promote the sound economic development of the area of the City of Santa Clara within the Bayshore North Project Area and the general welfare of the inhabitants through the employment of all appropriate means.

(b) That such means may include leasing property for construction and use of a facility for professional sporting and other events as well as other development.

(c) That the anticipated increase in the population of the City demands that the City take action to ensure opportunities for economic development within the City of Santa Clara.

(d) That employment opportunities for the residents of the City of Santa Clara are vital to the City’s future peace and prosperity.

(e) That for these reasons this chapter is necessary in the public interest for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.030 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Council in enacting this chapter to expand opportunities for economic growth within the area of the city within the Bayshore North Project Area, including opportunities for facilities for professional sporting and other events. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.040 Municipal affair.
The activities set forth in SCCC 17.25.010 are a municipal affair, necessary and appropriate to a municipal corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, and not prohibited by the Constitution of the State of California nor by the City Charter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.050 Effect of chapter upon other law.
This chapter shall not affect any other provision of law relating to the same or a similar subject but provides an alternative method of procedure governing the subject to which it relates, and it shall not abridge, modify or otherwise affect the right of the City to exercise any power given to it by the Constitution or any other law. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.060 Application of planning, zoning, etc., laws and ordinances.
Authority projects are subject to the planning, zoning, sanitary, and building laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to the area in which they are situated. In the planning and location of any facility, the Authority is subject to any and all officially adopted plans for the development of the area in which the Authority functions to the same extent as if it were a private entity. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.070 Partial invalidity.
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.080 Effect of definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this article govern the construction of this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.090 Authority.
“Authority” means the public corporation created by Article II of this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.100 Obligee of the Authority – Obligee.
“Obligee of the Authority” or “obligee” means any of the following:

(a) Any bondholder or trustee for any bondholders.

(b) Any lessor demising to the Authority property used in connection with a project or any assignee of all or part of such lessor’s interest.

(c) The State of California or the United States, or any agency of either, when a party to any contract with the Authority by which aid or a loan is given or made to the Authority. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.110 State public body.
“State public body” means the State of California, or any city, city and county, county, district, authority, or any other subdivision or public body of the State of California. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.120 Project.
“Project” means any acquisition, improvement, construction, or undertaking of any kind authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

Article II. Bayshore North Project Enhancement Authority

17.25.130 Establishment.
There is in the City a public body corporate and politic known as the Bayshore North Project Enhancement Authority of the City. The Authority shall be a public entity separate and apart from the City and any other entity or agency which is controlled by or is otherwise related to the City. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.140 Resolution of need for Authority to function.
The Authority shall not transact any business or exercise any powers unless and until the City Council by resolution declares that there is a need for the Authority to function in the City. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.150 Evidence of establishment and authorization.
In any suit, action, or proceeding by or against or in any manner relating to the Authority, the Authority shall be conclusively deemed to have become established and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers upon proof of the adoption of the resolution by the City Council declaring the need for the Authority to function. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.160 City Council as Authority and officers.
The members of the City Council shall constitute the members of the governing body of the Authority. Upon adoption of a resolution pursuant to SCCC 17.25.140, the members of the City Council shall have all the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities vested by this chapter in the governing board of the Authority. The Mayor shall serve as the chairperson of the Authority and the Vice Mayor shall serve as the vice chairperson. The City Manager, City Attorney, Director of Finance and City Clerk shall serve as the executive director, Authority counsel, treasurer and secretary of the Authority, respectively. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.170 Meetings – Vote necessary to act.
The governing board of the Authority shall hold a regular meeting at least once a year at such time, date and place as specified by resolution of the governing board. All meetings of the governing board shall be subject to the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act of the State of California. The vote necessary to take action shall be the same as that required for the City Council to take similar action. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.180 Meeting expenses.
Members of the governing board of the Authority shall not receive any compensation for attending meetings of the governing board. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.190 Administrative expenses.
Notwithstanding the provisions of SCCC 17.25.370, the Authority may contract with the City for the provision of administrative services, provided the Authority reimburses the City for the full cost of such services. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.200 Reports.
Annually, the Authority shall prepare a detailed report of all its transactions, including a statement of all revenues and expenditures. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.210 Financial statements.
At least once annually, the Authority shall prepare a statement of all its financial affairs, audited by independent certified public accountants. The statement shall be made available in the office of the Authority’s treasurer for public inspection. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.220 Failure to function – Suspension of Authority.
If, within four years after the adoption of a resolution declaring the need for an Authority to function in the City, the Authority has not issued bonds, or entered into any contract, the City Council by resolution may declare that there is no need for the Authority to function in the City. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the offices of the members of the Authority become vacant and the capacity of the Authority to transact business or exercise any power is suspended until the City Council again adopts a resolution declaring the need for the Authority to function. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.230 Restoration of Authority.
Upon the termination of any such suspension by the adoption of such resolution declaring the need for the Authority to function, proceedings for the organization and activation of the Authority shall be had and taken as if such resolution were the original resolution declaring need for a Bayshore North Project Enhancement Authority to function provided for by SCCC 17.25.140. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.240 Termination of Authority and winding up affairs.
The City Council, by adoption of a resolution declaring there is no need for an Authority to function, may order the dissolution of the Authority if the Authority has no outstanding bonded indebtedness, and if the unanimous written consent of the members of the governing body of the Authority is first obtained. Thereafter, the City Council may wind up the affairs of the Authority including taking title to all property of the Authority for the benefit of the City. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

Article III. Powers

17.25.250 Corporate powers.
In order to achieve the purposes set forth in Article I of this chapter, the Authority may:

(a) Sue and be sued, have a seal, and make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers.

(b) Make, and from time to time amend and repeal, bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter to carry into effect the powers and purposes hereof.

(c) Select and appoint or remove such permanent and temporary agents and employees, as it requires, and may determine their qualifications, duties, and compensation. The powers of the Authority under this article are subject to all limitations and rights applicable to similar employment by the City unless, by the resolution adopted pursuant to SCCC 17.25.140, the City Council otherwise determines. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.260 Acquisition and disposal of property – Projects – Insurance.
The Authority may:

(a) Purchase, lease, obtain options upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise, any real or personal property within the area of the city within the Bayshore North Project Area, or any interest in, or improvements on, such property by any means by which the City is authorized to do so.

(b) Sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, encumber (by mortgage, deed of trust, or otherwise) or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property or any interest in such property.

(c) Insure any of its real or personal property or operations against risks or hazards. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.270 Maintenance and management.
The Authority may acquire, construct, rent, lease, maintain, repair, manage and operate all or any portion of any real and personal property. Leases may be negotiated without competitive bidding or awarded after competitive bidding in such manner as may be established by the Authority. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.280 Establishment and operation of property.
The Authority may do any act to acquire and maintain property within the area of the city within the Bayshore North Project Area, to devote such property to uses and activities consistent with the purposes of this chapter and to acquire and construct such improvements on property owned, controlled, or operated by it as may be necessary or appropriate to such uses and activities. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.290 Receipt and expenditure of funds.
The Authority may receive, control, and order the expenditure of any and all money and funds pertaining to its facilities or properties, including but not limited to:

(a) All revenue derived from operations of the Authority.

(b) The proceeds of all financial aid or assistance by the State of California or the Federal government.

(c) The proceeds of assessments or special taxes levied by the City.

(d) The proceeds of all bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.300 Investments.
The Authority may invest funds held in reserve, or sinking funds, or funds not required for immediate disbursement, in property or securities in which cities may legally invest funds subject to their control. No such investment shall be made in contravention of any covenant or agreement with the holders of any bonds of the Authority issued and outstanding. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.310 Borrowing.
The Authority may borrow money or accept financial or other assistance from the State, the Federal government, or any other source for or in aid of any project within its area of operation, and to such ends may comply with any conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.320 Exercise of powers.
The Authority may exercise all or any part or combination of the powers granted by this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.330 Necessary or convenient acts.
The Authority may do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary, convenient, desirable, or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.340 Use of services and facilities of City.
In order that there may be no unnecessary duplication of effort or expense, the Authority may provide for the furnishing of services by, and the use of facilities of, any department, office or agency of the City in lieu of, or in conjunction with, the direct provision by the Authority of services and the use of facilities through employment or purchase or other means. The furnishing of such services and the use of such facilities of any such department, office or agency shall be upon such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Authority and the City Council, and subject to reimbursement to the appropriate funds of the City for the reasonable value thereof. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.350 Managing agency agreements.
Whenever the Authority determines that the management and operation of any facility authorized hereunder is so complex and specialized as to require that it be accomplished by specially qualified persons, it may make and enter into managing agency agreements with competent persons, firms or corporations specially trained and experienced to render such services, subject to retention of such controls over rates and use of the facility as are necessary or desirable to assure its operation as a public authority. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.360 Grants and loans for public purposes.
The Authority may make grants or loans of money or property to the redevelopment agency, stadium authority, housing authority, parking authority or any other agency or authority of the City, or to the City itself, to facilitate the accomplishment of any public purpose, subject to such terms and conditions as may be established by the Authority, and provided the governing board makes appropriate findings that such grant or loan does not constitute a gift of public funds or violate any statutory prohibition. Such public purposes may be carried out and accomplished by the entity to which such grant or loan was made without limitation or restriction by reason of the existence of such grant or loan, other than such as may be established by such terms and conditions. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.370 Contributions from City prohibited.
Notwithstanding any provision herein, the Authority may not accept any monies or property from the City, whether denominated a gift, donation, contribution or otherwise. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

Article IV. Revenue Bonds

17.25.380 Bonds.
As used in this chapter, “bonds” means revenue bonds issued pursuant to this article or under any applicable general law of the State of California. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.390 Power to borrow and issue bonds – Nature of bonds.
The Authority shall have power to borrow money to provide funds for any project, including without limitation funds for the purpose of making grants or loans pursuant to SCCC 17.25.360, and to issue in its name revenue bonds to evidence the indebtedness created by such borrowing. The bonds of each issue shall constitute special obligations, and evidence a special indebtedness, of the Authority, which shall be a charge upon, and payable, both as principal and interest and as to any premiums upon the redemption of any thereof, solely from, such revenues and funds as are specified therein and in the proceedings for their issuance. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

17.25.400 Limited liability.
Neither the members of the governing board of the Authority nor any persons executing the bonds are liable personally on the bonds by reason of their issuance. The bonds and other obligations of the Authority are not a debt of the City, or any of its enterprises, the State or any of its political subdivisions. The bonds do not constitute an indebtedness within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory debt limitation or restriction. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

Article V. Rights of Obligees

17.25.410 Enforcement of rights.
In addition to all other rights conferred on an obligee and subject only to any contractual restrictions binding upon him, an obligee may:

(a) By mandamus, suit, action, or proceeding at law or in equity, compel the Authority and its members, officers, agents or employees to perform every term, provision, and covenant contained in any contract of the Authority with or for the benefit of the obligee, to carry out all covenants and agreements of the Authority, and to fulfill all duties imposed upon the Authority by this chapter.

(b) By suit, action, or proceeding in equity, enjoin any acts or things which are unlawful and in violation of any of the rights of the obligee.

The members, officers, agents and employees of the Authority are not personally liable for damages caused by the performance or nonperformance of their duties under this chapter or any contract or indenture made pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 5-24-11).

Chapter 17.30
STADIUM AUTHORITY PROCUREMENT POLICY
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

17.30.010    General purpose, intent and authority.

17.30.020    Definitions.

17.30.030    Exemptions from centralized purchasing.

Article II. General Provisions and Definitions

17.30.040    Supplies, goods and equipment.

17.30.050    Bidding.

17.30.060    Purchase orders.

17.30.070    Encumbrance of funds.

17.30.080    Best value selection procedures.

17.30.090    Formal bidding procedure.

17.30.100    Action by Stadium Authority Board.

17.30.110    Exclusion.

17.30.120    Service contracts – Signature authority.

17.30.130    Public works.

17.30.140    Bid contest procedures.

17.30.150    Enforcement and remedies.

17.30.160    Information collection and reporting.

17.30.170    Conflict of interest.

17.30.180    Amendments.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

17.30.010 General purpose, intent and authority.
(a) General Purpose. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to formalize the policies and procedures with respect to procurement for the Santa Clara Stadium Authority (“Stadium Authority”).

(b) Intent. The Stadium Authority was formed to facilitate the acquisition, financing, development, operation and maintenance of the Stadium Project. The Stadium Authority intends, through the adoption of these procurement policies, to:

(1) Establish efficient, equitable and effective procedures for the procurement activities of the Stadium Authority;

(2) Ensure the integrity and equity in the procurement activities of the Stadium Authority and provide safeguards for the impartial application of the procurement policies; and

(3) Enable the Stadium Authority to operate and maintain equipment and facilities responsibly and to complete projects on time and on budget.

(c) Authority. The Executive Director shall be appointed as the purchasing officer of the Stadium Authority and shall have the authority to:

(1) Purchase or contract for supplies, materials, and equipment required by the Stadium Authority in accordance with prescribed purchasing and bidding procedures and such other rules and regulations;

(2) Negotiate and execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment, or delegate said duties to a designee;

(3) Act to procure for the Stadium Authority the needed quality and quantity of supplies, materials, and equipment at least expense to the Stadium Authority;

(4) Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

(5) Prepare and recommend to the Stadium Authority Board revisions to the rules governing the purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment for the Stadium Authority;

(6) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products;

(7) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of the purchasing system and other rules and regulations;

(8) Supervise the inspection of all supplies, materials, and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications, or delegate said duties to a designee;

(9) Maintain a bidders list, vendor catalog file(s), and the records needed for the efficient implementation of the procurement policies, or delegate said duties to a designee.

Any of the Executive Director’s authority may be delegated to contractors with the Stadium Authority; provided, that the contract delegating such authority is approved by the Stadium Authority Board and the procurement performed by the contractor is within the limits of a budget approved by the Stadium Authority Board for the year in which the contract is awarded.

(d) Waiver. The Executive Director (but not a contractor to whom the Executive Director has delegated its authority) shall have the authority to waive or modify any provisions of this chapter without any further action of the Stadium Authority Board. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning respectively prescribed to them by this section:

(a) “Contract amount” means the value of the entire contract, including any option. With respect to contracts for materials and supplies, the contract amount includes the costs of the materials and supplies as well as any installation and servicing costs including in the acquisition of the materials and supplies. In determining the contract amount, (1) multiple contracts with a single vendor for similar materials and supplies shall be considered a single contract, and (2) in the case of multi-year contracts covering years for which a budget has not yet been adopted shall not include amounts due in subsequent years that are conditioned on approval of the appropriate year’s budget.

(b) “Days” means calendar days.

(c) “Executive Director” means the Executive Director of the Stadium Authority, or a designee, including (except as otherwise specifically provided herein) any contractor to whom the Executive Director has delegated authority pursuant to SCCC 17.30.010(c).

(d) “Other public works” means other infrastructure, including, but not limited to, streets and highways, public rail transit, or water resource facilities and infrastructure not located on the stadium site or adjacent City streets and property.

(e) “Proposal” means the response by an offer or to a solicitation to obtain supplies or services.

(f) “Responsive” means a bid or offer submitted in response to a solicitation that conforms in all material respects to the requirements contained in the solicitation.

(g) “Stadium Authority” means the Santa Clara Stadium Authority.

(h) “Stadium Authority Board” means the governing board of the Santa Clara Stadium Authority.

(i) “Stadium Project” means the construction, operation, and maintenance of a stadium, including all appurtenant improvements and related facilities located on the stadium site or adjacent City streets and property.

(j) “Services” means the rendering of time, effort, or work, rather than the furnishing of a specified physical product other than reports incidental to the required performance.

(k) “Supplies” means all tangible personal property, including furniture, commodities, goods, equipment, leases of equipment, and insurance, including incidental insurance. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.030 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
The Stadium Authority, as a joint exercise of power authority established under Articles 1 through 4 of Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code (Government Code Sections 6500 et seq.), is not a department of the City and shall be exempt from the requirements that City departments purchase or contract or specify supplies, materials, and equipment through the purchasing division. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

Article II. General Provisions and Definitions

17.30.040 Supplies, goods and equipment.
The procurement policies apply to all purchases or contracts for supplies, goods, materials, and equipment by and on behalf of the Stadium Authority. Purchases of supplies, materials, and equipment by bid procedures shall be pursuant to SCCC 17.30.050 through 17.30.110. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.050 Bidding.
Bidding for supplies, goods, and equipment may be dispensed with only when:

(a) An emergency requires that an order be placed with the source of supply that can furnish the personal property most expeditiously. For purposes of this section, “emergency” shall be considered to mean the situations where delay caused by obtaining competitive bids would result in health and safety risks; or

(b) The contract amount involved is less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for supplies, goods and equipment if said expenditure has been included in the Stadium Authority’s approved annual budget; or

(c) The personal property can be obtained from only one vendor.

Informal selection procedures (SCCC 17.30.080) shall be conducted for purchases or contract amounts of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, but less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and

Formal bidding procedures (SCCC 17.30.090) shall be conducted for purchases or contract amounts of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more.

Bidders will be deemed to be doing business in the City of Santa Clara and are required to pay taxes locally, unless required otherwise by State law. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.060 Purchase orders.
(a) Purchases of supplies, materials, and equipment not subject to bid procedures shall be made only by purchase order approved by the Executive Director.

(b) Prior to making contractual payments, the Executive Director shall verify that the goods or services have been provided according to the terms and conditions set forth in the contract. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.070 Encumbrance of funds.
Except for reserved purchase order numbers assigned by the purchasing officer, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order or award any contract for supplies, materials, or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the proper account of the Stadium Authority to which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.080 Best value selection procedures.
Except as otherwise provided, purchases and contracts for supplies, materials, or equipment of estimated value in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, but less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), may be made by the Executive Director, in the open market as follows:

(a) Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchases shall be based on at least three bids unless the Executive Director determines that obtaining three bids is not feasible as a result of the lack of firms qualified to provide the required materials and supplies.

(b) Request for Bids. The Executive Director, in his or her discretion, may solicit bids by telephone request, written request to prospective vendors by mail, including electronic mail, and/or by notice posted on a public bulletin board in or near the office of the Stadium Authority.

(c) The Request for Bid. The request for bid made subject to this section shall describe the supplies, materials, or equipment desired in specific terms and how to obtain more detailed information, and shall state the time and place for submission and opening of bids; provided, however, the bid specifications shall ensure that more than one vendor could meet the bid requirements.

(d) Submission of Bids. Bids may be submitted to the Executive Director in writing or verbally. The award of the contract by the Executive Director shall be on the basis of best value. The Executive Director may reject any and all bids. The Executive Director shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. Such record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection.

(e) Evaluation of Bids. In the evaluation of bids under this section, the Executive Director may consider any of the following illustrative evaluation factors in determining the best value bid, but will take all necessary measures to ensure that the contracts are awarded fairly:

(1) Price, dollar value of procurement pricing information and quotations;

(2) Demonstrated ability to perform all requirements and delivery of the quantity of supplies, materials, and equipment within the time specified;

(3) Specific examples of similar past performance and demonstrated experience in providing the quality and quantity of supplies, materials, and equipment for projects of comparable size, scope and complexity;

(4) Evaluation of the ability to provide future maintenance and services, if applicable;

(5) Quality of supplies, materials and equipment to be provided under the contract; and

(6) Compliance or responsiveness of bid with bid specifications.

(f) Board Approval. All contracts or agreements to acquire supplies, materials, and equipment in the contract amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more shall require the approval of the Stadium Authority Board. The Executive Director may enter into a contract or agreement with a contract amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, but less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) pursuant to this section; provided, that the contract or agreement notes that Stadium Authority Board ratification must be later secured. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.090 Formal bidding procedure.
Except as otherwise provided, purchases and contracts for supplies, materials, or equipment of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the following procedures:

(a) Notices Inviting Bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.

(1) Published Notices. Notices inviting bids shall be published and/or posted at least ten days before the date of opening the bids. Such notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, and/or notices shall be posted in at least three public places in the City that have been designated as places for posting public notices. Whichever notice is given shall be determined by the Executive Director as being in the best interest of the City to attract bids.

(2) Bidders List. The Executive Director shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers. It shall be within the discretion of the Executive Director to add, delete, reject, and change the bidders list so as to maintain a current list of suppliers who are capable of responsible and efficient service to the Stadium Authority.

(b) Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the Executive Director, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid securities; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of the contract has been mailed unless the Stadium Authority is responsible for the delay. On refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, the contract may be awarded to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the contract is awarded to the next lowest responsible bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the Stadium Authority to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

(c) Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed written bids shall be submitted to the Executive Director and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

(d) Rejection of Bids. The Executive Director may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids.

(e) Award of Contracts. All contracts shall be awarded by the Executive Director to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in these procedures.

(f) Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the successful bidder may be determined by the casting of lots with the bidders in public at the time designated by the Executive Director.

(g) Performance Bonds. The Executive Director shall have the authority to require a performance bond in such amounts as the Executive Director shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the Stadium Authority before entering into a contract. If the Executive Director requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

(h) Board Approval. All contracts or agreements to acquire supplies, materials, and equipment with a contract amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more shall require the approval of the Stadium Authority Board. The Executive Director may enter into a contract or agreement with a contract amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, but less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), pursuant to this section; provided, that the contract or agreement notes that Stadium Authority Board ratification must be later secured. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.100 Action by Stadium Authority Board.
The Executive Director shall conduct all purchasing procedures for acquisition of supplies, materials, and equipment for users as authorized by the Stadium Authority by adoption of the annual budget. No award of contract shall be made for a cost in excess of the authorized budget amount through the Executive Director without first obtaining approval of the Stadium Authority Board for a budget amendment by addition, cancellation, or transfer; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not preclude award of multi-year contracts covering years for which a budget has not yet been adopted so long as the contract is within the limits of a budget approved by the Stadium Authority Board for the year in which the contract is awarded and subsequent years are conditioned on approval of the appropriate year’s budget. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.110 Exclusion.
These policies and procedures do not apply to the following:

(a) Contracts with or procurements from a State agency, political subdivision of the State, or any agency or political subdivision or a local, State or Federal government;

(b) Acquisition of real property or permanent or temporary interest in real estate;

(c) Disposal of real or personal property;

(d) Contracts for professional services in connection with threatened or pending litigation;

(e) Agreements with professional sports teams and with lessees and licenses for events in the Stadium, such as concerts, conferences, and sporting events in the Stadium; and

(f) Contracts for materials and supplies required during construction of the Stadium Project related to the construction of the Stadium Project. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.120 Service contracts – Signature authority.
The Executive Director shall have the authority to execute contracts with third parties for services provided to the Stadium Authority, which shall be exempt from the competitive process, as follows:

(a) The Executive Director, or designee, is authorized to purchase professional, nonprofessional and personal services required by the Stadium Authority and to execute contracts for such services on behalf of the Stadium Authority in contract amounts up to and including two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per contract, subject to approved budgetary amount, so long as such persons are specially trained and experienced and competent to perform the special services required. Contracts with a contract amount above this dollar limit shall be referred to the Stadium Authority Board for approval;

(b) The Executive Director is authorized to delegate all or a portion of the authority to execute such service contracts to specified Stadium Authority employees at her/his discretion. Such delegation of authority shall be made in writing;

(c) Such service contracts shall be generally consistent with forms of contracts approved by the Stadium Authority Counsel’s office or shall be subject to the final review and approval of the Stadium Authority Counsel’s office for form and content;

(d) The maximum amount of the value of the service contracts which the Executive Director or designee is authorized to execute shall be adjusted as needed by resolution of the Stadium Authority Board, with amounts rounded to the nearest five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) increment;

(e) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, solicitations for professional services of private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, or construction project management firms shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.130 Public works.
(a) Stadium Project. Government Code Section 6532 authorizes the Stadium Authority to award a contract for the development of the Stadium Project to a qualified design builder under specified conditions. As a requirement of Government Code Section 6532, any subcontracts awarded by the design builder to be funded with either Redevelopment Agency funds or Community Facility District funds must be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with procedures consistent with the City Charter. All other subcontracts awarded by the design-builder may be awarded on a best value basis consistent with the Subcontractor Selection and Procurement Plan adopted by the Stadium Authority.

(b) Other Public Works. For all other expenditures required for a public project, but which are not associated with the Stadium Project, the Stadium Authority shall comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 20162 and all applicable City Charter provisions. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.140 Bid contest procedures.
(a) A protest based on alleged improprieties in the application of this chapter shall be submitted to the Executive Director, not later than seven days after the basis for the protest is known or should have been known. The Executive Director’s responsibilities under this section may not be delegated to a contractor. An untimely protest shall be denied on that basis.

(b) The written protest must include all of the following:

(1) Name and address of the protestor;

(2) Identification of the procurement or contract at issue;

(3) A detailed statement of the reasons for the protest along with supporting exhibits, evidence, or documents to substantiate the reasons for the protest.

(c) The Executive Director shall review each protest filed and consider the protest and shall issue a written determination and finding regarding the protest and shall forward to the protestor, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by any other method deemed suitable which provides evidence of receipt.

(d) The protestor may appeal the determination and finding to the Stadium Authority Board within seven days after receipt of said written determination and finding from the Executive Director. The appeal must be in writing and must include a copy of the original protest application and the determination and finding letter, along with a written explanation of the grounds for disagreement with the determination and finding letter. If the protestor desires a hearing on the protest, a request for a hearing must be made, in writing, at the time of the appeal. An untimely appeal shall be denied on that basis. If a protestor fails to appeal the determination and finding letter, said letter will constitute the final decision of the Stadium Authority.

(e) If a timely request for a hearing on a protest appeal is received, the Stadium Authority Board shall conduct a hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting but in no event later than twenty-one (21) days after the receipt of the hearing request.

(f) The Stadium Authority Board shall issue a decision on the protest, which shall represent the final decision of the Stadium Authority, subject to judicial review.

(g) When a protest has been timely filed, the Stadium Authority shall not award the contract subject of the protest until there is a final Stadium Authority decision on the protest. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.150 Enforcement and remedies.
(a) If the Executive Director (but not a contractor to whom the Executive Director has delegated authority) or Stadium Authority Board determines that a procurement violates these policies and procedures, the Stadium Authority may determine that the procurement contract is voidable, and not automatically voided, if:

(1) All parties acted in good faith;

(2) Ratification of the contract would not undermine the intent and purpose of these procurement policies; and

(3) The violation(s) is insignificant or did not prevent substantial compliance with these procurement policies.

(b) If the Executive Director (but not a contractor to whom the Executive Director has delegated authority) or the Stadium Authority Board determines that a procurement violates these policies and procedures but satisfies the conditions in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section, then the Executive Director (but not a contractor to whom the Executive Director has delegated authority) or the Stadium Authority Board may choose to ratify the contract if the contract is in the best interest of the Stadium Authority, or alternatively choose to void the contract.

(c) If the Executive Director or Stadium Authority Board determines that a procurement violates these policies and procedures and is voidable under subsection (a) of this section, and that the contractor has acted in violation of these policies and procedures, the Executive Director or Stadium Authority Board may void the contract or ratify the contract without prejudice to the Stadium Authority’s right to appropriate legal action. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.160 Information collection and reporting.
(a) The Executive Director will create and maintain a bidders list, consisting of information about all firms that bid or quote on its contracts. The bidders list will include the name, address, and annual gross receipts of firms. The Stadium Authority shall provide a procedure requiring that bidders provide all requested information in their submission or upon the letting of a contract.

(b) The Executive Director shall prepare, and submit to the Stadium Authority Board, a report at the end of the Stadium Authority’s fiscal year summarizing the total number of contracts let by the Stadium Authority, the number of contracts approved under an exception, the number of contracts approved under best value procedures and the number of contracts approved under formal bidding procedures, and to the extent possible listing information related to application and outreach efforts conducted to implement the DBE program. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.170 Conflict of interest.
(a) The Stadium Authority and Stadium Authority staff and agents are subject to the State ethics law and its provisions dealing with conflict of interest, including but not limited to Government Code Sections 81000 et seq. and shall be subject to the requirements of the City’s Code of Ethics and Values adopted by the City Council in March 2000 and modified by the City Council in August 2001.

(b) The Stadium Authority and Stadium Authority staff may not accept or receive, directly or indirectly, any money, property, or other benefit from any person or entity doing business with, or interested in doing business with, the Stadium Authority. The Stadium Authority, the Executive Director, and Stadium Authority staff may not have any financial interest in any firm or company doing business with the Stadium Authority, or in any contract to which the Stadium Authority is a party. Any exception to this policy requires the approval of the Stadium Authority Board. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

17.30.180 Amendments.
The policy may be amended by the City Council from time to time by a duly adopted resolution. (Ord. 1900 § 1, 11-27-12).

Chapter 17.35
PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND
Sections:

17.35.010    Definitions.

17.35.020    Requirement to provide park and recreational facilities.

17.35.030    Formula for calculation of land dedication requirement.

17.35.040    Formula for calculation of fee in lieu of land dedication.

17.35.050    Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee.

17.35.060    Use of park in-lieu fees.

17.35.070    Credit for private open space.

17.35.080    Procedure.

17.35.090    Exceptions.

17.35.010 Definitions.
(a) “Active recreational use” shall mean activity that requires the use of organized play areas, including, but not limited to, softball, baseball, football and soccer fields, tennis and basketball courts, fitness stations and various forms of children’s play equipment.

(b) “Approving authority” shall mean the board, body or individual otherwise empowered by this Code or State law to approve the development application.

(c) “Average density” shall mean the average number of persons per household, as established by City Council resolution, in accordance with the most recent available Federal Census data.

(d) “Complete application” means an application for a residential development that has been determined to be complete by the Department of Planning and Inspection.

(e) “Dwelling unit categories” shall mean the following types of dwellings, as they are defined by the Zoning Ordinance, for which a separate dedication and/or fee requirement is to be set by Council resolution:

(1) Duplex dwellings and multiple dwellings.

(2) Single-family dwellings.

(f) “Parkland dedication standard” shall mean the acreage of park and recreational facilities to be provided per one thousand (1,000) City residents, which shall be initially set at three acres per one thousand (1,000) residents, and as may be periodically adjusted by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14; Ord. 1937 § 1, 2-24-15).

17.35.020 Requirement to provide park and recreational facilities.
Every person who constructs or causes to be constructed a dwelling unit or dwelling units or who subdivides residential property shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or provide a combination of such dedication and fee, at the discretion of the City, for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities, at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter.

(a) For subdivisions containing more than fifty (50) parcels, condominium developments of more than fifty (50) dwelling units, and residential developments not including a subdivision, the City may impose a parkland dedication requirement, a fee in lieu of such dedication, or a combination of the two.

(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, for subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or fewer, the City may impose a fee only. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project contains fifty (50) parcels or fewer, but will contain more than fifty (50) dwelling units, the City may impose a parkland dedication requirement, a fee in lieu of such dedication, or a combination of the two. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.030 Formula for calculation of land dedication requirement.
The formula for determining the required acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows:

(a) The average density for the specific dwelling unit category; multiplied by

(b) The parkland dedication standard; divided by

(c) One thousand (1,000) population.

By way of example, as of the adoption date of this chapter, the average density for a single-family detached dwelling unit is 2.9 persons, and the parkland dedication standard is three acres per one thousand (1,000) residents. For a single-family detached unit, the required acreage would therefore be 2.9 x 3.0 / 1,000 = 0.0087 acres per single-family detached unit. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.040 Formula for calculation of fee in lieu of land dedication.
(a) When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication, the maximum amount of such fee shall be determined by the fair market value of the amount of land that would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to SCCC 17.35.030, as set forth below. The date of valuation of the property for in-lieu fee purposes shall be the date that the City determines that the developer’s application for a parcel map or tentative subdivision map, or application for projects not involving a subdivision, is complete.

(b) Fair Market Value.

(1) The City shall determine the fair market value of the property by using the average per acre land value for property in the City of Santa Clara, based upon a survey of land values and sale records in the City. The City Council shall set a minimum of three such average values, one for each of the three existing Zip Codes in the City (95050, 95051, 95054). The City Council may, at its discretion, set average values for additional subregions of the City. The City Council shall review the fair market values not less than annually and set the values in a Council resolution.

(2) If the developer objects to this determination of fair market value, the developer may elect to have the value established by appraisal. If the developer chooses this option, the developer shall deposit with the City an amount sufficient to cover the cost of an appraisal, which the City shall conduct. The appraisal shall be completed prior to approval of the tentative or parcel map or, for developments not involving a subdivision, prior to the issuance of a building permit.

(c) Based on the determination of fair market value set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, for each of the dwelling unit categories, the City Council shall set the amount of fees to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication in a Council resolution, which the Council shall review annually. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.050 Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee.
In subdivisions of over fifty (50) parcels of land, in condominium developments of more than fifty (50) dwelling units, and in residential developments not involving a subdivision, a combination of land dedication and fee payment may be required. In any such case, the sum of the in-lieu fees and the fair market value of the land to be dedicated shall equal the amount that would otherwise be required if the developer paid only an in-lieu fee pursuant to this chapter.

(a) When only a portion of the land to be developed is identified in the parks, open space, and recreation goals and policies of the General Plan as the site for a local park, the portion identified in the General Plan shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of SCCC 17.35.040 shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to SCCC 17.35.030.

(b) When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been dedicated and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of SCCC 17.35.040 shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to SCCC 17.35.030, the fees to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision.

(c) If, as a result of a recent annexation or boundary change, the General Plan does not specify the specific amount of park and recreational land for a proposed subdivision containing more than fifty (50) parcels or a residential development not involving a subdivision of more than fifty (50) dwelling units, the City Council shall determine whether it accepts a land dedication, payment of a fee, or a combination of both a dedication and fee, based upon the following factors:

(1) The topography, geology, access and location of land in the development available for dedication;

(2) The size and shape of the development and land available for dedication;

(3) The feasibility of dedication; and

(4) The availability of previously dedicated park property.

(d) The determination of the City as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.060 Use of park in-lieu fees.
The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited to the park impact fee fund, and shall be used for the purposes set forth below.

(a) Money within the park impact fee fund shall be segregated by fee source and used and expended primarily for the acquisition and/or expansion of parks and recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the public by way of purchase of necessary land.

(b) In the alternative, for residential projects involving subdivisions only, if the City Council finds that there is already sufficient land available for such uses, then as a second priority, this money shall be used for the improvement and rehabilitation of existing land and facilities for park and recreational purposes.

(c) Except as otherwise provided in this section, for developments involving a subdivision of land, the land, fees, or combination thereof shall be used to serve the subdivision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for subdivisions for which the City requires the payment of fees or a combination of a land dedication and fees, the fees may be spent on facilities in a neighborhood other than the neighborhood of the subdivision, if all of the following requirements are met:

(1) The neighborhood in which the fees are to be expended has fewer than three acres of park area per one thousand (1,000) members of the neighborhood population;

(2) The neighborhood of the subdivision for which the fees are paid has a park area that meets or exceeds the parkland dedication standard;

(3) The City holds a public hearing before using the fees;

(4) It is reasonably foreseeable that residents of the subdivision will use the proposed park and recreational facilities in the neighborhood where the fees are used; and

(5) The neighborhood where the fees are used is within a ten-minute walking distance of the subdivision. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.070 Credit for private open space.
Where private open space is to be provided in a proposed residential development, the developer may submit a written request with the project application for a credit against the amount of parkland dedication or the amount of the in-lieu fee thereof. Except as otherwise provided below, as a prerequisite for receiving credit, housing developments of fifty (50) or more units must first dedicate a minimum of one acre of public open space to the City for public park purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, housing developments consisting solely of multifamily units will be exempt from the one acre public open space dedication prerequisite. A maximum credit of fifty percent (50%) of the value of the land devoted to private open space that is eligible for credit may be given against the requirement of land dedication or fees in lieu thereof required by this chapter, if the approving authority finds that it complies with this section and that it is in the public interest to do so. In order to receive such a credit, the approving authority must make findings that the private open space meets the following standards:

(a) The calculation of private open space shall not include features required to be included by zoning and building codes and other applicable laws, including but not limited to yards, court areas, setbacks, decorative landscape areas required with residential site design and other open areas.

(b) The private open space shall be devoted to active recreational uses, and for developments involving a subdivision shall be wholly or partially owned and maintained by the future residents of the development. The private ownership and maintenance of the open space shall be restricted for such use by a recorded written agreement, conveyance, covenant or restrictions. Such document shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the City Attorney, and any future proposed amendments must be first submitted to the City Attorney for approval prior to adoption.

(c) The space shall be reasonably adapted for use for recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location, and the developer must propose and agree to design and construct the necessary recreational and park facilities and improvements associated with each element of the private open space set forth below; said facilities and improvements shall be constructed prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the units that are receiving the credit.

(d) Facilities proposed for the open space shall be in substantial compliance with the provisions of the parks, open space, and recreation goals and policies of the General Plan.

(e) The developer shall supply a covenant to maintain the open space to the City Attorney prior to approval of the final subdivision map for review and approval. Once approved by the City Attorney, such document shall be recorded simultaneously with the final subdivision map.

(f) The private open space must contain at least four of the following eight elements:

(1) Turfed play field, comprised of a single unit of land which is generally level and free of physical barriers which would inhibit group play activities with a minimum contiguous area of one-half acre;

(2) Children’s play apparatus area that conforms to the then current Federal Consumer Product Safety Commission guidelines;

(3) Landscaped and furnished, park-like quiet area;

(4) Recreational community gardens;

(5) Family picnic area;

(6) Game, fitness or sport court area;

(7) Accessible swimming pool (minimum size forty-two (42) feet by seventy-five (75) feet) with adjacent deck and lawn areas;

(8) Recreation center buildings and grounds.

(g) Shape and Size.

(1) The combined area of active recreational uses for a facility to qualify is a minimum of three-quarters acre.

(2) The shape and location of the open space shall provide the greatest utility possible to the greatest number of residents of the development for which credit is sought. If limited access recreation areas are proposed, their credit value can only be applied against the park fee obligation generated by those residents with access to the said recreation area.

(3) Irregularly shaped pieces of property of less than optimum utility or burdened by topographic considerations that render them unsuitable for active recreational uses shall not be eligible for credit.

(h) Housing developments for which one hundred percent (100%) of the units are affordable to low and/or moderate income households, and housing developments for senior citizens authorized by the California Civil Code or the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act, will be eligible for up to an additional fifteen percent (15%) credit toward the parkland dedication requirement or fees in lieu thereof; provided, that the approving authority finds that (1) the development complies with all other provisions of this section and that (2) providing the additional credit would serve the public interest. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14; Ord. 1937 § 2, 2-24-15).

17.35.080 Procedure.
(a) Upon receiving a complete application for a residential development or subdivision, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall determine the conditions necessary to comply with the requirements for parkland dedication or fees in lieu thereof as set forth in this chapter and said conditions shall be proposed to the approving authority as conditions of approval for the project. The establishment of such conditions for projects that do not involve a subdivision shall comply with the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 66001 et seq.

(b) At the time of project approval, the approving authority shall consider the recommendation of the Director of Parks and Recreation and make a final determination as to the land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the developer.

(c) Any in-lieu fees imposed under this chapter shall be due and payable to the City prior to issuance of a building permit for each dwelling unit.

(d) Refunds. In the event a developer does not use a building permit for construction of a dwelling unit, the City will refund the fee collected for that dwelling unit at the time of expiration of the building permit. In addition, the City shall commit the funds to the uses authorized under this chapter within five years of the latter of the date the fee was paid, the issuance of buildings permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, or the construction of one-half of the dwelling units for developments not involving subdivisions. If such fees are not committed within this time, they, without any deductions, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the properties in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the development. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

17.35.090 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following developments:

(a) Commercial or industrial subdivisions that involve no residential component. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may, at its discretion, impose a condition on the approval of a parcel map or subdivision map requiring that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the City may require the owner of each parcel to pay the fee as a condition of the issuance of the permit.

(b) Convalescent hospitals and similar dependent care facilities.

(c) Residence halls on the campus of a college or university.

(d) In the event that a developer pays a fee or dedicates land pursuant to this chapter for a multifamily rental housing development without a subdivision, and the developer or his successors subsequently subdivides the development within fifteen (15) years, the developer or his successors shall not be required to pay the fee or dedicate land for the subsequent subdivision that would be required under this chapter.

(e) Accessory dwelling units, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 1928 § 3, 7-15-14).

Chapter 17.40
CITYWIDE AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

17.40.010    Application.

17.40.020    Definitions.

17.40.030    Affordable housing plan.

17.40.040    Calculation of floor area.

17.40.050    General requirements for affordable units.

17.40.060    Affordable housing fees.

17.40.070    Exemptions.

17.40.080    Affordable housing requirements – Residential ownership projects.

17.40.090    Affordable housing requirements – Residential rental projects.

17.40.100    Affordable housing requirements – Nonresidential projects.

17.40.110    Affordable housing requirements – Mixed use projects.

17.40.115    Density incentive – East Tasman Specific Plan.

17.40.120    Application and review procedures.

17.40.130    Enforcement.

17.40.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to any new construction, additional floor area or conversion of residential ownership, residential rental, nonresidential and mixed use development. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.020 Definitions.
“Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the City guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership dwelling units in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

“Affordable housing cost” or “affordable ownership cost” means a sales price resulting in projected average monthly housing payments, during the first calendar year of a household’s occupancy, including interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property taxes, homeowners’ insurance, homeowners’ association dues, if any, and a reasonable allowance for utilities, property maintenance and repairs.

“Affordable housing master fee schedule” means the schedule of fees established by resolution of the City Council.

“Affordable housing plan” means a detailed plan submitted to the Community Development Department by the applicant, owner or developer indicating how the proposed project will comply with the requirements of this chapter.

“Affordable rent” means the total monthly housing expenses for a rental affordable unit, as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Sections 6910 through 6924.

“Affordable sales price” means the maximum affordable housing cost for purchasers of dwelling units, as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Sections 6910 through 6924.

“Affordable unit” means an ownership or rental dwelling unit that is affordable to households with very low, low or moderate income levels.

“Applicant” or “developer” means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the community ownership project, or the person or organization making application hereunder.

“Approval authority” shall mean the board, body or individual(s) otherwise empowered by this Code or State law to approve the development application.

“Area median income” or “AMI” means the annual median income for Santa Clara County, adjusted for household size, as published periodically in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its successor provision.

“City affordable housing fund” means a fund or account designated by the City to maintain and account for all monies received from housing in-lieu fees, impact fees, penalties, repayments owed to the City when an affordable unit is sold and any other fees associated with the provision of affordable housing pursuant to this chapter. The purpose of the fund is to assist in providing housing that is affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households and cover administrative costs of the affordable housing programs run through the Community Development Department.

“Complete application” means an application for a residential, nonresidential or mixed use development that has been determined to be complete by the Community Development Department.

“Development agreement” means a development agreement enacted by legislation between the City and a qualified applicant pursuant to Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5.

“Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof, but not including a vessel or boat, house trail or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family or duplex dwelling units, and multiple-family units, but not including motels, or boarding or lodging houses.

“Dwelling, duplex” means a building designed to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.

“Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof used and designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including automobile courts, motels or boarding houses.

“Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building designed for and/or occupied by one family.

“Existing floor area” means legally existing gross floor area at the time of application for a planning permit or legally existing floor area that was demolished not more than one year prior to the filing of the application for a planning permit. Affordable housing units demolished as part of a project will not be considered existing floor area.

“Extremely low income households” means households whose income does not exceed the extremely low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Filing requirement” shall mean, for the purposes of this chapter, an application for a residential, nonresidential or mixed use development on file with the Community Development Department with a planning application (including property owner signature), a substantial set of detailed planning drawings, and all planning application fees paid in full.

“Gross floor area” (for the purposes of this chapter) means the area computed from the outside dimensions of the building, including but not limited to, all common areas, ancillary uses to residential buildings such as gyms or community rooms, entrances, stairwells, garages or internal parking space, mezzanine floors and any other design features or other internal floor area of the building, expressed in square feet and fractions thereof.

“Housing development” means a project for the construction of residential units with a minimum of three dwellings, including a subdivision or common interest development. “Housing development” also includes either (1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing nonresidential building to residential use, or (2) substantial rehabilitation of an existing multiple-family dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

“Impact fee” means a fee paid by an applicant, owner or developer into the City affordable housing fund imposed on nonresidential development projects and established by resolution of the City Council and updated from time to time to mitigate the impact of residential and nonresidential projects on the need for affordable housing in the City. Current fees are outlined in the affordable housing master fee schedule and are referred to as affordable housing fees.

“In-lieu fee” means a fee paid in lieu of providing an on-site or off-site affordable housing requirement by an applicant, owner or developer into the City affordable housing fund imposed on for-sale and rental residential development projects and established by resolution of the City Council and updated from time to time to mitigate the impact of affordable housing in the City. Current fees are outlined in the affordable housing master fee schedule and are also referred to as affordable housing fees.

“Low income household” means households whose income does not exceed the low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Market-rate unit” means a housing unit or the legal lot for such unit offered on the open market at the prevailing market rate for purchase or rental.

“Moderate income households” means households whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Nonresidential development project” means any planned district, subdivision map, conditional use permit or other discretionary or nondiscretionary City land use approval, which authorizes new construction of gross square feet of nonresidential space, the conversion of residential use to a nonresidential use, or the conversion of exempt space (as provided in SCCC 17.40.070) to nonexempt space, including, but not limited to, retail, hotel, motel (including motel, motor hotel, inn and auto court), office, professional office, other commercial (as defined as permitted uses in Chapters 18.34, 18.36 and 18.38 SCCC), light industrial, data centers and warehouses.

“Planning approval” means any discretionary or nondiscretionary approval of a residential, nonresidential project or mixed use project, including but not limited to a comprehensive, precise or specific plan adoption or amendment, rezoning, zoning ordinance amendment, general plan amendment, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variance or architectural review.

“Residential” means a building or portion of a building designed or used exclusively for dwelling purposes.

“Residential development project” means any planned district, subdivision map, conditional use permit or other discretionary or nondiscretionary City land use approval, which authorizes three or more new dwelling units or live-work units or residential lots, or a combination of three or more residential lots, new dwelling units and live-work units including, but not limited to, detached single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiple-family dwelling structures, condominium or townhouse development, condominium conversions and land subdivisions intended to be sold or rented to the general public.

“Residential ownership project” means any residential project that includes the creation of three or more residential dwelling units that may be sold individually. A residential ownership project also includes condominium conversions.

“Residential rental project” means any residential project or property under common ownership and control that creates one or more net new dwelling units that cannot be lawfully sold individually.

“Very low income households” means the households whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.030 Affordable housing plan.
An application for a development project shall include a written affordable housing plan describing how the project will comply with the provisions of this chapter. The affordable housing plan shall be processed concurrently with all other applications required for the project. The approving authority shall consider the affordable housing plan when acting upon the project. The approving authority shall impose conditions of approval to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.040 Calculation of floor area.
Requirements are applicable to the net additional floor area (gross floor area) of all new development apart from those identified in SCCC 17.40.070, including, but not limited to, all common areas, entrances, stairwells, garages or internal parking space, mezzanine floors and any other design features or other internal floor area of the residential or nonresidential building, expressed in square feet and fractions thereof. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.050 General requirements for affordable units.
(a) Affordable units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the project, unless otherwise approved by City Council through a development agreement, and shall contain, on average, the same number of bedrooms and shall be comparable to the design of the market-rate units in terms of appearance, materials and finished quality of the market-rate units in the project. There shall not be significant identifiable differences between affordable and market-rate dwelling units which are visible from the exterior of the dwelling units and the size and design of the dwelling units shall be reasonably consistent with the market-rate units in the development. Affordable units shall have the same access to project amenities and recreational facilities as market-rate units.

(b) Affordable units shall be constructed within a similar timeline as the construction of market-rate units. No building permit shall be issued for any market-rate unit unless a proportional number of building permits have been issued for affordable units and no certificates of occupancy or final inspections shall be issued for any market-rate units unless a proportional number of certificates of occupancy or final inspections have been issued for affordable units.

(c) All affordable rental units shall be sold or rented only to qualified extremely low, very low, low or moderate income households and all affordable ownership units shall be sold only to qualified extremely low, very low, low or moderate income households pursuant to procedures and guidelines established by the City.

(d) For-sale and rental affordable units shall be maintained as affordable housing for a period as identified in the City Below Market Purchase Program Policies and Procedures Manual, but not less than twenty (20) years applicable to for-sale units and fifty-five (55) years applicable to rental units.

(e) Any household that occupies an affordable unit must occupy that unit as its principal residence, unless otherwise approved in writing for rental to a third party for a limited period of time due to household economic hardship, as determined by the City.

(f) No household may begin occupancy of an affordable unit until the income level of the household has been verified and determined to be eligible to occupy that unit by the City. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.060 Affordable housing fees.
(a) The City shall adopt, by resolution, current fee levels (in-lieu and impact fees) as well as administrative guidelines necessary for the implementation of this chapter. Unless otherwise modified by the City Council, affordable housing fees will automatically adjust for inflation annually, using the Engineering News-Record McGraw-Hill Construction Weekly Building Cost Index for San Francisco. If this index ceases to exist, the Community Development Director shall substitute another construction cost index, which in his/her judgment is as nearly equivalent to the original index as possible. The automatic fee adjustment, as modified by the City Council, will occur when the City conducts its annual update of the municipal fee schedule.

(b) The applicant shall pay in-lieu and impact fees prior to receipt of the occupancy certificate of the building or dwelling. Applicable fees will be determined at time of payment.

(c) All payment of in-lieu fees and other penalties and payments made to the City under this chapter shall be deposited into the City affordable housing fund. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.070 Exemptions.
The following development projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(a) Additions, remodeling or construction of a single residential unit or duplex unit on an existing lot of record, including accessory dwelling units.

(b) Commercial square footage within a mixed use development where the commercial space is integrated into a single building that also includes residential development at a density of thirty (30) dwelling units per acre or greater and where the commercial square footage does not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

(c) Assembly uses including lodges, clubs, youth centers and religious assemblies.

(d) Day care, nursery and school facilities.

(e) Hospitals.

(f) Other nonresidential uses not listed above, but which the City Council determines will have a minimal impact upon the demand for affordable housing and to be exempt pursuant to City Council resolution. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.080 Affordable housing requirements – Residential ownership projects.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all residential ownership projects, including the residential ownership portion of any mixed use project, except for any resident ownership project exempt under SCCC 17.40.070.

(a) Residential ownership projects of ten or more units must provide at least fifteen percent (15%) of the units at affordable housing costs for extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households, or some combination of those income categories. A developer shall select income categories for each of the affordable units such that the average income of purchasers will not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of AMI. Residential ownership projects of fewer than ten units may either provide one dwelling at an affordable housing cost for a household earning up to one hundred percent (100%) of AMI, or pay an in-lieu fee identified for residential ownership projects in the affordable housing master fee schedule.

(b) Where the calculation of affordable housing requirements described in this section result in a fractional unit, the applicant shall either pay an in-lieu fee to the City affordable housing fund or the development shall provide an additional unit to satisfy the requirement.

(c) Calculation of the number of affordable units required by this section shall be based on the number of dwelling units in the residential project.

(d) The in-lieu fee will be calculated as follows:

(Gross square feet of total residential floor area) minus (gross square feet of existing residential floor area) multiplied by (per square foot fee) equals (total housing in-lieu or impact fee).

(e) The sales prices for the affordable units shall be determined pursuant to the City of Santa Clara Below Market Purchase Program Policies and Manual.

(f) The City Council may authorize a developer to provide a percentage of affordable units lower than fifteen percent (15%), if such units are restricted to extremely low, very low or low income households and would represent an equal or greater amount of value in subsidy. Such requests shall be memorialized through a development agreement.

(g) The City Council may authorize a developer to utilize an alternate means of compliance with subsection (a) of this section, in part or in whole, such as a dedication of land for affordable housing, the development of affordable units at an off-site location, or some combination thereof. In either case, the City priority shall be for a location that is accessible to public transit. Such an alternative shall be memorialized through a development agreement.

(1) For a dedication of land, the value of the land must be at least equivalent to the value of the subsidy that would be required to produce the inclusionary units otherwise required under subsection (a) of this section.

(2) For the provision of units off site, the developer must commit to constructing the units within a time frame comparable to what the City would achieve through the inclusionary requirement. In addition, the developer must construct a greater number of affordable units than would be required under subsection (a) of this section, or at least an equal number of units with a greater degree of affordability. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.090 Affordable housing requirements – Residential rental projects.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all residential rental projects, including the residential rental portion of any mixed use project, except for any resident rental project exempt under SCCC 17.40.070.

(a) Residential rental projects of ten or more units must provide at least fifteen percent (15%) of the units at affordable housing costs made available at affordable rental prices to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households as long as the distribution of affordable units averages to a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) area median income. Residential rental projects of fewer than ten units may either provide an affordable unit or pay an in-lieu fee identified for residential rental projects in the affordable housing master fee schedule.

(b) Where the calculation of affordable housing requirements described in this section results in a fractional unit, the applicant shall either pay an in-lieu fee to the City affordable housing fund or the development shall provide an additional unit to satisfy the requirement.

(c) The impact fee or in-lieu fee will be calculated as follows:

(Gross square feet of total residential floor area) minus (square feet of existing residential floor area) multiplied by (per square foot fee) equals (total housing impact fee).

(d) Calculation of the number of affordable units required by this section shall be based on the number of dwelling units in the residential project.

(e) The rental prices shall be determined pursuant to the total monthly housing expenses for a rental affordable unit, as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Sections 6910 through 6924.

(f) The City Council may authorize a developer to provide a percentage of affordable units lower than fifteen percent (15%), if such units are restricted to extremely low, very low or low income households and would represent an equal or greater amount of value in subsidy. Such requests shall be memorialized through a development agreement.

(g) The City Council may authorize a developer to utilize an alternate means of compliance with subsection (a) of this section, in part or in whole, such as a dedication of land for affordable housing, the development of affordable units at an off-site location, or some combination thereof. In either case, the City priority shall be for a location that is accessible to public transit. Such an alternative shall be memorialized through a development agreement.

(1) For a dedication of land, the value of the land must be at least equivalent to the value of the subsidy that would be required to produce the inclusionary units otherwise required under subsection (a) of this section.

(2) For the provision of units off site, the developer must commit to constructing the units within a time frame comparable to what the City would achieve through the inclusionary requirement. In addition, the developer must construct a greater number of affordable units than would be required under subsection (a) of this section, or at least an equal number of units with a greater degree of affordability. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.100 Affordable housing requirements – Nonresidential projects.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new construction of nonresidential projects, including the nonresidential portion of any mixed use project.

(a) Affordable housing requirements applicable through nonresidential projects may be met through payment of an impact fee as identified in the affordable housing master fee schedule.

(b) The impact fee will be calculated on a per square foot basis for net new gross floor area. The formula below shall be used in calculating the amount of the housing impact fee:

(Gross square feet of total nonresidential floor area) minus (square feet of existing nonresidential floor area) multiplied by (per square foot fee) equals (total housing impact fee).

(c) As an alternative to payment of the impact fee, a developer or applicant or owner may request to mitigate the housing impacts through construction of affordable residential units on an appropriate housing site, the dedication of land for affordable housing or the provision of other resources to provide affordable housing. The City Council may approve this request if the proposed alternative furthers affordable housing opportunities in the City, at a value greater than or equal to the otherwise applicable impact fee and agreed with the City through a development agreement. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.110 Affordable housing requirements – Mixed use projects.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new construction of mixed use projects, except for the commercial portion of a mixed use project where the commercial space does not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and is integrated into a single structure that also includes residential development at a density of thirty (30) units per acre or greater or any other nonresidential project exempt under SCCC 17.40.070.

(a) Affordable housing requirements on the residential gross floor area portion of the mixed use project shall be met in line with the provisions of SCCC 17.40.080 or 17.40.090, depending on whether the residential units, as proposed, are for-sale or rental units.

(b) Affordable housing requirements applicable on the nonresidential gross floor area portion of the mixed use project shall be met in line with the provisions of SCCC 17.40.100.

(c) As an alternative to payment of the impact fee, a developer or applicant or owner may request to mitigate the housing impacts through construction of affordable residential units on an appropriate housing site, the dedication of land for affordable housing or the provision of other resources to provide affordable housing. The City Council may approve this request if the proposed alternative furthers affordable housing opportunities in the city equal to the payment of the impact fee and agreed with the City through a development agreement. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.115 Density incentive – Tasman East Specific Plan.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for either ownership or rental housing developed under the Transit Neighborhood Zoning Designation in the Tasman East Specific Plan Area, the following affordable housing requirements apply:

Project Density

Incremental Affordable Housing Requirement (Phase I – project applications filed through August 1, 2019)

Incremental Affordable Housing Requirement (Phase II – project applications filed after August 1, 2019)

Density = 120 DU/AC

10%

15%

120 DU/AC < Density = 140 DU/AC

8%

12%

Density > 140 DU/AC

5%

10%

(b) The affordability requirement is calculated on an incremental basis, meaning that for a project with a density of greater than one hundred forty (140) DU/AC in Phase I, the portion that equates to the first one hundred twenty (120) DU/AC of density would be calculated using the ten percent affordability requirement, with the affordability requirement being eight percent for the increment of units greater than one hundred twenty (120) and less than or equal to one hundred forty (140) DU/AC, and five percent for the increment of units over one hundred forty (140) DU/AC.

(c) Affordable units shall be priced such that the distribution of affordable units in a development averages to a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) area median income. (Ord. 1992 § 3, 11-27-18).

17.40.120 Application and review procedures.
(a) Upon receiving a complete application, along with an affordable housing plan as outlined in SCCC 17.40.030, the Community Development Director shall determine the conditions necessary to comply with the requirements for provision of affordable housing units, payment of in-lieu or impact fee, or land dedication as set forth in this chapter and said conditions shall be proposed to the approving authority as conditions of approval for the project.

(b) At the time of project approval, the approving authority shall consider the recommendation of the Community Development Director and make a final determination as to the affordable housing requirement to be fulfilled by the applicant, owner or developer.

(c) Any payment of housing impact fees and in-lieu fees imposed under this chapter shall be payable to the City prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy for a development project subject to this chapter or at a time otherwise specified by City Council ordinance or resolution.

(d) The requirements of this chapter are minimum requirements. The City may require additional affordable units or additional measures to further affordable housing to the extent it has authority to do so without respect to this chapter.

(e) The City Manager may adopt guidelines and/or procedures for implementing this chapter. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

17.40.130 Enforcement.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applicants proposing or constructing a development governed by this chapter. No planning approval shall be issued for development after the “effective date” unless it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.

(b) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person(s) or entity to sell or rent an affordable unit under this chapter at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to a household not qualified under this chapter.

(c) The City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all regulatory agreements and resale controls placed on affordable units by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

(d) The City may revoke, deny or suspend any permit or development approval for a residential project which has failed to comply with this chapter.

(e) Failure of any official or agency to impose the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of this chapter.

(f) The City shall be entitled to recover all its costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 1974 § 1, 1-23-18).

Title 18
ZONING*
Chapters:

18.02    Adoption, Title, Intent, Interpretation and Purpose

18.04    Zoning Districts

18.06    Definitions

18.08    Regulations for A – Agricultural Zoning Districts

18.10    Regulations for R1-8L – Single-Family, Larger Lot Area Zoning Districts

18.12    Regulations for R1-6L – Single-Family Zoning Districts

18.14    Regulations for R2-7L – Duplex Zoning Districts

18.16    Regulations for R3-18D – Low-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning Districts

18.18    Regulations for R3-25D – Moderate-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning Districts

18.20    Regulations for R3-36D – Medium-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning Districts

18.22    Regulations for Various Mixed Use Combining Zoning Districts

18.23    Regulations for the Lawrence Station Area Plan Zoning District (LSAP)

18.24    Regulations for R3-M – Mobile Home Park Zoning Districts

18.25    Regulations for the Transit Neighborhood (TN) Zoning District

18.26    Regulations for R3-RV – Recreational Vehicle Park Zoning Districts

18.28    Reserved

18.30    Regulations for OA – Professional Office Zoning Districts

18.32    Regulations for OG – General Office Zoning Districts

18.34    Regulations for CN – Neighborhood Commercial Zoning Districts

18.36    Regulations for CC – Community Commercial Zoning Districts

18.38    Regulations for CT – Thoroughfare Commercial Zoning Districts

18.40    Regulations for CD – Downtown Commercial Zoning Districts

18.42    Regulations for CP – Commercial Park Zoning Districts

18.44    Regulations for CR – Commercial Recreation Zoning Districts

18.46    Regulations for MP – Planned Industrial Zoning Districts

18.48    Regulations for ML – Light Industrial Zoning Districts

18.50    Regulations for MH – Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts

18.52    Regulations for B – Public, Quasi-Public, and Public Park or Recreation Zoning Districts

18.54    Regulations for PD – Planned Development and Combined Zoning Districts

18.56    Planned Development – Master Community Zoning Districts

18.58    Regulations for HT – Historic Combining Districts

18.60    Special Use Regulations Applicable to Certain Zoning Districts

18.62    Special Yard and Area Regulations

18.64    Special Height Regulations

18.66    Special Regulations Applicable to Residential Accessory Buildings

18.68    Service Station Standards

18.70    Use Regulations Applicable to Specified Regulated Businesses

18.72    Prohibition of Superstore Establishments

18.74    Parking Regulations

18.76    Architectural Review

18.78    Residential Density Bonus Standards

18.80    Sign Regulations

18.82    Prohibited Activities in Residential Districts

18.84    Special Provisions for Central Business Area – Parking Requirements

18.86    Off-Site Parking Provisions

18.88    Landscape Permit Provisions

18.90    Zoning Administrator

18.92    Procedure for Establishing Setback Lines

18.94    Nonconforming Uses

18.96    Certificates of Use and Occupancy

18.98    Special Zoning Exceptions

18.100    Home Occupations

18.102    Regulation of Marijuana

18.104    Massage Establishments

18.106    Historic Preservation

18.108    Variances

18.110    Use Permits

18.112    Amendments

18.114    Enforcement, Penalties and Legal Procedures

18.116    Legislative

18.118    Reasonable Accommodation

18.120    Emergency Shelters

*Code reviser’s note: The provisions of this title derive from Ordinance 1204, passed March 18, 1969, as amended through Ordinance 1664, passed December 1, 1994. For the ordinance history of specific Zoning Ordinance sections, refer to the 1983 compilation on file in the office of the City Clerk.

Chapter 18.02
ADOPTION, TITLE, INTENT, INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE
Sections:

18.02.010  Adoption and title.

18.02.020  Intent and purpose.

18.02.030  Application of district regulations.

18.02.040  Interpretation.

18.02.010 Adoption and title.
This Title 18 (entitled "Zoning") shall be known and cited variously as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara," the "City's Zoning Ordinance," the "Zoning Ordinance," or other similar designation. Title 18 may also be referred to as "this title." (Zoning Ord. § 1-1).

18.02.020 Intent and purpose.
(a) The intent of this title is to encourage development of various kinds of living, working and commercial activities in specific areas as defined in general in the general plan of the City and to segregate and protect the activities of these areas one from another and to accomplish the following purposes:

(1) To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare.

(2) To conserve the values of property throughout the City and to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial, professional and manufacturing areas, and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.

(3) To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property.

(4) To minimize congestion on the public streets and highways.

(5) To provide for the elimination of incompatible and nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district.

(6) To establish official plan lines and building setback lines.

(7) To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.

(8) To promote efficient urban design arrangement and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.

(9) To preserve landmarks which reflect the City's historical, architectural, cultural and aesthetic traditions and promote a sense of community identity and historic perspective. (Zoning Ord. § 1-2).

18.02.030 Application of district regulations.
The regulations established by this title within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.

(a) No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used, maintained, or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, maintained, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all the regulations herein specified.

(b) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this title. (Zoning Ord. § 1-3).

18.02.040 Interpretation.
When interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except as specifically herein provided, it is not intended by the adoption of this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, maintenance, establishment, moving, alteration, or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that in cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction upon the erection, construction, maintenance, establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of buildings, or the use of any such buildings or premises in said several districts, or any of them, than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations, or permits or by such easements, covenants or agreements, then in such case the provisions of this title shall control. (Zoning Ord. § 1-4).

Chapter 18.04
ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.04.010  List of zoning districts.

18.04.020  Alternative zoning districts.

18.04.030  Zoning map generally – Area of jurisdiction.

18.04.040  Zoning district boundaries.

18.04.010 List of zoning districts.
This title divides the incorporated territory of the City into geographical districts designated as zoning districts.

The reference contained herein to the word "districts" or "district" shall refer to the zoning districts as provided for in this title. The zoning districts are as follows:

A

Agricultural Zoning District

R1-8L

Single-Family Zoning District

R1-6L

Single-Family Zoning District

R2-7L

Duplex Zoning District

R3-18D

Low-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning District

R3-25D

Moderate-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning District

R3-36D

Medium-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning District

R3-M

Mobile Home Park Zoning District

R3-RV

Recreational Vehicle Park Zoning District

OG

General Office Zoning District

OA

Professional Office Zoning District

CN

Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District

CC

Community Commercial Zoning District

CT

Thoroughfare Commercial Zoning District

CD

Downtown Commercial Zoning District

CP

Commercial Park Zoning District

CR

Commercial Recreation Zoning District

MP

Planned Industrial Zoning District

ML

Light Industrial Zoning District

MH

Heavy Industrial Zoning District

B

Public or Quasi-Public Zoning District

PD

Planned Development Combining Zoning District

HT

Historic Combining Zoning District

(a) The following zoning district has not been listed above although it is a zoning district in the City at this time because it is intended that properties no longer be placed in that district and such district shall be repealed when properties are no longer in such district.

R3-HD

High-Density Multiple-Dwelling Zoning District – Central Business District

(Zoning Ord. § 2-1).

18.04.020 Alternative zoning districts.
Whenever a zoning district set forth in the following column on the left is under consideration, any zoning district set forth opposite thereof in the column on the right may also be considered without indicating any such alternative in any prescribed notice.

Zoning District

Alternative

A

---

R1-8L

---

R1-6L

R1-8L

R2-7L

R1-8L; R1-6L

R3-18D

R1-8L; R1-6L; R2-7L

R3-25D

R3-18D; R2-7L; R1-6L; R1-8L

R3-36D

R3-25D; R3-18D; R2-7L; R1-6L; R1-8L

R3-M

---

R3-RV

---

OA

---

OG

---

CN

---

CC

OG; CN

CT

OG; CN; CC

CD

OG; CN; CC; CT

CP

---

CR

---

MP

---

ML

MP

MH

ML; MP

B

---

PD

All zoning districts as authorized in SCCC 18.54.030

(Zoning Ord. § 2-2).

18.04.030 Zoning map generally – Area of jurisdiction.
The designations, locations and boundaries of the districts established are delineated upon the map entitled "City of Santa Clara, California Zoning Map" dated February 1, 1969, which is adopted as a part of this title, which map and all notations and information thereon and all amendments made or adopted by the City Council between the date of said map and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, and which are still in effect and not shown on said map are hereby made a part of this title by reference; said map is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Santa Clara. Any land within the incorporated limits of the City, now or in the future, and not designated or indicated on the zoning map shall be placed in the proper zoning district by initiation of amendment proceedings as set forth in SCCC 18.112.020. The inclusion of lands within the City's sphere of influence as adopted by the Santa Clara County Local Agency Formation Commission shall be sufficient authority for the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and approve the appropriate zoning and other land use applications that will apply to such land in the event of subsequent annexation to the City.

(a) Territory annexed to the City of Santa Clara and not shown as part of the City by the Zoning Map herein shall upon the effective date of such annexation be classified and zoned as agriculture or A district, unless the City Council has prior to such effective date prezoned said territory to another classification. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. (Zoning Ord. § 2-3).

18.04.040 Zoning district boundaries.
The boundaries of zoning districts may be indicated by map or legal description. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district, the following rules shall apply:

(a) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines, such street and alley lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

(b) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

(c) In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown upon said zoning district map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on such zoning district map.

(d) In case further uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission upon written application or upon its own motion, shall determine the location of such boundaries. (Zoning Ord. § 2-4).

Chapter 18.06
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

18.06.001    General.

18.06.005    Certain words and tenses.

18.06.010    Definitions.

18.06.001 General.
For the purpose of this title certain terms used herein are defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1680 § 1, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 3-1).

18.06.005 Certain words and tenses.
All words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; all words in the plural number shall include the singular number and all words in the singular number shall include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The word “lot” indicates the word “plot,” the word “building” includes the word “structures,” and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory. The word “City” as used herein shall mean the City of Santa Clara, State of California; the words “City Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Santa Clara, State of California; the words “Planning Commission” shall mean the City Planning Commission of the City of Santa Clara, State of California; the words “architectural committee” shall mean the architectural committee of the City of Santa Clara as established in Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Ord. 1680 § 1, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 3-2).

18.06.010 Definitions.
(a) “A” definitions:

(1) “Accessory unit” means one additional dwelling unit that includes a single kitchen, sleeping quarters, not more than one bathroom, and not more than two bedrooms on a lot six thousand (6,000) square feet or greater or one bedroom on a lot less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, on a lot with an existing single-family dwelling. The accessory unit may be attached to or part of the existing single-family unit or may be a detached structure and shall meet all other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including design compatibility with the main residence in accordance with the City’s design guidelines.

(2) “Airport” means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft.

(3) “Alley” means any public thoroughfare, other than a street, that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property at the rear or sides thereof.

(4) “Apartment” means a room or suite of two or more rooms that is designed for, intended for, and/or occupied by one family doing its cooking therein.

(5) Apartment House. See “Dwelling, multiple.”

(6) “Arcade” means any establishment in which six or more mechanical devices are located and operated as a game, contest, or amusement through the insertion of a coin or token or by the payment of a fee or other consideration.

(7) “Auto dealer” means a commercial business that sells five or more vehicles in a one-year period.

(8) “Automobile wrecking yard” means any use of premises for the conduct of a business whereon two or more vehicles not in operating condition are standing and/or on which used motor vehicles, or parts thereof, are dismantled and/or stored.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) “Basement” means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling that is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.

(2) “Basement storage area” means that portion of a building that is, and so long as it continues to be, as follows: complies with “basement” definition, is used solely for automobile parking, mechanical equipment, and/or the storage of goods and merchandise sold at the premises, and is not used as a display and/or sales area.

(3) “Block” means that property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting street and railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage.

(4) “Boarding house or rooming house” means a dwelling, other than a hotel, where lodging or lodging and meals for two or more persons is provided for compensation.

(5) “Building” means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

(6) “Building, accessory” means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot and/or building site.

(7) “Building, main” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot and/or building site on which it is situated.

(8) “Building, residential” means a building designed or used exclusively for dwelling purposes.

(9) “Building site” means a lot or parcel of land in single or joint ownership, and occupied or to be occupied by a building or buildings, together with such open spaces as are required by the terms of this title and having its frontage on a public street, road, highway, or permanent means of access thereto by way of a City-approved public accessway or thoroughfare for vehicular or pedestrian travel.

(10) “Business block” means frontage in any commercial or industrial district on one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets (or between an intersecting street and railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage) fifty percent (50%) or more of which is in use for business or industrial purposes.

(11) “Business, wholesale” means the selling of commodities in large quantities, as to retailers or jobbers rather than to consumers directly, but not including the open storage and/or sale of any material or commodity, and not including the processing or manufacture of any product or substance.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) “Central business area” means that area in the City of Santa Clara whose boundaries are generally described as follows: beginning at the intersection of Benton Street and Lincoln Street and extending easterly on Benton Street to Monroe Street; thence northerly on Monroe Street to Fremont Street; thence easterly on Fremont Street to Alviso Street; thence southerly on Alviso Street to Franklin Street; thence westerly on Franklin Street to Lafayette Street; thence southerly on Lafayette Street to Homestead Road; thence westerly on Homestead Road to Lincoln Street; thence northerly on Lincoln Street to the point of beginning.

(2) “Civic center” means an area developed or to be developed with any of the following public buildings or uses, including offices, libraries, playgrounds, parks, assembly halls, police stations, fire stations.

(3) “Clinic or medical health center” means an establishment where patients are admitted for study and treatment by two or more licensed physicians and their professional associates, practicing medicine together.

(4) “Common area” means that portion of a community ownership project exclusive of the individually owned units.

(5) “Community ownership” means: (i) a joint ownership of land and/or improvements combined with a separate ownership or exclusive right of occupancy of a unit or (ii) an investment apartment complex, which is defined as having separate ownership of at least two contiguous dwelling units per each ownership with all dwelling units to be rental units. The characteristics of the various forms of community ownership are as follows:

(A) “Community apartment” is an interest in real property in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon.

(B) “Condominium” is an interest in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be (i) an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, (ii) an estate for life, or (iii) an estate for years, such as a leasehold or subleasehold.

(C) “Investment apartments” is an interest in real property wherein an apartment complex has multiple ownership of contiguous rental dwelling units of at least two contiguous units per each ownership, with all dwelling units in the project to remain rental units. This separate ownership of multiple rental dwelling units is combined with common ownership by the associated unit owners of the land and buildings where such units are located.

(D) “Planned development” is an interest in real property, excluding condominiums, community apartments, and stock cooperatives, having either or both of the following features:

(i) Any contiguous lots, parcels, or areas (hereinafter collectively referred to as “common area[s]”) are owned in common by the owners of the separately owned lots, parcels, or areas. Said common area(s) may consist of areas or facilities; the beneficial use and enjoyment of said common area(s) characteristically are reserved to some or all of the owners of separately owned lots, parcels, or areas.

(ii) Any power exists (A) to enforce any obligation in connection with membership in an owners’ association or (B) to enforce any obligation pertaining to the beneficial use and enjoyment of any portion of, or any interest in, either the separately or commonly owned lots, parcels, or areas by means of a levy or assessment, which may become a lien upon the separately owned lots, parcels, or areas of defaulting owners or members. Said lien may be foreclosed in any manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages or deeds of trust, with or without a power of sale.

(E) “Stock cooperative” is a corporation that is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to improved real property, either in fee simple or for a term of years, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy.

(6) Community Ownership Project.

(A) “Community apartment project” means a project containing two or more apartment units in a community apartment, as community apartment is defined hereinabove, and shall include a conversion to such a project.

(B) “Condominium project” means a project containing two or more condominium units, as condominium is defined hereinabove, and shall include a conversion to such a project.

(C) “Investment apartment project” means a project containing at least seventy-five (75) rental units that has been subdivided into multiple blocks of unit ownership of at least two contiguous rental units per ownership block, as investment apartment is defined hereinabove, and shall include a conversion to such a project.

(D) “Planned development project” means a project containing two or more separately owned lot, parcel, or area units in a planned development, as planned development is defined hereinabove, and shall include a conversion to such a project.

(E) “Stock cooperative project” means a project containing two or more units of improved real property held by a stock cooperative, as stock cooperative is defined hereinabove, and shall include a conversion to such a project.

(7) “Conversion” means a change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing attached structures, to that defined for the appropriate type of community ownership project, as defined herein, regardless of the present or prior use of such lands and structures and regardless of whether improvements have been made or are to be made to such structures.

(8) “Court” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with and providing access to a building or buildings and that is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings, including the open space in a house court or court apartment.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) “Developer” (for purposes of Chapter 18.54 SCCC) means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the community ownership project, or the person or organization making application hereunder.

(2) “District” means a portion of the City within which certain uses of lands, buildings, and/or structures are permitted or prohibited and within which certain yards and other open spaces are required and certain height limits are established for the same, all as set forth and specified in this title.

(3) “Drive-through service facility” means a use involving direct sales or provision of services to occupants of vehicles in areas outside a totally enclosed building.

(4) “Driveway” means a permanently surfaced area on a lot designed and required to provide direct access for vehicles between a street and a private garage, carport, or other permitted parking space area or loading area.

(5) “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof, but not including a vessel or boat, house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family or duplex dwelling units, and multiple-family units, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding or lodging houses.

(6) “Dwelling, duplex” means a building designed to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.

(7) “Dwelling groups” means a group of two or more one-family, two-family, or multiple dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having a yard or court in common, but not including motels.

(8) “Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof used and designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including automobile courts, motels, or boarding houses.

(9) “Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family.

(10) “Dwelling unit” means a room or group of rooms including living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities, constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for residential occupancy on a nontransient basis and having not more than one kitchen.

(e) “E” definitions:

(1) “Electric power plants” means all equipment, fixtures, and personal property operated or maintained in connection with the production of electricity using any source of thermal, steam, wind, or solar energy with a generating capacity of more than five hundred (500) kilowatts and less than fifty (50) megawatts, including all conduits, ducts, or other devices, materials, apparatus, or property used or to be used for the transmission of the electricity so produced.

(f) “F” definitions:

(1) “Family” means an individual or group of persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, including State or County licensed residence programs which comply with State law. “Family” shall not be construed to include a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons occupying a hotel, boarding house, or similar institution.

(2) “Floor area ratio” means the gross floor area of the single-family house divided by the total lot area. Garages and accessory units are included in the gross floor area for the purposes of this title. The floor area includes the sum of all the floors in the main structure measured to the outside surface of the exterior walls. It includes the stairwells at all floors and all areas that are greater than fifty percent (50%) enclosed with walls and covered.

(3) “Fraternity or sorority house” means a residential structure used by a fraternal organization recognized by a school, college, or university as living quarters for its members and for business, meeting, or social activities related to the organization.

(g) “G” definitions:

(1) “Garage or carport” means an accessible, roofed parking space meeting the minimum dimensions set forth in Chapter 18.74 SCCC.

(2) “Garage, private” means a structure designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles by the occupants of the dwelling, including roofed parking space or carport.

(3) “General plan” means the latest adopted comprehensive long-term plan adopted in accordance with the State planning and zoning law to guide the physical development of the City, including diagrams and text setting forth objectives, principles, standards, and plan proposals.

(4) “Grade (adjacent ground elevation)” means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the property line, if it is less than five feet distant from said wall. In case a wall is parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the lowest point of elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way.

(5) “Gross floor area” means the area computed from the outside dimensions of the building and not excluding corridors and other design features and aggregated for each additional story or mezzanine floor, excluding any basement storage area.

(h) “H” definitions:

(1) “Height of buildings” is a vertical distance from the “grade” to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.

(2) “Historic landmark” means an individual structure or group of structures on a single lot, a site, an area, a district, or combination thereof, having a special historical, architectural, cultural, or aesthetic value.

(3) “Home occupation” is an accessory use of a dwelling that shall constitute, either entirely or partly, the livelihood of a person living in the dwelling, which use shall meet and be subject to all of the provisions of Chapter 18.100 SCCC, Home Occupations.

(4) “Home for the ambulatory aged” means where the proprietor furnishes lodging and varying degrees of custodial care to persons who are elderly, but are otherwise in good health and ambulatory.

(5) “Hospital” means an institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the medical or surgical care of its patients for twenty-four (24) hours or more. The term “hospital” as used in this title does not apply to institutions operating solely for the treatment of mentally ill persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts, or other types of cases necessitating confinement of patients, and the term “hospital” shall not be used for convalescent, nursing, shelter, or boarding homes.

(6) “Hotel, motel, motor hotel, inn, or auto court” means an establishment consisting of one building or a group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging accommodations a majority of which are designed for use by transients, travelers, or temporary guests. Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises, telephone and secretarial or desk service, meal and beverage service, meeting rooms, incidental merchandise sales, barber and beauty shops, kitchens, and other incidental services and facilities.

(7) “Housekeeping unit” means an individual or group of persons occupying a dwelling unit that has a single kitchen.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) “J” definitions:

(1) “Junkyard” means the use of any lot or portion thereof for the storage of junk, including scrap metals, salvage, or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling or “wrecking” of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, whether for sale or storage.

(k) “K” definitions:

(1) “Kitchen” means any room or space in a building designed, intended, or used for the preparation or cooking of food.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) “Landscaped areas” means the installation and permanent maintenance of an area with trees, shrubs, lawn, or planted ground cover to present an attractive, well-kept appearance.

(A) Landscaped areas shall not be surfaced in part or whole with concrete, asphalt, or other surface material, but shall contain earth, and may contain organic mulch, inorganic fillers such as wood shavings, bark, volcanic rock, or other similar mulch material.

(B) A portion of such landscaped treatment may consist of decorative planters, stone work, brick work, and the like; any such landscaping treatment shall not exceed three feet in height. Elements of ornamentation such as an archway, piece of statuary, lamp post, and the like, provided as part of the landscaping in a required front or street side yard, may exceed three feet in height.

(C) Each landscaped area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent.

(D) An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(2) “Legal nonconforming building” means a building or structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption or amendment of this Code, but does not comply with the current setback, height limit, parking or other requirements for the applicable zoning district.

(3) “Legal nonconforming use” means a use of land and/or a building (either a conforming or nonconforming building) that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this Code, but does not conform to the current requirements for allowable uses within the applicable zoning district.

(4) “Liquor” refers to spirituous or intoxicating liquor, including wine and beer.

(5) “Lot” means a parcel of land created in accordance with all City ordinances and of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as herein required. Such parcel shall have frontage on an improved public street.

(6) “Lot area” means the total horizontal square footage contained within the boundaries of a lot.

(7) “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, the street frontages of which lot form an interior angle not greater than one hundred thirty (130) degrees and not less than forty-five (45) degrees.

(8) “Lot coverage” means the area of a lot occupied by the principal structure or structures and accessory structures.

(9) “Lot depth” means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the lot front line and at right angles to such line to its intersection with a parallel line passing through the midpoint of the lot rear line. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the lot front line shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the curb and parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the side lines of the lot with the lot front line.

(10) “Lot frontage” means that boundary of a lot along a public street; for the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under subsection (y) of this section.

(11) “Lot, key” means the first lot to the rear of a reverse lot.

(12) “Lot, reverse corner” means a corner lot the side street of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line upon which the rear of said reverse corner lot abuts.

(13) “Lot, through” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.

(14) “Lot width” means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard setback; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, when thirty-five (35) feet is permitted.

(15) “Lot line” means a property boundary line of any lot.

(16) “Lot line, front” means on an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street. In the case of a corner lot, it is the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. In the case of corner lots having equal street frontages, it is that property line the prolongation of which creates the front property line for the greatest number of interior lots in the same block.

(17) “Lot line, rear” means the boundary line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line of a triangular or trapezoidal lot or a lot the rear line of which is formed by two or more lines, the following shall apply:

(A) For a triangular lot, it shall be deemed to be a line thirty (30) feet in length within the lot and farthest removed from the front lot line and at right angles to the line that is used to determine the depth of such lot.

(B) For a trapezoidal lot, it shall be deemed to be a line at right angles to the line that is used to determine the depth of such lot and drawn through a point bisecting the boundary most distant from the front lot line and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.

(C) For a lot whose boundary most distant from the front lot line comprises two or more lines, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be that single boundary line that is at least forty (40) feet in length; or, if the above boundary lines are less than forty (40) feet in length, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be that boundary line closest to the front lot line and most nearly parallel to it.

(18) “Lot line, side” is any lot boundary that is not a front line or a rear lot line.

(m) “M” definitions:

(1) “Maintained” means preserved in a condition or state of equivalent quality to that which was approved or required by the City. Unless the context demands otherwise, the term is synonymous and is interchangeable with the term “permanently maintained.”

(2)    (A) “Marijuana” shall be interchangeable with the word “cannabis” for all purposes, and refers to any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not, whether in whole or in part, the seeds thereof, the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, extract, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of any part of the plant, its seeds, or resin.

(B) “Commercial marijuana activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and/or cannabis products as provided for in Division 10 (“Cannabis”) of the Business and Professions Code, and whether for medical or nonmedical uses.

(3) “Masonry” means a hard, durable building material such as brick, stone, or concrete (both block and precast), or the architectural committee-approved equivalent.

(4) “Mobile home park” means land or premises used or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by trailers or mobile dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind.

(5) Motel. See “Hotel.”

(6) “Multiple dwelling” means three or more dwelling units forming an apartment, townhouse, condominium, court, or group complex.

(n) “N” definitions:

(1) “Neighborhood recreational enterprise” means a neighborhood recreational enterprise serving a residential neighborhood by exclusive membership derived from the immediate vicinity in which it is located. All revenue will be derived from membership dues or fees. No sale of liquor or other merchandise will be permitted on premises.

(2) “Nonconforming use” means a building, structure, or land occupied by a use that does not conform to the appropriate regulations of this title.

(3) “Nontaxable merchandise” means products, commodities or items the sale of which is not subject to California State sales tax.

(4) “Nursing and convalescent home” means a building and premises for the care of sick, injured, aged, or infirm persons to be housed; or a place of rest for those who are bedfast or needing considerable nursing care, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) “Organization documents” means:

(A) Declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions;

(B) Articles of incorporation;

(C) By-laws; and

(D) Any contracts for the maintenance, management, or operation of all or any part of a “community ownership project.”

(2) “Outdoor storage” means the keeping of personal or business property or motor vehicles in a required open parking space or any other area outside of a building for a period of time exceeding seventy-two (72) consecutive hours.

(3) “Outdoor walk-up service facility” means a use involving direct sales or provision of services to pedestrians who line up in areas outside a totally enclosed building.

(4) “Owners’ association” means the nonprofit corporation or association created to own, lease, or provide management, maintenance, preservation, and control of the contiguous or noncontiguous lots, parcels, areas, or improvements owned in common or the lots, parcels, areas, or improvements separately owned, or in which there is a right to exclusive occupancy, or both types of ownership, common and separate, or any portion of or interest in them.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) “Parking space” means a paved space on the building site meeting the minimum dimensions set forth in Chapter 18.74 SCCC, intended for use for parking of a motor vehicle, and having permanent means of access to and from a public street or alley independent of any other parking space. Said space shall be located on the same lot as the land use serviced, except as set forth in Chapter 18.84 SCCC or except when appropriate legal documents assuring the mutual use of the means of access and/or adjacent parking space are submitted and approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection and the City Attorney and are appropriately recorded.

(2) “Pharmacy, ethical” means a professional pharmacy conducted within and for the convenience of occupants and patrons of a medical building or buildings, which limits the sale of articles to drugs, prescription medicines, surgical and medical supplies, and other health regulated articles.

(3) “Principal use” means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.

(4) “Professional office” means architect, attorney, chiropractor, professional engineer, drafting office, collection agency, dentist, doctor, insurance office, private detective, real estate agency, social worker, or similar use.

(5) “Public building” means a building owned or used by the Federal, State, County, or City government, or any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.

(6) “Public open space” means any publicly owned open area, including, but not limited to, the following: parks, playgrounds, golf courses, waterways, parkways, parking lots, and streets.

(7) “Public utility and public service uses” means all those buildings and other facilities employed in the distribution of public utilities, such as communications equipment buildings; electric, gas, and water transmission stations; electrical substations, and the like; but excluding service yards and business offices.

(8) “Public utility service yard” means a facility for the storage of vehicles and material for installation, maintenance, and construction personnel, together with an appropriate office building.

(q) “Q” definitions:

(1) “Quasi-public building” means a building or use that is essentially public in services rendered or involving assemblage of people, although under private ownership by a person, firm, agency, or corporation.

(r) “R” definitions:

(1) “Replacement value” means the current construction cost for replacement of an existing building, structure, or portion thereof, including accessory facilities and other parts of an established use.

(2) Rest Home. See “Nursing home.”

(3) “Restaurant” means a public eating place.

(4) “Retail” means any enterprise involving the on-site transaction or transfer of merchandise to the general public, including but not limited to advertising products as available to the public, and over-the-counter sales.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) “Sales floor area” means interior building space which is designated for the sale of merchandise, and which does not include restrooms, office space, storage space, automobile service areas or open-air garden sales space. “Sales floor area” shall also include common check stands, management, ownership interest, warehouses and distribution facilities. This definition shall apply to the cumulative total square footage of sales floor area of related or successive permits, such as additions or expansions of a building.

(2) “Sanitarium” means a building and premises in and on which two or more sick, injured, or infirm persons are regularly housed or intended to be housed for compensation, not including hospitals.

(3) “School” means a public or private school, teaching subjects required by the Education Code of the State of California.

(4) “Service station” means a filling station retailing motor fuel and oil to motor vehicles; including grease racks, battery and ignition services, and other accessory sales and services for vehicles, but excluding recapping, steam cleaning, painting, body work, and engine overhaul. The accessory sales and services for vehicles shall include casual sales of bottled or canned soft drinks, cigarettes, and candy bars to customers.

(5) “Solid fence” means a fence constructed of a durable, weatherproof material so that light cannot shine through it.

(6) “Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.

(7) “Street” means a public thoroughfare, accepted by the City of Santa Clara, that affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, except as an “alley” as defined herein.

(8) “Street line” means the dividing line between a street and the abutting property.

(9) “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, except fences not exceeding six feet in height, the use of which requires location on or under the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground.

(10) “Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.

(11) “Superstore” means a business establishment engaged in retail sales to the general public, with a sales floor area that exceeds one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet and that designates more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total sales floor area to the sale of nontaxable merchandise. Discount club stores, where users pay a membership fee in order to shop, containing a wide variety of items such as food, clothing, tires and appliances, and selling many items in large quantities or bulk, are exempted from the definition of “superstore.”

(12) “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on the length of stay, that is occupied by persons with disabilities, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, thereby improving the resident’s health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible and applicable, work in the community.

(13) “Swimming pool” means a swimming pool, wading pool, fish pond, or other outside body of water created by artificial means that has any depth in excess of eighteen (18) inches, whether above or below grade, and whether intended to be temporary or permanent in nature.

(t) “T” definitions:

(1) “Tavern or lounge” means a building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, not including restaurants where the principal business is serving food.

(2) “Transitional housing” means a building or buildings configured as rental housing, but operated under program requirements that call for termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that is not less than six months after the initial occupancy.

(u) “U” definitions:

(1) “Unit” means the element of a condominium project that:

(A) Is not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project;

(B) Is an apartment in a community apartment project to which the occupant has the right of exclusive occupancy;

(C) Is the lot, parcel, or area owned separately in a planned development project; or

(D) Is a portion of improved real property in a stock cooperative project of which title is held by a corporation and in which a shareholder of said corporation receives a right of exclusive occupancy to said portion of improved real property.

(2) “Use” means the purpose for which land, premises, or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

(3) “Use, accessory” means a use incidental to the principal use of a lot or a building located on the same lot.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) “W” definitions:

(1) Walk-up (Outdoor). See “Outdoor walk-up service facility.”

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) “Y” definitions:

(1) “Yard” means an open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed, except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 18.62 SCCC.

(2) “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of the front portion of the lot and measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest line of the building wall; provided, that if any building line or official plan line has been established for the street upon which the lot faces, then such measurement shall be taken from such building line or official plan line to the nearest line of the building.

(3) “Yard, side” means a yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest wall of the building and extending from the front yard of the lot to the rear yard.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Ord. 1680 § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. 1786 § 1, 11-4-03; Ord. 1843 § 1, 5-5-09; Ord. 1865 § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. 1888 §§ 1, 2, 8-16-11; Ord. 1891 §§ 1, 2, 8-30-11; Zoning Ord. § 3-3; Ord. 1935 §§ 1, 2, 1-13-15; Ord. 1968 §§ 1, 2, 8-22-17; Ord. 1973 § 1, 11-21-17).

Chapter 18.08
REGULATIONS FOR A – AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.08.010    Application.

18.08.020    Intent.

18.08.030    Permitted uses.

18.08.040    Conditional uses.

18.08.050    Lot area.

18.08.060    Lot width.

18.08.070    Building height limits.

18.08.080    Front yard.

18.08.090    Side yards.

18.08.100    Rear yard.

18.08.110    Minimum automobile parking required.

18.08.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all A zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 4-1).

18.08.020 Intent.
To provide for the protection of existing agricultural lands, to encourage the preservation and the retention of the land in its natural state and to provide an interim zoning for lands newly annexed to the City. (Zoning Ord. § 4-2).

18.08.030 Permitted uses.
(a) A single-family dwelling.

(b) Animal husbandry.

(c) Apiaries – aviaries.

(d) Crop and tree farming.

(e) Dairies and processing of dairy products.

(f) Field and truck crops.

(g) Nurseries, greenhouses, landscape gardening, botanical conservatories, and arboreta.

(h) Livestock, farming, and ranches.

(i) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(j) Any other agricultural use which in the opinion of the Planning Commission is similar in character and is not more detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood than any use listed above. (Zoning Ord. § 4-3).

18.08.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Agricultural processing plants.

(b) Cattle feed yards.

(c) Farm-labor camps.

(d) Frog farms.

(e) Golf course (except driving tee or range, miniature course, and similar uses operated for commercial purposes).

(f) Hog farms.

(g) Turkey, chicken, and other fowl raising.

(h) Stands for the sale of produce raised on the premises. (Zoning Ord. § 4-4).

18.08.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum of three acres with not more than one dwelling unit per acre. (Zoning Ord. § 4-5).

18.08.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 4-6).

18.08.070 Building height limits.
Two stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 4-7).

Density. 
One dwelling unit per acre. 

18.08.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 4-8).

18.08.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 4-9).

18.08.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth.

Notwithstanding the above, corner lot rear yards may be interchanged to set from the interior or nonstreet side yard lot line. (Zoning Ord. § 4-10).

18.08.110 Minimum automobile parking required.
One garage or carport shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Conditional uses requiring a use permit shall provide adequate parking as required under Chapter 18.74 SCCC for the most similar use. (Zoning Ord. § 4-11).

Chapter 18.10
REGULATIONS FOR R1-8L –
SINGLE-FAMILY, LARGER LOT AREA ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.10.010    Application.

18.10.020    Intent.

18.10.030    Permitted uses.

18.10.040    Reserved.

18.10.050    Lot area.

18.10.060    Lot width.

18.10.070    Building height limits.

18.10.080    Front yard.

18.10.090    Side yards.

18.10.100    Rear yard.

18.10.110    Maximum building coverage.

18.10.120    Parking requirements.

18.10.130    Fencing.

18.10.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R1-8L zoning districts. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-1).

18.10.020 Intent.
This is the most restrictive of residential zones composed entirely of the single-family residential environment. Such areas should be clearly defined and without encroachments by uses not performing a residential neighborhood function. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-2).

18.10.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(c) Home occupation as defined in Chapter 18.100 SCCC.

(d) Accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the following:

(1) Properties with an accessory unit are not required to provide additional on-site parking.

(2) If the required covered parking space or spaces for the single-family dwelling are demolished or converted in conjunction with the development of an accessory unit, two replacement parking spaces must be provided on the same lot. Notwithstanding the provisions of SCCC 18.10.120(a), such spaces may be covered or uncovered; may be tandem or individually accessible; and, if uncovered, may be located in the front or corner side setbacks, if placed on an existing driveway.

(3) If the main dwelling unit on the property is subject to a preferential parking permit program for on-street parking, the accessory dwelling unit shall also be eligible for the preferential parking permit program.

(4) The accessory unit may be attached to or detached from the existing single-family unit.

(5) A detached accessory unit building shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height. An attached accessory unit shall not exceed one story in height on lots that are less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.

(6) A detached accessory unit may have a net floor area of not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. For an attached accessory unit, the floor area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing living area of the single-family dwelling, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

(7) The roof, siding and windows of the accessory unit, whether attached to the main dwelling unit or a detached building, shall be consistent with the roof slope, materials and design of the principal residence, in accordance with the City’s design guidelines. Enclosed or internal staircases to access attached second-floor accessory units are required.

(8) For second-floor accessory units associated with additions or with construction of a new residence, the following development standards apply. If multiple standards apply to a property, the most restrictive standard shall control.

(A) The total second-floor area of the building shall not exceed sixty-six percent (66%) of the first floor building area (including the garage area).

(B) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least five feet from the front wall of the first floor of the main dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the garage area of a house is closer to the front property line than the living area of the main dwelling unit, then second-floor accessory unit areas above the garage shall be stepped back at least ten feet from the front wall of the garage.

(C) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least three feet from the side walls of the first floor, or clerestory windows with a minimum sill height of five feet shall be provided and maintained on all side elevations.

(D) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least three feet from the rear walls of the first floor, or clerestory windows with a minimum sill height of five feet shall be provided and maintained on all rear elevations.

(E) Second-floor outdoor spaces associated with accessory units shall be located on rear elevations and must be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from a side property line. The maximum depth for second-floor outdoor spaces associated with accessory units is four feet.

(F) The floor to ceiling height of a second-floor accessory unit must be equal to or less than the average floor to ceiling height of the first floor, but in no case less than seven feet in height.

(9) For attached accessory units, building setbacks and building coverage restrictions are the same as those that apply to the main dwelling unit. For detached accessory units, the minimum rear setback is five feet and the minimum side setback is three feet. Detached accessory units must maintain a five-foot setback beyond the existing front setback of the main dwelling unit. A detached accessory unit, in conjunction with other accessory buildings, may cover not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of any rear yard. For purposes of rear yard coverage, the rear yard is measured from a line extending twenty (20) feet from the full width of the lot at the rear property line.

(10) On a lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, the floor area ratio (FAR) of all structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%).

(11) Utility Connections.

(A) Notwithstanding SCCC 17.15.210, 17.15.220 and 17.15.280, the City shall not require the installation of new or separate utility connections directly between the accessory unit and the utilities, or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge, when a new accessory unit is constructed, if the accessory unit is contained within the existing building envelope of an existing single-family residence or accessory structure, the accessory unit has independent exterior access from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.

(B) For all accessory dwelling units not described in subsection (d)(11)(A) of this section, the construction of accessory units shall be subject to standard utility connection requirements and charges. The City shall establish prorated charges for accessory dwelling units in the municipal fee schedule.

(12) For those properties with an accessory unit which has been used continuously as an accessory unit since April 13, 1983, the unit may be approved in its historic location; provided, that the requirements of this section can be met with regard to minimum lot size and maximum accessory unit size.

(e) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(f) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Ord. 1786 § 2, 11-4-03; Zoning Ord. § 5-3; Ord. 1935 § 3, 1-13-15; Ord. 1968 § 3, 8-22-17).

18.10.040 Reserved.
(Formerly operative as “Conditional uses”. Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Ord. 1786 § 3, 11-4-03; Zoning Ord. § 5-3.1).

18.10.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-4).

18.10.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than seventy (70) feet. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-5).

18.10.070 Building height limits.
Two stories but not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-6).

18.10.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the front yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-7).

18.10.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, one having a width of not less than six feet on one side and nine feet on the opposite side.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot, exclusive of the front yard, shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the street side yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-8).

18.10.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth.

Notwithstanding the above, corner lot rear yards may be interchanged to set from the interior, or nonstreet, side yard lot line. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-9).

18.10.110 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than forty percent (40%) of the area of any lot. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-10).

18.10.120 Parking requirements.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in SCCC 18.10.030(d)(2), each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; these parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet is required between said parking and any street right-of-way line.

(b) Additional parking shall be permitted in required front yards or corner lot side yards, with motor vehicles, trailers, and boats parked in an orderly manner, generally perpendicular to the street. Such parking shall be prohibited in the thirty-five percent (35%) minimum landscaped area. Motor vehicles that do not comply with restrictions imposed by other sections of this title are prohibited.

(c) Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials, such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or gravel.

(d) More information on prohibited activities in residential districts may be found in Chapter 18.82 SCCC. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-11; Ord. 1968 § 5, 8-22-17).

18.10.130 Fencing.
At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with existing multiple residential, office, commercial, industrial, or public or quasi-public development (B zoning district) that does not have such a fence.

As an alternative, with the approval of the City Council, an indenture agreement running with the land which contains a hold harmless covenant may be recorded. (Ord. 1680 § 2, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 5-12).

Chapter 18.12
REGULATIONS FOR R1-6L – SINGLE-FAMILY ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.12.010    Application.

18.12.020    Intent.

18.12.030    Permitted uses.

18.12.040    Reserved.

18.12.050    Lot area.

18.12.060    Lot width.

18.12.070    Building height limitations.

18.12.080    Front yard.

18.12.090    Side yards.

18.12.100    Rear yard.

18.12.110    Maximum building coverage.

18.12.120    Minimum parking requirements.

18.12.130    Fencing.

18.12.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R1-6L zoning districts. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-1).

18.12.020 Intent.
To stabilize and protect the residential characteristics of the district and to promote and encourage a suitable single-family residential environment. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-2).

18.12.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(c) Home occupation as defined in Chapter 18.100 SCCC.

(d) Accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the following:

(1) Properties with an accessory unit are not required to provide additional on-site parking.

(2) If the required covered parking space or spaces for the single-family dwelling are demolished or converted in conjunction with the development of an accessory unit, two replacement parking spaces must be provided on the same lot. Notwithstanding the provisions of SCCC 18.12.120(a), such spaces may be covered or uncovered; may be tandem or individually accessible; and, if uncovered, may be located in the front or corner side setbacks, if placed on an existing driveway.

(3) If the main dwelling unit on the property is subject to a preferential parking permit program for on-street parking, the accessory dwelling unit shall also be eligible for the preferential parking permit program.

(4) The accessory unit may be attached to or detached from the existing single-family unit.

(5) A detached accessory unit building shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height. An attached accessory unit shall not exceed one story in height on lots that are less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.

(6) A detached accessory unit may have a net floor area of not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. For an attached accessory unit, the floor area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing living area of the single-family dwelling, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

(7) The roof, siding and windows of the accessory unit, whether attached to the main dwelling unit or a detached building, shall be consistent with the roof slope, materials and design of the principal residence, in accordance with the City’s design guidelines. Enclosed or internal staircases to access attached second-floor accessory units are required.

(8) For second-floor accessory units associated with additions or with construction of a new residence, the following development standards apply. If multiple standards apply to a property, the most restrictive standards shall control.

(A) The total second-floor area of the building shall not exceed sixty-six percent (66%) of the first floor building area (including the garage area).

(B) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least five feet from the front wall of the first floor of the main dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the garage area of a house is closer to the front property line than the living area of the main dwelling unit, then second-floor accessory unit areas above the garage shall be stepped back at least ten feet from the front wall of the garage.

(C) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least three feet from the side walls of the first floor, or clerestory windows with a minimum sill height of five feet shall be provided and maintained on all side elevations.

(D) Second-floor accessory unit areas shall be stepped back at least three feet from the rear walls of the first floor, or clerestory windows with a minimum sill height of five feet shall be provided and maintained on all rear elevations.

(E) Second-floor outdoor spaces associated with accessory units shall be located on rear elevations and must be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from a side property line. The maximum depth for second-floor outdoor spaces associated with accessory units is four feet.

(F) The floor to ceiling height of a second-floor accessory unit must be equal to or less than the average floor to ceiling height of the first floor, but in no case less than seven feet in height.

(9) For attached accessory units, building setbacks and building coverage restrictions are the same as those that apply to the main dwelling unit. For detached accessory units, the minimum rear setback is five feet and the minimum side setback is three feet. Detached accessory units must maintain a five-foot setback beyond the existing front setback of the main dwelling unit. A detached accessory unit, in conjunction with other accessory buildings, may cover not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of any rear yard. For purposes of rear yard coverage, the rear yard is measured as twenty (20) feet extending from the rear property line.

(10) On a lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, the floor area ratio (FAR) of all structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%).

(11) Utility Connections.

(A) Notwithstanding SCC 17.15.210, 17.15.220 and 17.15.280, the City shall not require the installation of new or separate utility connections directly between the accessory unit and the utilities, or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge, when a new accessory unit is constructed, if the accessory unit is contained within the existing building envelope of an existing single-family residence or accessory structure, the accessory unit has exterior access independent from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.

(B) For all accessory dwelling units not described in subsection (d)(11)(A) of this section, the construction of accessory units shall be subject to standard utility connection requirements and charges. The City shall establish prorated charges for accessory dwelling units in the municipal fee schedule.

(12) For those properties with an accessory unit which has been used continuously as an accessory unit since April 13, 1983, the unit may be approved in its historic location; provided, that the requirements of this section can be met with regard to minimum lot size and maximum accessory unit size.

(e) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(f) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Ord. 1786 § 4, 11-4-03; Zoning Ord. § 6-3; Ord. 1935 § 4, 1-13-15; Ord. 1968 § 4, 8-22-17).

18.12.040 Reserved.
(Formerly operative as “Conditional uses”. Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Ord. 1786 § 5, 11-4-03; Zoning Ord. § 6-3.1).

18.12.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-4).

18.12.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than sixty (60) feet. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-5).

18.12.070 Building height limitations.
Two stories but not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-6).

18.12.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the front yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-7).

18.12.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than five feet.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the street side yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-8).

18.12.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth.

Notwithstanding the above, corner lot rear yards may be interchanged to set from the interior, or nonstreet, side yard lot line. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-9).

18.12.110 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than forty percent (40%) of the area of any lot. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-10).

18.12.120 Minimum parking requirements.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in SCC 18.12.030(d)(2), each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; these parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet is required between said parking and any street right-of-way line.

(b) Additional parking shall be permitted in required front yards or corner lot side yards, with motor vehicles, trailers, and boats parked in an orderly manner, generally perpendicular to the street. Such parking shall be prohibited in the thirty-five percent (35%) minimum landscaped area. Motor vehicles that do not comply with restrictions imposed by other sections of this title are prohibited.

(c) Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or gravel.

(d) More information on prohibited activities in residential districts may be found in Chapter 18.82 SCCC. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-11; Ord. 1968 § 6, 8-22-17).

18.12.130 Fencing.
At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with existing multiple residential, office, commercial, industrial, or public or quasi-public development (B zoning district) that does not have such a fence.

As an alternative, with the approval of the City Council, an indenture agreement running with the land which contains a hold harmless covenant may be recorded. (Ord. 1680 § 3, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 6-12).

Chapter 18.14
REGULATIONS FOR R2-7L – DUPLEX ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.14.010    Application.

18.14.020    Intent.

18.14.030    Permitted uses.

18.14.040    Lot area.

18.14.050    Lot width.

18.14.060    Building height limits.

18.14.070    Front yard.

18.14.080    Side yards.

18.14.090    Rear yard.

18.14.100    Maximum building coverage.

18.14.110    Open landscaped area.

18.14.120    Lot area per dwelling unit.

18.14.130    Parking requirements.

18.14.140    Fencing.

18.14.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R2-7L zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 7-1).

18.14.020 Intent.
This is a duplex zone (two-family dwelling) providing most of the desirable residential characteristics attributed to single-family districts. It is intended to provide a low-density residential transition between more intense land uses and single-family homes. (Zoning Ord. § 7-2).

18.14.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(d) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(e) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(f) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(g) One accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the requirements of SCCC 18.10.030(d). (Zoning Ord. § 7-3; Ord. 1935 § 5, 1-13-15; Ord. 1993 § 1, 1-15-19).

18.14.040 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet with not more than one two-family dwelling per lot, or more than one single-family dwelling per lot. (Zoning Ord. § 7-4).

18.14.050 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than 65 feet. (Zoning Ord. § 7-5).

18.14.060 Building height limits.
Two stories but not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 7-6).

18.14.070 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the front yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Zoning Ord. § 7-7).

18.14.080 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than five feet.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the street side yard shall be permanently maintained as landscaped area. (Zoning Ord. § 7-8).

18.14.090 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth.

Notwithstanding the above, corner lot rear yards may be interchanged to set from the interior, or nonstreet, side yard lot line. (Zoning Ord. § 7-9).

18.14.100 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than forty-five percent (45%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 7-10).

18.14.110 Open landscaped area.
Each lot shall have not less than forty percent (40%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscaped area. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area. (Zoning Ord. § 7-11).

18.14.120 Lot area per dwelling unit.
There shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for each dwelling unit. (Zoning Ord. § 7-12).

18.14.130 Parking requirements.
(a) Each dwelling unit shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; such parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet shall be required between said parking and any street right-of-way.

(b) Additional parking shall be permitted in required front yards or corner lot side yards, with motor vehicles, trailers, and boats parked in an orderly manner, generally perpendicular to the street. Such parking shall be prohibited in the thirty-five percent (35%) minimum front yard and street side yard landscaped areas. Motor vehicles that do not comply with restrictions imposed by other sections of this title are prohibited.

(c) Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials, such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or gravel.

(d) More information on prohibited activities in residential districts may be found in Chapter 18.82 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 7-13).

18.14.140 Fencing.
At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with existing multiple residential, office, commercial, industrial, or public or quasi-public development (B zoning district) that does not have such a fence.

As an alternative, with the approval of the City Council, an indenture agreement running with the land which contains a hold harmless covenant may be recorded. (Zoning Ord. § 7-14).

Chapter 18.16
REGULATIONS FOR R3-18D –
LOW-DENSITY MULTIPLE-DWELLING ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.16.010    Application.

18.16.020    Intent.

18.16.030    Permitted uses.

18.16.040    Lot area.

18.16.050    Lot width.

18.16.060    Building height limits.

18.16.070    Front yard.

18.16.080    Side yards.

18.16.090    Rear yard.

18.16.100    Maximum building coverage.

18.16.110    Open landscaped area.

18.16.120    Lot area per dwelling unit.

18.16.130    Minimum automobile parking required.

18.16.140    Additional development standards.

18.16.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R3-18D zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 8-1).

18.16.020 Intent.
This zone is designed to encourage lot assembly to provide quality multi-unit housing at a low to moderate density. The 18D denotes maximum density of eighteen (18) dwelling units on a one-acre lot with established percentages of open space required. It is not intended that lots less than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet in size provide housing at the maximum density of the zone. (Zoning Ord. § 8-2).

18.16.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings (subject to the restrictions of Chapter 18.12 SCCC).

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Dwelling groups.

(d) Multiple-family dwellings.

(e) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(f) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(g) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(h) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(i) One accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the requirements of SCCC 18.10.030(d). (Zoning Ord. § 8-3; Ord. 1935 § 6, 1-13-15; Ord. 1993 § 2, 1-15-19).

18.16.040 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 8-4).

18.16.050 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than seventy (70) feet. No two-family or multiple residential development may occur on a lot of substandard width without variance approval. (Zoning Ord. § 8-5).

18.16.060 Building height limits.
Two stories not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 8-6).

18.16.070 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 8-7).

18.16.080 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet.

For construction on lots less than seventy (70) feet in width, one interior or nonstreet side yard may be reduced to five feet if immediately adjacent to a garage, carport, or single-story living unit on a lot adjoining such side yard.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 8-8).

18.16.090 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 8-9).

18.16.100 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 8-10).

18.16.110 Open landscaped area.
Each lot greater than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet in size shall have not less than forty-five percent (45%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open space.

All other lots shall have not less than forty percent (40%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscaped area. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area.

Open landscaped areas shall include but not be limited to required front, side or rear setback areas plus usable common open space and/or private open space areas. (Zoning Ord. § 8-11).

18.16.120 Lot area per dwelling unit.
For every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling, dwelling group, or apartment structure, the following table establishes the permitted densities based on net square footage of the lot. No multiple dwelling use shall be established on any zoning plot containing less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet of area without variance approval.

When calculating number of units, if insufficient area exists to provide the minimum lot area for the additional unit, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number.

Permitted Densities/Graduated Scale R3-18D

Lot Size

# of Dwelling Units/

Square Feet (Net)

Square Feet of Lot Area

 

 

 

 

Up to

 

6,999

1/6,000 square feet

7,000

–

8,499

1/3,500 square feet

8,500

–

9,999

1/2,830 square feet

10,000

–

22,000

1/2,500 square feet

Over

 

22,000

1/2,420 square feet

(Zoning Ord. § 8-12).

18.16.130 Minimum automobile parking required.
At least one garage or carport shall be provided for each dwelling unit, plus one parking space for each dwelling unit. No parking shall occur in required front yards or corner lot street side yards. A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet shall be required between said parking space and any street right-of-way line. Back out parking is prohibited for three units or more.

Where garage doors are located so as to be opposite each other with a distance of less than forty (40) feet, automatic garage door openers and roll-up garage doors shall be provided. (Zoning Ord. § 8-13).

18.16.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines:

(1) With any existing office, commercial, or industrial development that does not have such a fence.

(2) With any single-family or duplex zoning or property proposed for single-family or duplex development in the general plan.

(3) With any multiple-dwelling or B-zoned activity area where a conflict in use is probable, the Director of Planning and Inspection is granted the authority as an administrative function to determine such probability of conflict and with regard to this subsection permit a suitable alternative for situations such as jointly used driveway or recreation area, or adjacent minimum ten-foot yards, where construction of masonry would not be warranted.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with screening shrubs and trees, shall be required adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(c) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall not reflect directly into any living area.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be solid core type doors equipped with one hundred eighty (180)-degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. Each disposal area shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot-high masonry enclosure with solid wood gates. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for weekly pickup of the equivalent of one thirty-two (32)-gallon container per bedroom. (Zoning Ord. § 8-14).

Chapter 18.18
REGULATIONS FOR R3-25D – MODERATE-DENSITY MULTIPLE-DWELLING ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.18.010    Application.

18.18.020    Intent.

18.18.030    Permitted uses.

18.18.040    Lot area.

18.18.050    Lot width.

18.18.060    Building height limits.

18.18.070    Front yard.

18.18.080    Side yards.

18.18.090    Rear yard.

18.18.100    Maximum building coverage.

18.18.110    Open landscaped area.

18.18.120    Lot area per dwelling unit.

18.18.130    Minimum automobile parking required.

18.18.140    Additional development standards.

18.18.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R3-25D zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 9-1).

18.18.020 Intent.
This zone is designed to encourage lot assembly to provide quality multi-unit housing at a moderate medium density. The 25D denotes maximum density of twenty-five (25) dwelling units on a one-acre lot with established percentages of open space required. It is not intended that lots less than one acre in size provide housing at the maximum density of the zone. (Zoning Ord. § 9-2).

18.18.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings (subject to the restrictions of Chapter 18.12 SCCC).

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Dwelling groups.

(d) Multiple-family dwellings.

(e) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(f) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(g) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(h) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(i) One accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the requirements of SCCC 18.10.030(d). (Zoning Ord. § 9-3; Ord. 1935 § 7, 1-13-15; Ord. 1993 § 3, 1-15-19).

18.18.040 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 9-4).

18.18.050 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than seventy (70) feet. No two-family or multiple residential development may occur on a lot of substandard width without variance approval. (Zoning Ord. § 9-5).

18.18.060 Building height limits.
Two stories but not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 9-6).

18.18.070 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 9-7).

18.18.080 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet.

For construction on lots less than seventy (70) feet in width, one interior or nonstreet side yard may be reduced to five feet if immediately adjacent to a garage, carport, or single-story living unit on a lot adjoining such side yard.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 9-8).

18.18.090 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 9-9).

18.18.100 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 9-10).

18.18.110 Open landscaped area.
Each lot greater than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet in size shall have not less than forty-five percent (45%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open space. All other lots shall have not less than forty percent (40%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscaped area. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area.

Open landscaped areas shall include but not be limited to required front, side, or rear setback areas, exclusive of driveway, plus usable common open space and/or private open space areas. (Zoning Ord. § 9-11).

18.18.120 Lot area per dwelling unit.
For every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling, dwelling group, or apartment structure, the following table establishes the permitted densities based on net square footage of the lot. No multiple dwelling use shall be established on any zoning plot containing less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet of area without variance approval.

When calculating number of units, if insufficient area exists to provide the minimum lot area for the additional unit, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number.

Permitted Densities/Graduated Scale R3-25D

Lot Size

# of Dwelling Units/

Square Feet (Net)

Square Feet of Lot Area

Up to

 

6,999

1/6,000 square feet

7,000

–

8,499

1/3,500 square feet

8,500

–

9,999

1/2,830 square feet

10,000

–

22,000

1/2,500 square feet

22,001

–

44,000

1/2,000 square feet

Over

 

44,000

1/1,740 square feet

(Zoning Ord. § 9-12).

18.18.130 Minimum automobile parking required.
At least one garage or carport shall be provided for each dwelling unit, plus one parking space for each dwelling unit. No parking shall occur in required front yards or corner lot street side yards.

A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet shall be required between said parking space and any street right-of-way line. Back out parking is prohibited for three units or more.

Where garage doors are located so as to be opposite each other with a distance of less than forty (40) feet, automatic garage door openers and roll-up garage doors shall be provided. (Zoning Ord. § 9-13).

18.18.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines:

(1) With any existing office, commercial, or industrial development that does not have such a fence.

(2) With any single-family or duplex zoning or property proposed for single-family or duplex development in the general plan.

(3) With any multiple-dwelling or B-zoned activity area where a conflict in use is probable, the Director of Planning and Inspection is granted the authority as an administrative function to determine such probability of conflict and with regard to this subsection permit a suitable alternative for situations such as jointly used driveway or recreation area, or adjacent minimum ten-foot yards, where construction of such a fence of masonry would not be warranted.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(c) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall not reflect directly into any living area.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be solid core type doors equipped with one hundred eighty (180)-degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. Each disposal area shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot-high masonry enclosure with solid wood gates. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for weekly pickup of the equivalent of one thirty-two (32)-gallon container per bedroom. (Zoning Ord. § 9-14).

Chapter 18.20
REGULATIONS FOR R3-36D –
MEDIUM-DENSITY MULTIPLE-DWELLING ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.20.010    Application.

18.20.020    Intent.

18.20.030    Permitted uses.

18.20.040    Lot area.

18.20.050    Lot width.

18.20.060    Building height limits.

18.20.070    Front yard.

18.20.080    Side yards.

18.20.090    Rear yard.

18.20.100    Maximum building coverage.

18.20.110    Open landscaped area.

18.20.120    Lot area per dwelling unit.

18.20.130    Dwelling standards.

18.20.140    Minimum automobile parking required.

18.20.150    Additional development standards.

18.20.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R3-36D zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 10-1).

18.20.020 Intent.
This zone is designed to encourage quality multi-unit housing at medium density. The 36D denotes maximum density of thirty-six (36) dwelling units on a one-acre lot with established percentage of open space required. It is not intended that lots less than one acre in size provide housing at the maximum density of the zone. (Zoning Ord. § 10-2).

18.20.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings (subject to the restrictions of Chapter 18.12 SCCC).

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Dwelling groups.

(d) Multiple-family dwellings.

(e) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(f) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(g) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(h) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(i) One accessory unit, as defined under SCCC 18.06.010(a), on a lot that has an existing single-family dwelling, subject to the requirements of SCCC 18.10.030(d). (Zoning Ord. § 10-3; Ord. 1935 § 8, 1-13-15; Ord. 1993 § 4, 1-15-19).

18.20.040 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 10-4).

18.20.050 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than seventy (70) feet. No two-family or multiple residential development may occur on a lot of substandard width without variance approval. (Zoning Ord. § 10-5).

18.20.060 Building height limits.
Four stories but not exceeding forty-five (45) feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 10-6).

18.20.070 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 10-7).

18.20.080 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet.

For construction on lots less than seventy (70) feet in width, one interior or nonstreet side yard may be reduced to five feet if immediately adjacent to a garage, carport, or single-story living unit on a lot adjoining such side yard.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 10-8).

18.20.090 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 10-9).

18.20.100 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than forty-five percent (45%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 10-10).

18.20.110 Open landscaped area.
Each lot greater than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet in size shall have not less than forty-five percent (45%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open space.

All other lots shall have not less than forty percent (40%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscaped area. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area.

Open landscaped areas shall include but not be limited to required front, side or rear setback areas, exclusive of driveways, plus usable common open space and/or private open space areas. (Zoning Ord. § 10-11).

18.20.120 Lot area per dwelling unit.
For every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling, dwelling group, or apartment structure, the following table establishes the permitted densities based on net square footage of the lot. No multiple dwelling use shall be established on any zoning plot containing less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet of area without variance approval.

When calculating number of units, if insufficient area exists to provide the minimum lot area for the additional unit, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number.

Permitted Densities/Graduated Scale R3-36D

Lot Size

# of Dwelling Units/

Square Feet (Net)

Square Feet of Lot Area

Up to

6,999

1/6,000 square feet

7,000

–

8,499

1/3,500 square feet

8,500

–

9,999

1/2,830 square feet

10,000

–

22,000

1/2,500 square feet

22,001

–

44,000

1/2,000 square feet

Over

44,000

1/1,210 square feet

(Zoning Ord. § 10-12).

18.20.130 Dwelling standards.
A variety of housing types and sizes shall be provided in this zoning district. The minimum floor area of any unit shall be four hundred twenty (420) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 10-13).

18.20.140 Minimum automobile parking required.
At least one garage or carport shall be provided for each dwelling unit, plus one parking space for each dwelling unit. No parking shall occur in required front yards or corner lot street side yards.

A minimum driveway length of twenty (20) feet shall be required between said parking space and any street right-of-way line. Back out parking is prohibited for three units or more.

Where garage doors are located so as to be opposite each other with a distance of less than forty (40) feet, automatic garage door openers and roll-up garage doors shall be provided. (Zoning Ord. § 10-14).

18.20.150 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines:

(1) With any existing office, commercial, or industrial development that does not have such a fence.

(2) With any single-family or duplex zoning or property proposed for single-family or duplex development in the general plan.

(3) With any multiple-dwelling or B-zoned activity area where a conflict in use is probable, the Director of Planning and Inspection is granted the authority as an administrative function to determine such probability of conflict and with regard to this subsection permit a suitable alternative for situations such as jointly used driveway or recreation area, or adjacent minimum ten-foot yards, where construction of such a fence of masonry would not be warranted.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(c) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall not reflect directly into any living area.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be solid core type doors equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. Each disposal area shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot-high masonry enclosure with solid wood gates. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for weekly pickup of the equivalent of one thirty-two (32) gallon container per bedroom. (Zoning Ord. § 10-15).

Chapter 18.22
REGULATIONS FOR VARIOUS MIXED USE COMBINING ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

Article I. Regulations for MU – Mixed Use Combining Zoning Districts

18.22.010    Application.

18.22.020    Intent.

18.22.030    Permitted and conditional uses.

18.22.040    Development standards.

18.22.050    Additional development standards.

18.22.060    Architectural review.

Article II. Regulations for TMU – Transit-Oriented Mixed Use Combining Zoning Districts

18.22.110    Application.

18.22.120    Intent.

18.22.130    Permitted and conditional uses.

18.22.140    Development standards.

18.22.150    Additional development standards.

18.22.160    Architectural review.

Article III. Regulations for VHDMU – Very High Density Mixed Use Zoning Districts

18.22.210    Application.

18.22.220    Intent.

18.22.230    Permitted uses.

18.22.240    Conditional uses.

18.22.250    Development standards.

18.22.260    Parking requirements.

18.22.270    Additional development standards.

Article I. Regulations for MU – Mixed Use Combining Zoning Districts

18.22.010 Application.
The regulations in this article shall apply to each zoning district to which the zoning suffix MU is combined, creating a mixed use combining zoning district. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.020 Intent.
The mixed use combining zoning district is intended to encourage quality multifamily residential development in conjunction with commercial development or redevelopment. This district also encourages the construction and use of housing without related commercial development. Mixed use districts encourage development that is consistent with the existing community because the districts are located in areas that have traditionally been zoned for commercial and office uses, but are adjacent to residentially zoned property. Combining housing with office and/or retail uses can increase the number and diversity of housing options available in the City, and is consistent with the City’s general plan policies for increasing housing. A variety of housing types and sizes may be provided in this zoning district. A percentage of the residential units should be affordable to low and/or moderate income households. A balance of ownership housing and rental housing is encouraged. The permitted density is from nineteen (19) up to twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre, based on the total acreage of the site and in addition to any commercial use of the same property. Development standards for such residential use are set in SCCC 18.22.040. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.030 Permitted and conditional uses.
Except as provided in this section, and subject to restrictions contained in this article, permitted and conditional uses for mixed use combining zoning districts are:

(a) Existing nonconforming uses and permitted and conditional uses specified by the thoroughfare commercial (CT) or community commercial (CC) zoning district with which the mixed use overlay zoning district is combined. The mix of residential uses and auto-oriented uses on the same property is not permitted.

(b) Multifamily dwellings with a minimum density of nineteen (19) units per acre and a maximum density of twenty-five (25) units per acre, based upon gross site acreage.

(c) Additional dwelling units may be permitted through the approval of a density bonus, subject to the regulations of Chapter 18.78 SCCC.

(d) Parking lot and/or parking structures associated with primary uses of the site.

(e) Home occupations as defined in Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(f) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(g) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. 1935 § 9, 1-13-15).

18.22.040 Development standards.
Development standards include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Lot Area. Each lot shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

(b) Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet.

(c) Building Height Limits. Structures are limited to three stories plus depressed parking. Total building height measured from adjacent grade shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet.

(d) Front Yards. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than ten feet in depth.

(e) Side Yards. Each lot shall have one side yard of not less than ten feet in width. Where adjacent properties are designated single-family in the general plan, that side yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width for the main building. If any part of the main building is adjacent to properties designated single-family and is more than two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, the third story shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from that side yard property line. Single story accessory buildings such as carports or garages shall be set back at least five feet from the side property line.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall not be less than ten feet in width.

(f) Rear Yards. A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. If any part of the main building is adjacent to properties designated single-family and is more than two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, the third story shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the rear property line. Single story carports or garages shall be set back at least five feet from the rear property line.

(g) Maximum Building Coverage. No restriction, but coverage is subject to parking, landscaping, and setback requirements.

(h) Open Landscaped Area. Each lot shall have not less than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscape areas. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in each separate planter area.

Open landscaped areas shall exclude driveway area but include required front, side and rear setback areas, and usable common and private open space areas, including hardscape on parking podiums, roofs, decks and balconies.

(i) Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. For every dwelling unit proposed, a minimum of one thousand seven hundred forty-two (1,742) net square feet of lot area shall be required. When calculating number of units, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number if the calculation produces insufficient minimum lot area for an additional unit.

(j) Minimum Parking Requirements. The minimum parking requirements for commercial uses are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. Parking for each residential unit shall be one space for each studio; one and one-half spaces for each one bedroom unit; two spaces for each two-plus bedroom unit.

Mixed use development, located near transit, and transportation demand management (TDM) can accommodate reduced parking because increased transit accessibility and mixed land uses can reduce vehicle trips and vehicle demand per household or by land use. Parking shared among uses is encouraged where an efficiency in shared use can be demonstrated. Modifications or reductions to the automobile parking space requirements of this section may be possible under the procedures set forth in SCCC 18.90.020. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.050 Additional development standards.
Additional development standards include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Residential Development. Unless otherwise regulated within this article, the residential portion of a mixed use development shall meet the community ownership standards, as established in SCCC 18.54.080, and all applicable building code standards.

(b) Fencing. At the time of new construction of a building on property in this zoning district, the owner shall install and thereafter maintain a solid fence of masonry six feet high on all interior property lines where such a fence does not exist. In front yards and street side yards, fencing shall not exceed three feet in height.

The Director of Planning and Inspection is granted the authority as an administrative function to determine the probability of conflict between uses and, with regard to this subsection, to permit a suitable alternative for situations where construction of a masonry fence would not be warranted, such as jointly used driveway, parking or recreation areas, or adjacent minimum ten-foot yards.

(c) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with shrubs and trees intended to provide a suitable visual screen, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(d) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be solid core type doors equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(e) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. Each disposal area shall be screened from public view by a minimum seven-foot-high masonry enclosure with solid wood gates and a roof. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for weekly pickup of the equivalent of one thirty-two (32) gallon container per bedroom. Enclosures shall also be of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for any commercial uses on-site. Trash compactors shall be located within an enclosed building.

(f) Building Frontage. Buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the property frontage. In the remaining street frontage, low walls and hedges are encouraged to maintain the continuity of the streetscape. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.060 Architectural review.
Architectural review per Chapter 18.76 SCCC shall occur at the Planning Commission for any new construction that will include residential. Notice shall be given by posting in the time and manner set forth in SCCC 18.112.060. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 8-24-04).

Article II. Regulations for TMU – Transit-Oriented Mixed Use Combining Zoning Districts

18.22.110 Application.
The regulations in this article shall apply to each zoning district to which the zoning suffix TMU is combined, creating a transit-oriented mixed use combining zoning district. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.120 Intent.
The transit-oriented mixed use combining zoning district is intended to encourage quality high density residential development in close proximity to multiple transit lines and in conjunction with commercial development or redevelopment. This district also encourages the construction and use of housing without related commercial development. Mixed use districts encourage development that is consistent with the existing community because the districts are located in areas that have traditionally been zoned for commercial and office uses, but are adjacent to residentially zoned property. Combining housing with office and/or retail uses can increase the number and diversity of housing options available in the City, and is consistent with the City’s general plan policies for increasing housing. A variety of housing types and sizes may be provided in this zoning district. A percentage of the residential units should be affordable to low and/or moderate income households. A balance of ownership housing and rental housing is encouraged. The permitted density is from twenty-six (26) up to forty-five (45) dwelling units per acre, based on the total acreage of the site and in addition to any commercial use of the same property. Development standards for such residential use are set in SCCC 18.22.140. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.130 Permitted and conditional uses.
Except as provided in this section, and subject to restrictions contained in this article, permitted and conditional uses for mixed use combining zoning districts are:

(a) Existing nonconforming uses and permitted and conditional uses specified by the thoroughfare commercial (CT) or community commercial (CC) zoning district with which the mixed use overlay zoning district is combined. The mix of residential uses and auto-oriented uses on the same property is not permitted.

(b) Multifamily dwellings with a minimum density of twenty-six (26) units per acre and a maximum density of forty-five (45) units per acre, based upon gross site acreage.

(c) Additional dwelling units may be permitted through the approval of a density bonus, subject to the regulations of Chapter 18.78 SCCC.

(d) Parking lot and/or parking structures associated with primary uses of the site.

(e) Home occupations as defined in Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(f) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(g) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. 1935 § 10, 1-13-15).

18.22.140 Development standards.
Development standards include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Lot Area. Each lot shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

(b) Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet.

(c) Building Height Limits. Structures are limited to four stories plus depressed parking. Total building height measured from adjacent grade shall not exceed fifty (50) feet.

(d) Front Yards. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than ten feet in depth.

(e) Side Yards. Each lot shall have one side yard of not less than ten feet in width. Where adjacent properties are designated single-family in the general plan, that side yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width for the main building. If any part of the main building is adjacent to properties designated single-family and is more than two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, the third and fourth stories shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from that side yard property line. Single story accessory buildings such as carports or garages shall be set back at least five feet from the side property line.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall not be less than ten feet in width.

(f) Rear Yards. A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. If any part of the main building is adjacent to properties designated single-family and is more than two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, the third and fourth stories shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the rear property line. Single story carports or garages shall be set back at least five feet from the rear property line.

(g) Maximum Building Coverage. No restriction, but coverage is subject to parking, landscaping, and setbacks requirements.

(h) Open Landscaped Area. Each lot shall have not less than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area developed into permanently maintained open landscape areas. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in each separate planter area.

Open landscaped areas shall exclude driveway area but include required front, side and rear setback areas, and usable common and private open space areas, including hardscape on parking podiums, roofs, decks and balconies.

(i) Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. For every dwelling unit proposed, a minimum of nine hundred sixty-eight (968) net square feet of lot area shall be required. When calculating number of units, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number if the calculation produces insufficient minimum lot area for an additional unit.

(j) Minimum Parking Requirements. The minimum parking requirements for commercial uses are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. Parking for each residential unit shall be one space for each studio; one and one-half spaces for each one bedroom unit; two spaces for each two-plus bedroom unit.

Mixed use development, located near transit, and transportation demand management (TDM) can accommodate reduced parking because increased transit accessibility and mixed land uses can reduce vehicle trips and vehicle demand per household or by land use. Parking shared among uses is encouraged where an efficiency in shared use can be demonstrated. Modifications or reductions to the automobile parking space requirements of this section may be possible under the procedures set forth in SCCC 18.90.020. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.150 Additional development standards.
Additional development standards include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Residential Development. Unless otherwise regulated within this article, the residential portion of a mixed use development shall meet the community ownership standards, as established in SCCC 18.54.080, and all applicable building code standards.

(b) Fencing. At the time of new construction of a building on property in this zoning district, the owner shall install and thereafter maintain a solid fence of masonry six feet high on all interior property lines where such a fence does not exist. In front yards and street side yards, fencing shall not exceed three feet in height.

The Director of Planning and Inspection is granted the authority as an administrative function to determine the probability of conflict between uses and with regard to this subsection, to permit a suitable alternative for situations where construction of a masonry fence would not be warranted, such as jointly used driveway, parking or recreation areas, or adjacent minimum ten-foot yards.

(c) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with shrubs and trees intended to provide a suitable visual screen, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(d) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be solid core type doors equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(e) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. Each disposal area shall be screened from public view by a minimum seven-foot-high masonry enclosure with solid wood gates and a roof. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for weekly pickup of the equivalent of one thirty-two (32) gallon container per bedroom. Enclosures shall also be of sufficient size to accommodate trash bins for any commercial uses on-site. Trash compactors shall be located within an enclosed building.

(f) Building Frontage. Buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the property frontage. In the remaining street frontage, low walls and hedges are encouraged to maintain the continuity of the streetscape. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04).

18.22.160 Architectural review.
Architectural review per Chapter 18.76 SCCC shall occur at the Planning Commission for any new construction that will include residential. Notice shall be given by posting in the time and manner set forth in SCCC 18.112.060. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 8-24-04).

Article III. Regulations for VHDMU – Very High Density Mixed Use Zoning Districts

18.22.210 Application.
The regulations set forth in this article apply to all parcels in the VHDMU zoning districts. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.220 Intent.
This district is designed to provide for transit- and pedestrian-oriented mixed use development comprised of very high density housing over fifty (50) dwelling units per acre and up to and including one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units per acre in conjunction with local and regional serving commercial uses that link with existing and planned transit facilities to support and maximize transit use. This district is intended to encourage high quality integrated development consisting of residential and commercial uses in a horizontal and or vertical arrangement to maximize open space for active and passive uses and provide opportunities for place making. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.230 Permitted uses.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings with a minimum density of fifty-one (51) dwelling units per acre up to and including a maximum density of one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units per acre, based on gross site acreage.

(b) Parking structures associated with the primary uses of the site.

(c) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(d) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(e) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(f) Any use permitted in the CC community commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN neighborhood commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG general office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as may be amended and subject to the regulations set forth in this article and the following:

(1) Such uses are permitted on the ground floor of multifamily dwelling structures.

(2) Such uses are permitted in buildings intended solely for retail use; provided, that the development of the retail building would not make it infeasible to achieve the minimum residential density specified in this article over all contiguous parcels with the VHDMU zoning designation.

(3) No auto service uses, mortuaries, lodges, or clubs are permitted.

(g) On the ground floor of multifamily dwelling structures, live/work units subject to the following performance standards:

(1) A minimum first floor to ceiling height of twelve (12) feet;

(2) A minimum front room depth of thirty-five (35) feet;

(3) A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) glazing along the front elevation;

(4) Double entry doors with a minimum of eighty percent (80%) transparent glass surface area; and

(5) Live/work units occupy a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of an individual building’s ground floor retail frontage.

(h) Hotel, full service that may include restaurant(s), bar/lounge, massage and spa services, administrative offices, and meeting and banquet rooms.

(i) Restaurants, including on-premises sale and service of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits.

(j) Outdoor seating and dining areas appurtenant to restaurant and retail uses.

(k) Live entertainment that is wholly incidental to an otherwise permitted commercial use.

(l) Outdoor walk-up facility appurtenant to retail uses. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.240 Conditional uses.
(a) Any use identified as a conditional use in the CC community commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN neighborhood commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG general office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as may be amended, subject to the regulations set forth in this article and the following:

(1) Such uses are conditionally permitted on the ground floor of multifamily dwelling structures;

(2) Such uses are conditionally permitted in buildings intended solely for retail use; provided, that the development of the retail building would not make it infeasible to achieve the minimum residential density specified in this article over all contiguous parcels with the VHDMU zoning district.

(b) On the ground floor of multifamily dwelling structures, live/work units that meet the glazing and entry door requirements of the performance standards set forth in SCCC 18.23.030(j) but that do not meet one or more of the following minimum performance standards:

(1) A minimum first floor to ceiling height of twelve (12) feet;

(2) A minimum front room depth of thirty-five (35) feet; or

(3) Live/work units occupy a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of an individual building’s ground floor retail frontage.

(c) Stand-alone parking garage.

(d) Live entertainment as a primary use.

(e) Cocktail lounges, bars, or taverns not associated with a restaurant or hotel use. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.250 Development standards.
(a) Dwelling Unit Density. For the VHDMU district, the minimum dwelling unit density shall exceed fifty (50) dwelling units per acre and the maximum dwelling unit density is one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units per acre.

(b) Minimum Lot Area. None.

(c) Minimum Lot Width. None.

(d) Building Height Limits. The maximum height limit in the VHDMU district shall be limited by FAA restrictions, as may be amended.

(e) Front Yard Requirements. None.

(f) Side Yards Requirements. None.

(g) Maximum Building Coverage. No maximum, subject to providing adequate pervious area to meet stormwater requirements. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.260 Parking requirements.
(a) Minimum Parking Requirements.

(1) The minimum parking requirements for all commercial uses, including restaurants, is three parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area.

(2) Hotel rooms: 0.75 spaces per each lodging unit.

(3) Studio and one bedroom residential units: one parking space per unit.

(4) Residential units with two or more bedrooms: one and one-half parking spaces per unit.

(b) Shared Parking. Parking shared among uses is encouraged, and a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the parking spaces provided may be shared between two uses. For the purposes of this article, those parking spaces shared between two uses count towards the parking requirement of both.

(c) Modifications or reductions to the automobile parking space requirements of this section may be permitted under the procedures set forth in SCCC 18.90.020. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

18.22.270 Additional development standards.
(a) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one foot-candle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall reflect downward and away from residential areas and public streets.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewers. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(b) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. If not placed within a garage or other structure, each disposal area shall be screened from public view. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash and recycling bins for residential and commercial uses on site. Trash compactors shall be located within an enclosed building. (Ord. 2004 § 1, 8-27-19).

Chapter 18.23
REGULATIONS FOR THE LAWRENCE STATION AREA PLAN ZONING DISTRICT (LSAP)
Sections:

18.23.010    Application.

18.23.020    Intent.

18.23.030    Permitted uses.

18.23.040    Conditional uses.

18.23.050    Existing industrial buildings/uses.

18.23.060    Development standards.

18.23.070    Parking requirements.

18.23.080    Additional development standards.

18.23.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all parcels in the Lawrence Station area plan (LSAP) zoning district, except as otherwise provided in SCCC 18.23.050 (Existing industrial buildings/uses). The LSAP encompasses approximately seventy-two (72) gross acres of property and right-of-way, situated between Kifer Road, Lawrence Expressway, Central Expressway, and Calabazas Creek. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.020 Intent.
This zone is designed to implement the vision of the Lawrence Station area plan, creating a high-density, transit-oriented residential district with supportive retail services. The Lawrence Station area plan is expected to be implemented over time, and the district contains provisions for the continuation of existing industrial buildings and uses. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Dwelling groups.

(d) Multiple-family dwellings.

(e) Private garages and accessory buildings (see Chapter 18.66 SCCC) customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(f) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(g) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(h) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(i) On the ground floor of multifamily dwellings with a dwelling unit density greater than fifty (50) dwelling units per acre, or in buildings intended solely for retail use, any use permitted in the CC community commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN neighborhood commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG general office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as amended, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(j) On the ground floor of multifamily dwellings with a dwelling unit density greater than fifty (50) dwelling units per acre, live/work units, subject to the following performance standards:

(1) A minimum first floor to ceiling height of twelve (12) feet;

(2) A minimum front room depth of thirty-five (35) feet;

(3) A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) glazing along the front elevation;

(4) Double entry doors with a minimum of eighty percent (80%) transparent glass surface area; and

(5) Live/work units occupy a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of an individual building’s ground floor retail frontage.

(k) Outdoor seating and dining areas appurtenant to retail uses.

(l) Live entertainment that is wholly incidental to an otherwise permitted commercial use.

(m) Outdoor walk-up facility appurtenant to retail uses. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.040 Conditional uses.
(a) On the ground floor of multifamily dwellings with a dwelling unit density greater than fifty (50) dwelling units per acre, or in buildings intended solely for retail use, any use identified as a conditional use in the CC community commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN neighborhood commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG general office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as amended, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Bar and/or restaurant which serves or sells alcoholic beverages.

(c) On the ground floor of multifamily dwellings with a dwelling unit density greater than fifty (50) dwelling units per acre, live/work units that meet the glazing and entry door requirements of the performance standards set forth in SCCC 18.23.030(j) but that either do not meet the height and depth performance standards, or exceed the twenty-five percent (25%) frontage maximum specified in SCCC 18.23.030(j)(5).

(d) Stand-alone parking garage.

(e) Live entertainment as a primary use. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.050 Existing industrial buildings/uses.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the lawful use of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter may continue and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, as though the prior zoning of the parcel remained in place, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety, at which time the prior zoning shall become inapplicable and the other sections of this chapter shall apply from that point forward.

(b) Allowed Uses. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, permitted uses of the ML light manufacturing district are allowed, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply to such building and use, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety.

(c) Conditional Uses. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, conditional uses of the ML light manufacturing district are conditionally permitted, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety.

(d) Development Standards. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, development standards of the ML light manufacturing district shall apply, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.060 Development standards.
(a) Maximum Dwelling Unit Density. For the LSAP district, the maximum dwelling unit density is one hundred (100) dwelling units per acre.

(b) Minimum Lot Area. None.

(c) Minimum Lot Width. None.

(d) Building Height Limits. The maximum height limit in the LSAP district is one hundred (100) feet in height.

(e) Front Yard Requirements. None.

(f) Side Yard Requirements. None.

(g) Maximum Building Coverage. No maximum, subject to providing adequate pervious area to meet stormwater requirements. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.070 Parking requirements.
(a) Minimum Parking Requirements.

(1) The minimum parking requirements for all commercial uses, including restaurants, is four parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area.

(2) Studio and one-bedroom residential units: one parking space per unit.

(3) Residential units with two or more bedrooms: two parking spaces per unit.

(b) Shared Parking. Parking shared among uses is encouraged, and up to twenty percent (20%) of parking spaces provided may be shared between two uses. For the purposes of this title, those parking spaces shared between two uses counts towards the parking requirement of both.

(c) Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirements.

(1) For each multifamily unit, one Class 1 parking space per three units and one Class 2 bike rack, accommodating two bikes, per fifteen (15) units is required.

(2) For each single-family home, townhouse, row house or other residential unit with independently secured vehicle parking, one Class 1 parking space per unit is required.

(3) For retail or restaurant uses, for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area, one Class 2 bike rack (accommodating two bikes) is required. In addition, one Class 1 parking space is required for every thirty (30) employees or fraction thereof. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

18.23.080 Additional development standards.
(a) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewer. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(b) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. If not screened within a garage or structure, each disposal area shall be screened from public view. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash and recycling bins for residential and commercial uses on site. Trash compactors shall be located within an enclosed building. (Ord. 1961 § 1, 12-13-16).

Chapter 18.24
REGULATIONS FOR R3-M MOBILE HOME PARK ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.24.010    Application.

18.24.020    Intent.

18.24.030    Permitted uses.

18.24.040    Conditional uses.

18.24.050    General regulations.

18.24.060    Mobile home park standards.

18.24.070    Mobile home site standards.

18.24.080    Construction and operation.

18.24.090    Additional regulations.

18.24.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R3-M zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 12-1).

18.24.020 Intent.
This zone is intended to encourage high-quality residential characteristics in mobile home park developments. (Zoning Ord. § 12-2).

18.24.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Mobile home parks and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to the permitted use.

(b) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(c) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(d) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter. (Zoning Ord. § 12-3; Ord. 1935 § 11, 1-13-15).

18.24.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Any commercial activity ancillary to and necessary for the efficient operation of the mobile home park. (Zoning Ord. § 12-4).

18.24.050 General regulations.
The following general regulations are adopted for the development and maintenance of mobile home parks.

(a) Minimum Park Area. Each mobile home park shall contain a minimum of four acres.

(b) Maximum Density. Each mobile home park shall not exceed a density of ten mobile home sites per gross acre.

(c) Use.

(1) No mobile home in this district shall be used for any purpose other than a dwelling.

(2) Each mobile home shall be located on an approved mobile home site, and all mobile home sites shall be designed to accommodate independent mobile homes. No mobile home site shall be used as the location for more than one mobile home or trailer. (Zoning Ord. § 12-5).

18.24.060 Mobile home park standards.
The following regulations are adopted as minimum mobile home park standards.

(a) Front and/or Street Side Yard Setback. Each mobile home park shall have front yard and street side yard setbacks of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street right-of-way lines.

(b) Minimum Interior Side Yard Setbacks. Each interior side yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.

(c) Minimum Rear Yard Setback. Each rear yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.

(d) Landscaping. All required minimum setback areas and all areas not improved by roadways, walkways, pathways, or occupied by other park facilities shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees, and shrubs. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area. Native and ornamental trees with a height of twenty (20) feet or greater shall be retained unless their removal is specifically allowed by the Planning Commission. In no case shall there be less than a six-foot-wide landscaped planter around the entire perimeter of the site.

(e) Permanent Structures Prohibited. Permanent buildings or structures on individual mobile home sites, including room additions, cabanas, ramadas, carports, or patio structures shall be prohibited. Planning division-approved portable demountable structures which may be easily disassembled and moved may be permitted.

(f) Fencing. Substantial solid fencing not less than six feet in height shall be constructed and maintained on the exterior boundaries of a mobile home park. Screening fences not less than six feet in height shall be installed and maintained around interior laundry yards, refuse collection points, and playground areas.

(g) Roadways. Mobile home park roadways and driveways shall be paved and maintained in good repair. All such roadway and driveways shall be surfaced and granted in such a manner that the drainage for the mobile home park shall drain to a centrally located drain or system of drains which shall be connected to the nearest storm sewer or other such system as may be approved by the City Engineer.

(h) Walkways. Paved walkways at least three feet wide shall be constructed and maintained throughout the mobile home park to provide access to the general park facilities including all buildings and sanitation facilities. Such walkways shall be separate from roadways or driveways for auto traffic.

(i) Parking. Provision shall be made for a minimum of one individually accessible and one tandem parking space per mobile home site. In addition to the above described parking spaces, to provide for excess parking of campers, boats, pickup trucks, hauling trailers, and the like, there shall be provided “reservoir parking” in the ratio of one such parking space for every four mobile home sites. Each reservoir parking space shall be at least ten feet by thirty (30) feet in size.

(j) Lighting. Mobile home park lighting shall consist of street electrolier type rather than flood lighting.

(k) Recreation Area. Recreation area shall be provided and maintained based on the following formula: 100 square feet for each mobile home unit.

(l) Tenant Storage. There shall be provided a minimum storage facility of ninety (90) cubic feet on each mobile home site.

Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the mobile home park and shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant materials.

(m) Underground Utilities. All service utilities such as electricity, water, gas, and the like within the property lines of the premises of a mobile home park shall be installed underground.

(n) Fire Protection. Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size, and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulations of the Fire Department. (Zoning Ord. § 12-6).

18.24.070 Mobile home site standards.
The following site standards are hereby adopted for mobile home spaces within each mobile home park.

(a) Mobile Home Site Size. The average size of mobile home sites in each mobile home park shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet in area or greater; no mobile home site shall be less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. Each site area shall be exclusive of any area used in common by park residents such as walkways, roadways, recreation areas, and park setback areas.

(b) Minimum Front, Side, and Rear Yard Setbacks. Each such yard to be at least five feet.

(c) Landscaping. All minimum setback areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees, and shrubs.

(d) Site Boundaries Marked. Boundaries of each mobile home site shall be permanently and visibly delineated.

(e) Mobile Home Site Paving. The following on-site areas shall be provided and maintained with suitable paving:

(1) All area occupied or covered by a mobile home and attached portable structures.

(2) All driveways and parking areas.

(3) Walkways to park roadways.

(4) Storage areas.

(5) Utility areas. (Zoning Ord. § 12-7).

18.24.080 Construction and operation.
All construction and operation procedures within the property lines of the premises of a mobile home park shall be in accordance with the provisions of the most recent edition of:

(a) California Health and Safety Code, Division 13 (entitled “Housing”), Part 2 (entitled “Mobile Homes – Manufactured Housing), Section 18000 et seq.

(b) California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Subchapter 2 (entitled “Mobile Homes, Recreational Vehicles and Commercial Coaches), Section 4000 et seq. (Zoning Ord. § 12-8).

18.24.090 Additional regulations.
Refer to Chapter 18.60 SCCC for additional mobile home regulations. (Zoning Ord. § 12-9).

Chapter 18.25
REGULATIONS FOR THE TRANSIT NEIGHBORHOOD (TN) ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

18.25.010    Application.

18.25.020    Intent.

18.25.030    Permitted uses.

18.25.040    Conditional uses.

18.25.050    Existing buildings and uses.

18.25.060    Development standards.

18.25.070    Parking requirements.

18.25.080    Additional development standards.

18.25.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all Transit Neighborhood (TN) zoning districts. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.020 Intent.
This zone is designed to implement the Transit Neighborhood General Plan designation, creating a high-density, transit-oriented residential district with supportive retail services. Transit Neighborhoods are expected to be implemented over time, and the district contains provisions for the continuation of existing industrial buildings and uses. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings.

(b) Home occupation as defined under Chapter 18.06 SCCC.

(c) Live/work units.

(d) Supportive housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(e) Transitional housing, subject to the same standards and restrictions as other dwelling units under this chapter.

(f) Housing for the ambulatory aged.

(g) On the ground floor of multifamily dwelling structures, or in buildings intended solely for retail use, any use permitted in the CC Community Commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN Neighborhood Commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG General Office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as amended, except that auto repair and auto sales, other than product showcase venues, are not permitted, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(h) Outdoor seating and dining areas appurtenant to retail uses.

(i) Live entertainment that is wholly incidental to an otherwise permitted commercial use.

(j) Outdoor walk-up facility appurtenant to retail uses.

(k) On-sale of alcohol appurtenant to restaurant uses.

(l) Neighborhood Light Industrial uses, with a public facing component, including but not limited to breweries, wineries, catering companies, garment manufacturing, and crafts and artists’ studios. Such uses shall be operated completely within an enclosed building. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.040 Conditional uses.
(a) On the ground floor of multifamily dwellings, or in buildings intended solely for retail use, any use identified as a conditional use in the CC Community Commercial district (Chapter 18.36 SCCC), CN Neighborhood Commercial district (Chapter 18.34 SCCC), or OG General Office district (Chapter 18.32 SCCC), each as amended, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Cocktail lounges, bars, and taverns, involving the on-sale of alcohol without meals.

(c) Live entertainment as a primary use.

(d) Stand-alone parking garage. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.050 Existing buildings and uses.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the lawful use of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter may continue and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, as though the prior zoning of the parcel remained in place, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety, at which time the prior zoning shall become inapplicable and the other sections of this chapter shall apply from that point forward.

(b) Allowed Uses. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, permitted uses of the prior zoning district are allowed, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply to such building and use, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety.

(c) Conditional Uses. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, conditional uses of the prior zoning district are conditionally permitted, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety.

(d) Development Standards. For parcels with legal uses of buildings existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, development standards of the prior zoning district shall apply, and none of the other sections of this chapter shall apply, until such time as the existing use (including any expansions) has been discontinued in its entirety. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.060 Development standards.
(a) Maximum Dwelling Unit Density. For the Transit Neighborhood district, the maximum dwelling unit density is three hundred fifty (350) dwelling units per acre.

(b) Minimum Dwelling Unit Density. For the Transit Neighborhood district, the minimum dwelling unit density is one hundred (100) dwelling units per acre.

(c) Minimum Lot Area. None.

(d) Minimum Lot Width. None.

(e) Building Height Limits. The maximum height limit in the Transit Neighborhood district is two hundred twenty (220) feet in height.

(f) Front Yard Requirements. None.

(g) Side Yards Requirements. None.

(h) Maximum Building Coverage. No maximum, subject to providing adequate pervious area to meet stormwater requirements. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.070 Parking requirements.
(a) Minimum Parking Requirements.

(1) The minimum parking requirement for grocery stores is one parking space per five hundred (500) square feet of building area.

(2) The minimum parking requirement for all other commercial uses, including restaurants, is one parking space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area.

(3) Residential units: one parking space per unit.

(4) Residential units with a floor area of less than five hundred fifty (550) square feet: 0.5 space per unit.

(5) Guest parking associated with residential uses: one space per twenty (20) units.

(6) Home for the ambulatory aged: one space per employee plus 0.1 space per unit.

(b) Shared Parking. Parking shared among uses is encouraged, and up to twenty percent (20%) of parking spaces provided may be shared between two uses. For the purposes of this title, those parking spaces shared between two uses count towards the parking requirement of both.

(c) Unbundled Parking. A maximum of one parking space shall be rented or sold with each unit. Additional parking spaces shall be rented or sold separately.

(1) As an alternative to renting or selling parking spaces separately from residential units, property managers may implement a parking preference program, with prospective renters without cars put on a separate waiting list from renters with cars, and renters being chosen alternately from the two lists.

(d) Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirements.

(1) For each multifamily unit, one Class 1 parking space per two units and one Class 2 bike rack, accommodating two bikes, per fifteen (15) units are required.

(2) For retail or restaurant uses, for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, one Class 2 bike rack (accommodating two bikes) is required. In addition, one Class 1 parking space is required for every thirty (30) employees or fraction thereof. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

18.25.080 Additional development standards.
(a) Lighting and Security.

(1) Open parking areas and common open space areas shall include lighting which provides a minimum illumination of one footcandle. Lighting fixtures shall be weather and vandal resistant. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(2) All main entrance doors to individual dwelling units shall be equipped with one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewer. Each main entrance door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a minimum of one-inch bolt projection and a maximum security strike plate.

(3) All sliding glass doors and ground floor windows shall be equipped with auxiliary locks, as approved by the Chief of Police.

(b) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide accessible trash disposal areas. If not screened within a garage or structure, each disposal area shall be screened from public view. Such enclosures shall provide area of sufficient size to accommodate trash and recycling bins for residential and commercial uses on site. Trash compactors shall be located within an enclosed building. (Ord. 1992 § 1, 11-27-18).

Chapter 18.26
REGULATIONS FOR R3-RV – RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.26.010    Application.

18.26.020    Intent.

18.26.030    Definitions.

18.26.040    Permitted uses.

18.26.050    Conditional uses.

18.26.060    Occupancy.

18.26.070    Recreational vehicle park design standards.

18.26.080    Recreational vehicle site design standards.

18.26.090    Public notice.

18.26.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all R3-RV zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 13-1).

18.26.020 Intent.
This zone is intended to:

(a) Provide adequate sites for temporary parking of recreational vehicles whose occupants are visiting or passing through the area of Santa Clara.

(b) Minimize the adverse impacts between a recreational vehicle park and surrounding land uses.

(c) Provide health and safety standards to protect both the users of the park and the community. (Zoning Ord. § 13-2).

18.26.030 Definitions.
(a) “Recreational vehicle” is a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer with or without motive power designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.

(b) “Recreational vehicle park” is any property where one or more lots are rented to users of recreational vehicles and which are occupied for temporary purposes.

(c) “Recreational vehicle site” is a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park for one recreational vehicle, automobile and camping party.

(d) “Camping party” is a person or group of not more than ten persons occupying any site within a park for not more than thirty (30) days annually. (Zoning Ord. § 13-3).

18.26.040 Permitted uses.
(a) Recreational vehicle parks and accessory uses limited to a permanent residence for the manager, vending machines and recreational facilities for the exclusive use of the park occupants.

(b) Supportive housing, if contained within a recreational vehicle or the permanent residence for the park manager.

(c) Transitional housing, if contained within a recreational vehicle or the permanent residence for the park manager. (Zoning Ord. § 13-4; Ord. 1935 § 12, 1-13-15).

18.26.050 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Any commercial activity to and necessary for the operation of the park. No signs advertising the presence of such commercial activity shall be visible from a public street. (Zoning Ord. § 13-5).

18.26.060 Occupancy.
Occupancy of each site is limited to one recreational vehicle and one automobile or truck, accommodating one camping party. The length of stay is limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days in any twelve (12)-month period.

No buildings or storage sheds are permitted on the recreational vehicle sites. (Zoning Ord. § 13-6).

18.26.070 Recreational vehicle park design standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: three acres.

(b) Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet.

(c) Minimum setbacks:

(1) Front yard: fifteen (15) feet.

(2) Street side yard: fifteen (15) feet.

(3) Interior side yard: five feet.

(4) Interior yard adjacent to any R district: thirty (30) feet including five feet of landscaping adjacent to property line and a twenty-five (25)-foot drive.

(d) Landscaping.

(1) Front and street side yards.

(2) Five-foot strip adjacent to any R district to be planted with trees of a species which will form a screen.

(e) Fences. A six-foot high solid fence or architectural control committee-approved alternative is required on all interior property lines and on the front and street side yard setback lines. On property lines adjacent to any R district the fence shall be masonry.

(f) Parking. One visitor parking space shall be provided for every fifteen (15) recreational vehicle sites or fraction thereof.

(g) Facilities.

(1) Recreation. A recreation area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided in addition to the required landscaping. Recreation equipment, such as a pool, playground, and picnic tables, and a service building, including toilets, showers, and laundry, can be located within the recreation area.

(2) Sanitation.

(A) A minimum of one toilet and one lavatory for each sex shall be provided for the exclusive use of the park occupants. An additional toilet and lavatory for each sex shall be provided for each fifteen (15) sites or fraction thereof which is not provided with a water connection and a three-inch drain inlet for connection to a vehicle equipped with a toilet.

(B) A minimum of one shower for each sex and one washer and dryer is required.

(C) Trailer sanitation stations designed to receive the discharge of sewage holding tanks for self-contained vehicles shall be installed in an accessible location in every recreational vehicle park in which there are sites not provided with drain inlets designed to receive the discharge of toilets. Trailer sanitation stations shall be provided on the basis of one station for each one hundred (100) such sites or fraction thereof.

(D) Trash containers shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of every recreational vehicle site and enclosed with a solid wood or masonry fence six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 13-7).

18.26.080 Recreational vehicle site design standards.
(a) Minimum site size: one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

(b) Separation. Recreational vehicle parking pads shall be located to maintain a ten-foot separation between recreational vehicles.

(c) Landscaping. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of each site shall be landscaped and shall include a nondeciduous tree of at least fifteen (15)-gallon size.

(d) Parking. Each site shall include parking space for one automobile.

(e) Access. Each site shall have direct access to a driveway designed in accordance with Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 13-8).

18.26.090 Public notice.
Notice of the time and place of the public hearing considering a rezoning for a recreational vehicle park shall be given at least two weeks before the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. Such notice shall include a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected. (Zoning Ord. § 13-9).

Chapter 18.28
(Reserved)
Chapter 18.30
REGULATIONS FOR OA – PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.30.010  Application.

18.30.020  Intent.

18.30.030  Permitted uses.

18.30.040  Conditional uses.

18.30.050  Lot area.

18.30.060  Lot width.

18.30.070  Building height limits.

18.30.080  Front yard.

18.30.090  Side yards.

18.30.100  Rear yard.

18.30.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.30.120  Open landscaped area.

18.30.130  Required parking.

18.30.140  Additional development standards.

18.30.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all OA zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 15-1).

18.30.020 Intent.
This is a professional office district intended to accommodate a demonstrated need for the development of such uses together with necessary landscaping and off-street parking facilities in locations served by primary access, yet inappropriate for commercial or high-employment office centers because of close proximity to purely residential uses. It is intended that the professional and administrative uses established in this district shall be designed and landscaped so as to be in harmony with such adjacent residential uses. (Zoning Ord. § 15-2).

18.30.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are of a similar nature will be permitted.

(a) Professional offices such as: accountant, architect, doctor.

(b) Clinics and ethical pharmacies.

(c) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the ambulatory aged.

(d) Nursery, preschool.

(e) Parking lot and/or parking structure.

(f) Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted use. (Zoning Ord. § 15-3).

18.30.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Lodges, clubs.

(b) Mortuaries. (Zoning Ord. § 15-4).

18.30.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 15-5).

18.30.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than sixty-five (65) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 15-6).

18.30.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 15-7).

18.30.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 15-8).

18.30.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet.

Notwithstanding the above, the side yard on the street side of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 15-9).

18.30.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth; provided, however, that if the principal building does not exceed one story in height, the rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 15-10).

18.30.110 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 15-11).

18.30.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and area shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A landscaped area equal to five percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 15-12).

18.30.130 Required parking.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 15-13).

18.30.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residential zoned property or with property proposed for residential development in the general plan.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry or solid wood fence at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 15-14).

Chapter 18.32
REGULATIONS FOR OG – GENERAL OFFICE ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.32.010  Application.

18.32.020  Intent.

18.32.030  Permitted uses.

18.32.040  Conditional uses.

18.32.050  Lot area.

18.32.060  Lot width.

18.32.070  Building height limits.

18.32.080  Front yard.

18.32.090  Side yards.

18.32.100  Rear yard.

18.32.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.32.120  Open landscaped area.

18.32.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.32.140  Additional development standards.

18.32.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all OG zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 16-1).

18.32.020 Intent.
This district is intended to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of administrative facilities and business office centers, wherein the normal development of mixed commercial uses would not be appropriate. This is a heavy employment zone bordering and contiguous to the central business area or community and regional commercial areas. (Zoning Ord. § 16-2).

18.32.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Banks.

(b) Clinics and ethical pharmacies.

(c) Financial and general business offices.

(d) Lodges, clubs.

(e) Mortuaries.

(f) Nursery, preschool.

(g) Parking lot and/or parking structure.

(h) Professional offices such as: accountant, architect, doctor.

(i) Restaurant.

(j) Studios and instructional facilities such as dance studio, music studio, or similar establishment teaching a specific subject as distinguished from a school (not to include industrial training such as welding or automotive repair involving the use of tools and materials appropriate to an industrial use area).

(k) Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted use. (Zoning Ord. § 16-3).

18.32.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Animal clinics or hospitals (not kennels).

(b) Cocktail lounges, bars, taverns (intended to include any establishment serving liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises).

(c) Dancing or live entertainment.

(d) Fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, boarding house.

(e) Hospitals.

(f) Research laboratories, limited to investigation, analysis, testing, or experimentation only.

Manufacturing or processing of any kind is prohibited. (Zoning Ord. § 16-4).

18.32.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 16-5).

18.32.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than sixty-five (65) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 16-6).

18.32.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 16-7).

18.32.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 16-8).

18.32.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet. (Zoning Ord. § 16-9).

18.32.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 16-10).

18.32.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking, landscaping and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 16-11).

18.32.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A landscaped area equal to five percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 16-12).

18.32.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 16-13).

18.32.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residential zoned property or with property proposed for residential development in the general plan.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped with screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to all interior property lines unless two properties are developed concurrently with a common driveway at property line. Each planter shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of soil area within the planter shall be five feet, or seven feet if adjacent to parking stalls.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry or solid wood fence at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 16-14).

Chapter 18.34
REGULATIONS FOR CN – NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.34.010  Application.

18.34.020  Intent.

18.34.030  Permitted uses.

18.34.040  Conditional uses.

18.34.050  Lot area.

18.34.060  Lot width.

18.34.070  Building height limits.

18.34.080  Front yard.

18.34.090  Side yards.

18.34.100  Rear yard.

18.34.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.34.120  Open landscaped area.

18.34.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.34.140  Additional development standards.

18.34.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all CN zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 17-1).

18.34.020 Intent.
This is a limited commercial zone that provides retail goods and services for the convenience of the immediately adjacent residential neighborhood. (Zoning Ord. § 17-2).

18.34.030 Permitted uses.
All uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided in this section or in SCCC 18.34.040. Only the following uses, or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature, will be permitted:

(a) Retail sales or rentals of new merchandise or service:

(1) Clothing stores.

(2) Pharmacies.

(3) Grocery stores or delicatessens.

(4) Hardware stores.

(5) Stores which sell alcoholic beverages (packaged goods off-sale).

(6) Restaurants, excluding those which sell or serve alcoholic beverages. Outdoor use of designated seating areas for twelve (12) or fewer customers of such restaurants, within an area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less, is allowed if architectural committee approval is obtained and such outdoor use is operated in conformance with any conditions of approval.

(7) Bookstores and video stores, provided more than fifty percent (50%) of the displayed inventory or stock on hand, at any one time, is not adult oriented as defined and regulated in Chapter 18.70 SCCC.

(b) Sales of personal or financial services:

(1) Barber shops and beauty parlors.

(2) Banks and savings and loans.

(3) Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, and pressing shops.

(4) Professional offices, such as accountants, architects, or doctors.

(5) Nurseries and preschools.

(6) Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios, or similar establishments, in which a specific subject is taught, as distinguished from a public or private general educational school. This category does not include facilities in which industrial training is provided, such as welding or automotive repair, involving the use of tools and materials appropriate to an industrial use area.

(c) Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with, and necessary for, the operation of any permitted use. Such uses may include a parking lot, if constructed at, or within thirty-six (36) inches of, the elevation of the top of the nearest street curb. (Zoning Ord. § 17-3).

18.34.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC:

(a) Automobile service station (subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.68 SCCC).

(b) Stores which sell beer and/or wine (packaged goods off-sale) located on the same parcel as an automobile service station (subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.68 SCCC).

(c) Neighborhood bar and/or restaurant which serves or sells alcoholic beverages, with an area of less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet (including any outdoor seating). Dancing or live entertainment shall not be permitted.

(d) Outdoor walk-up service facility.

(e) Animal clinic or animal hospital (not kennels).

(f) Parking lot and/or parking structures constructed at an elevation more than thirty-six (36) inches above or below the elevation of the top of the nearest street curb. (Zoning Ord. § 17-4).

18.34.050 Lot area.
Each lot or commercial complex shall contain a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and shall not exceed a maximum area of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet including the area devoted to service station use. (Zoning Ord. § 17-5).

18.34.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than eighty (80) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 17-6).

18.34.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 17-7).

18.34.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 17-8).

18.34.090 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of every lot that is adjacent at that side of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall not be less than ten feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 17-9).

18.34.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of each lot that is adjacent at the rear of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 17-10).

18.34.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking, landscaping, and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 17-11).

18.34.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 17-12).

18.34.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 17-13).

18.34.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required front or street side yard areas.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 17-14).

Chapter 18.36
REGULATIONS FOR CC – COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.36.010    Application.

18.36.020    Intent.

18.36.030    Permitted uses.

18.36.040    Conditional uses.

18.36.050    Lot area.

18.36.060    Lot width.

18.36.070    Building height limits.

18.36.080    Front yard.

18.36.090    Side yards.

18.36.100    Rear yard.

18.36.110    Maximum building coverage.

18.36.120    Open landscaped area.

18.36.130    Minimum parking requirements.

18.36.140    Additional development standards.

18.36.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all CC zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 18-1).

18.36.020 Intent.
This is a general shopping center zone district, which is intended to encourage organized concentration of a wide variety of retail goods and services for the community. (Zoning Ord. § 18-2).

18.36.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided in SCCC 18.36.040.

(a) Any use permitted in the CN or OG district subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) The following retail business establishments, shops, and offices supplying commodities or performing services for residents of the surrounding community:

(1) Animal hospital – clinic or veterinarian (no kennel).

(2) Antique shop.

(3) Appliance sales and service.

(4) Art goods.

(5) Auto accessory sales facility not involving installation on the premises.

(6) Bakery.

(7) Beauty college.

(8) Bicycle sales and repair.

(9) Book store including rental.

(10) Candle shop.

(11) Carpets, rugs, draperies.

(12) Confectionery.

(13) Department store.

(14) Florist.

(15) Furniture store.

(16) Hobby shop.

(17) Import store.

(18) Jewelry sales and repair.

(19) Pet shop.

(20) Pipe and tobacco shop.

(21) Radio and television sales and service.

(22) Repair shop for domestic appliances, radios, shoes.

(23) Second hand sales.

(24) Shoe store.

(25) Sporting goods.

(26) Stationery store.

(27) Tailoring and custom dressmaking.

(c) Incidental storage and accessory uses including repair operations and services, provided such uses shall be clearly incidental to the sale of products at retail on the premises and shall be so located, constructed and operated as not to be offensive or objectionable because of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or other public nuisances. (Zoning Ord. § 18-3).

18.36.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Any conditional use permitted in the CN or OG district, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Amusement or recreational enterprise, such as arcade, bowling alley, or pool hall.

(c) Drive-through service facility.

(d) Outdoor walk-up service facility, if located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan.

(e) Outdoor activity, display, or storage ancillary to a permitted use, such as incidental nursery display or tire, battery, or auto accessory service center.

(f) Theater (indoor).

(g) Smoking lounges, pursuant to Chapter 8.37 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 18-4; Ord. 1939 § 3, 3-24-15).

18.36.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 18-5).

18.36.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 18-6).

18.36.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 18-7).

18.36.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 18-8).

18.36.090 Side yards.
(a) Interior Lot. Side yards are required at each side of every lot that is adjacent at that side of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall not be less than ten feet in width.

(b) Corner Lot. The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 18-9).

18.36.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of each lot that is adjacent at the rear of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 18-10).

18.36.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking, landscaping, and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 18-11).

18.36.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 18-12).

18.36.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 18-13).

18.36.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan. Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required front or street side yard areas.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 18-14).

Chapter 18.38
REGULATIONS FOR CT – THOROUGHFARE COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.38.010  Application.

18.38.020  Intent.

18.38.030  Permitted uses.

18.38.040  Conditional uses.

18.38.050  Lot area.

18.38.060  Lot width.

18.38.070  Building height limits.

18.38.080  Front yard.

18.38.090  Side yards.

18.38.100  Rear yard.

18.38.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.38.120  Open landscaped area.

18.38.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.38.140  Additional development standards.

18.38.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all CT zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 19-1).

18.38.020 Intent.
This district is primarily designed to provide for those commercial uses that are appropriate to major commercial thoroughfare or highway locations and are dependent on thoroughfare travel, and is intended to encourage the development of auto-oriented uses or other uses that are more suitable for individual auto access than for development within a shopping center. (Zoning Ord. § 19-2).

18.38.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided in SCCC 18.38.040 and shall be so located, constructed, and operated as not to be offensive or objectionable because of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or other public nuisances.

(a) Any use permitted in the CC district, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) The following auto-oriented activities:

(1) Auto sales and service within a building.

(2) Garage – public or private, ambulance service, auto repair.

(3) Motorcycle sales and service.

(4) Motel, hotel.

(5) Rental business.

(6) Tire, battery, and auto accessory center.

(c) Incidental storage and accessory uses, including repair operations and services. (Zoning Ord. § 19-3).

18.38.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Any conditional use permitted in the CC district, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Auto laundry.

(c) Outdoor activity display or storage not contained wholly within a completely enclosed building, such as auto sales, boat sales, plant nursery, tire sales, trailer rental.

(d) Drive-in theater. (Zoning Ord. § 19-4).

18.38.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of seven thousand (7,500) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 19-5).

18.38.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 19-6).

18.38.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 19-7).

18.38.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than ten feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 19-8).

18.38.090 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of an interior lot that is adjacent at that side to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall not be less than ten feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than ten feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 19-9).

18.38.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of each lot that is adjacent at the rear of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 19-10).

18.38.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking, landscaping, and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 19-11).

18.38.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 19-12).

18.38.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 19-13).

18.38.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed, and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required front or street side yard areas.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 19-14).

Chapter 18.40
REGULATIONS FOR CD – DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.40.010  Application.

18.40.020  Intent.

18.40.030  Permitted uses.

18.40.040  Conditional uses.

18.40.050  Lot area.

18.40.060  Lot width.

18.40.070  Building height limits.

18.40.080  Front yard.

18.40.090  Interior and corner side yards.

18.40.100  Rear yard.

18.40.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.40.120  Open landscaped area.

18.40.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.40.140  Additional development standards.

18.40.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all CD zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 20-1).

18.40.020 Intent.
This zone is intended to encourage the development of a large concentration of commercial and office uses in the central business area of the City, which will provide a focal point of activity for the entire City and the surrounding areas.

Manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, and distributing activities are not intended. (Zoning Ord. § 20-2).

18.40.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided in SCCC 18.40.040. Manufacturing or processing of any kind is prohibited.

(a) Any use permitted in the CT district subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter plus those diverse and special uses serving the entire City and region.

(b) Any of the following commercial nonmanufacturing uses or services for which a central location for convenient use by the general public is desired:

(1) Auctioneer.

(2) Gymnasium.

(3) Laundry.

(4) Newspaper, printing, or commercial printing shop.

(5) Pawn shop. (Zoning Ord. § 20-3).

18.40.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Any conditional use permitted in the CT district subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Auditorium, arena, ice skating rink, roller skating rink, or other activity involving a large assemblage of people.

(c) Transportation terminal, such as bus station, heliport. (Zoning Ord. § 20-4).

18.40.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 20-5).

18.40.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than sixty (60) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 20-6).

18.40.070 Building height limits.
No City-imposed limitation on height, but the Federal Aviation Agency regulations should be consulted. (Zoning Ord. § 20-7).

18.40.080 Front yard.
No requirement. (Zoning Ord. § 20-8).

18.40.090 Interior and corner side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of a lot that is adjacent at such side of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall not be less than ten feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 20-9).

18.40.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of each lot that is adjacent at the rear of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 20-10).

18.40.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking, landscaping, and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 20-11).

18.40.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) Required front yards; and

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. (Zoning Ord. § 20-12).

18.40.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 20-13).

18.40.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height if located within fifteen (15) feet of the front or street side yard property lines.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 20-14).

Chapter 18.42
REGULATIONS FOR CP – COMMERCIAL PARK ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.42.010  Application.

18.42.020  Intent.

18.42.030  Permitted uses.

18.42.040  Conditional uses.

18.42.050  Lot area.

18.42.060  Lot width.

18.42.070  Building height limits.

18.42.080  Front yard.

18.42.090  Side yards.

18.42.100  Rear yard.

18.42.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.42.120  Open landscaped area.

18.42.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.42.140  Additional development standards.

18.42.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all CP zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 21-1).

18.42.020 Intent.
This district is intended to provide a high quality commercial environment adjacent to major highways and serving tourists and other highway users or requiring direct access to regional markets. This district encourages multi-acre parcels developed with mixed commercial uses based on an integrated site plan and architectural design. Such developments are characterized by common circulation and parking areas, significant landscaping, and unified management or restrictive covenants to maintain high standards. (Zoning Ord. § 21-2).

18.42.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted:

(a) The following uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided in SCCC 18.42.040, and shall be so located, constructed, and operated as not to be offensive or objectionable because of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or other public nuisances:

(1) Hotels and motels.

(2) Professional, financial, and general business offices.

(3) Restaurants serving food and nonalcoholic beverages.

(4) Recreational and cultural facilities, exhibition halls, museums, auditoriums, and theaters.

(5) Accessory retail and service establishments, which are physically located within a building in which any of the above-referenced permitted uses are located.

(b) The following outdoor uses are allowed, except as provided in SCCC 18.42.040; provided, that such uses are so located, constructed, and operated as not to be offensive or objectionable because of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or other public nuisances:

(1) Restaurants serving food and nonalcoholic beverages.

(2) Walk-up service facilities. (Zoning Ord. § 21-3).

18.42.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC:

(a) Outdoor recreational facilities.

(b) Cocktail lounges, bars, taverns, restaurants serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.

(c) Dancing or live entertainment.

(d) Service stations (service stations are exempt from lot area and width requirements of this chapter, but must comply with all requirements of Chapter 18.68 SCCC).

(e) Stores selling beer and/or wine (packaged goods off-sale) located on the same parcel as an automobile service station (subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.68 SCCC).

(f) Car wash facilities where integrated with a service station.

(g) Arcades.

(h) Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be similar in nature. (Zoning Ord. § 21-4).

18.42.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 21-5).

18.42.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 21-6).

18.42.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 21-7).

18.42.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than forty (40) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 21-8).

18.42.090 Side yards.
(a) Side yards are required at each side of every lot. Each such side yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width.

(b) The street side yard of a corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than forty (40) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 21-9).

18.42.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of every lot. Such rear yard lot shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 21-10).

18.42.110 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 21-11).

18.42.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) The first twenty (20) feet of required front yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards). A landscaped berm or planning division-approved equivalent, not less than thirty (30) inches in height, shall be provided between the required street landscaping and any open area used for parking, storage, and the like, except for necessary driveways and walkways.

(b) The first ten feet of required side and rear yards.

(c) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings.

(d) An alternative proposal equal to or exceeding the open landscaped area provisions provided herein may be used subject to approval by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 21-12).

18.42.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 21-13).

18.42.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on a property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan. Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height if located within twenty (20) feet of front or street side yard lot lines.

(b) Landscaped Areas – Curbing and Irrigation. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An automatic irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 21-14).

Chapter 18.44
REGULATIONS FOR CR – COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.44.010  Application.

18.44.020  Intent.

18.44.030  Permitted uses.

18.44.040  Conditional uses.

18.44.050  Lot area.

18.44.060  Lot width.

18.44.070  Front yard.

18.44.080  Side yards.

18.44.090  Rear yard.

18.44.100  Maximum building coverage.

18.44.110  Open landscaped area.

18.44.120  Minimum parking requirements.

18.44.130  Additional development standards.

18.44.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all CR zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 22-1).

18.44.020 Intent.
This district is designed for major commercial recreational and leisure activities, such as a recreational, amusement, or theme park, arena, amphitheater, golf course, and ancillary commercial services for patrons of such activities on parcels of ten acres or more. (Zoning Ord. § 22-2).

18.44.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses shall be so located, constructed, and operated as not to be offensive or objectionable because of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, glare, or other public nuisances.

(a) Outdoor amusement and recreational enterprise, such as an amusement, recreational or theme park, an amphitheater, golf driving range, miniature golf course, picnic area, mechanical ride, or attraction.

(b) Indoor amusement and recreational enterprise, such as arcade, arena, bowling alley, skating rink, studio, and theater.

(c) Specialty retail business, such as antique shop, art gallery, delicatessen, handicraft shop, souvenir and curio shop.

(d) Restaurant, not including sale of alcoholic beverages or drive-in facility.

(e) Parking facility.

(f) Incidental storage and accessory uses. (Zoning Ord. § 22-3).

18.44.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Restaurant, cocktail lounge, and nightclub serving alcoholic beverages.

(b) Drive-in restaurant.

(c) Service station (exempt from the lot size, setback, and landscaping requirements of this chapter, but must comply with Chapter 18.68 SCCC). (Zoning Ord. § 22-4).

18.44.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of ten acres. (Zoning Ord. § 22-5).

18.44.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 22-6).

18.44.070 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than forty (40) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 22-7).

18.44.080 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of every lot. Each such side yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall not be less than forty (40) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 22-8).

18.44.090 Rear yard.
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth at the rear of the lot. The setback for structures adjacent to a residentially zoned property or general planned properties shall be equal to or greater than the height of the structure. (Zoning Ord. § 22-9).

18.44.100 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 22-10).

18.44.110 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) First twenty (20) feet of required front yards and street side yards of corner lots (with openings for access ways in accordance with City standards). A landscaped berm or planning division-approved equivalent, not less than thirty (30) inches in height, shall be provided between the required street landscaping and any open area used for parking, storage, and the like, except for necessary driveways and walkways.

(b) A minimum area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings.

(c) An alternative proposal, equal to or exceeding the open landscaped area provisions provided herein, may be used subject to approval by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 22-11).

18.44.120 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 22-12).

18.44.130 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height if located within twenty (20) feet of front or street side yard lot lines.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be ten feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height and shall be designed and located in a manner acceptable to the Director of Planning and Inspection.

(e) Noise Impact. Noise impact shall be considered in the design of all facilities and uses to minimize the impact on residential properties. (Zoning Ord. § 22-13).

Chapter 18.46
REGULATIONS FOR MP – PLANNED INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.46.010    Application.

18.46.020    Intent.

18.46.030    Permitted uses.

18.46.040    Conditional uses.

18.46.050    Lot area.

18.46.060    Lot width.

18.46.070    Building height limits.

18.46.080    Front yard.

18.46.090    Side yards.

18.46.100    Rear yard.

18.46.110    Maximum building coverage.

18.46.120    Open landscaped area.

18.46.130    Minimum parking requirements.

18.46.140    Additional development standards.

18.46.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all MP zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 23-1).

18.46.020 Intent.
This district is intended to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of modern large-scale administrative facilities, research institutions, and specialized manufacturing organizations, all of a non-nuisance type. Such permitted uses shall not cause objectionable noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazards, or other wastes emanating from the property. The district is to provide for an aesthetically attractive working environment with park-like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking, and other amenities appropriate to an employee-oriented activity where problems of product handling, storage, advertising, and distribution are not of significant concern. (Zoning Ord. § 23-2).

18.46.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses, or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses except service stations shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise provided for in this title.

(a) Chemical and physical science offices and laboratories.

(b) Engineering and cartographic offices and laboratories.

(c) Manufacture, assembling, and packaging of electronic equipment, instruments, and devices.

(d) Manufacture, assembling, and packaging of pharmaceuticals.

(e) Professional, financial, and administrative offices.

(f) Research offices and laboratories.

(g) Testing offices and laboratories.

(h) Light manufacturing and activity not dealing with large volumes of product handling, storage, and distribution and that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar in character and not more detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the neighborhood than any use listed above.

(i) Incidental retail sales of industrial products or products manufactured on-site if adequate on-site customer parking is provided, display and sales occur only within a permanent building, and the industrial character of the property is maintained.

(j) Incidental and accessory buildings, storage buildings, outdoor storage, warehouses, exposed mechanical appurtenances, and the like comprising less than ten percent of the total lot area and shielded from public view.

(k) Public or private automobile parking lots improved and landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(l) Smoking lounges, pursuant to Chapter 8.37 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 23-3; Ord. 1939 § 4, 3-24-15).

18.46.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC. Such use permits shall not be granted if the proposed use or structure would be objectionable or detrimental to adjacent properties or to the industrial area in general by reason of traffic, parking, noise, inappropriate design, or signs.

Conditional uses shall be encouraged to be conducted within industrial and office buildings in order to maintain the industrial character of the zoning district. Use permits that propose the construction of new freestanding buildings shall not be approved, with the exception of service stations, unless the gross floor area of the buildings is over five thousand (5,000) square feet.

(a) Retail commercial and service uses, such as restaurants, cocktail lounges (may include ancillary dancing and live entertainment, exclusive of Class II entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430), and service stations to serve the industrial zoning districts.

(b) Outdoor storage activity or mechanical equipment in excess of ten percent of the total lot area when ancillary to and necessary for the operation of any permitted use.

(c) Other uses not normally permitted, but that are:

(1) Necessary to permitted uses, such as a residence for security purposes or safe storage of hazardous materials; or

(2) Appropriate for an industrial area, such as lodges and bingo halls. (Zoning Ord. § 23-4).

18.46.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 23-5).

18.46.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 23-6).

18.46.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed seventy (70) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 23-7).

18.46.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a landscaped street side front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 23-8).

18.46.090 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of every lot. Each such side yard shall not be less than ten feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 23-9).

18.46.100 Rear yard.
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 23-10).

18.46.110 Maximum building coverage.
Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover a total of more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of any lot. (Zoning Ord. § 23-11).

18.46.120 Open landscaped area.
Each lot shall have not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped area including the following:

(a) Required front yards and street side yards of corner lots. A landscaped berm or planning division-approved equivalent, not less than thirty (30) inches in height, shall be provided and permanently maintained between the required street setback area and any open area used for parking, storage, and the like, except for necessary driveways and walkways.

(b) A minimum area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings.

(c) An alternative proposal, equal to or exceeding the open landscaped area provisions provided herein, may be used subject to approval by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 23-12).

18.46.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 23-13).

18.46.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required frontage landscaping.

Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from the street by a solid fence at least six feet high, located behind required frontage landscaping.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped in screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. The minimum width of the planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height.

(e) Loading Spaces. A maximum of two loading spaces shall be permitted on the street side of any building within sixty-five (65) feet from the street right-of-way. There is no restriction on the number of loading spaces located more than sixty-five (65) feet from the street right-of-way. Loading areas shall be designed so as not to interfere with required parking access and circulation. (Zoning Ord. § 23-14).

Chapter 18.48
REGULATIONS FOR ML – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.48.010    Application.

18.48.020    Intent.

18.48.030    Permitted uses.

18.48.040    Conditional uses.

18.48.050    Lot area.

18.48.060    Lot width.

18.48.070    Building height limits.

18.48.080    Front yard.

18.48.090    Side yards.

18.48.100    Rear yard.

18.48.110    Maximum building coverage.

18.48.120    Open landscaped area.

18.48.130    Minimum parking requirements.

18.48.140    Additional development standards.

18.48.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all ML zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 24-1).

18.48.020 Intent.
This district is intended to provide an optimum general industrial environment, and it is intended to accommodate industries operating substantially within an enclosed building. Such permitted uses shall not be objectionable or detrimental to adjacent properties because of signing, noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibrations, glare, heat, fire hazards, or industrial wastes emanating from the property. (Zoning Ord. § 24-2).

18.48.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

All uses except service stations shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise provided for in this title.

(a) Any use permitted in the MP district subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Commercial storage and wholesale distribution warehouses.

(c) Plants and facilities for the assembly, compounding, manufacture, packaging, processing, repairing, or treatment of equipment, materials, merchandise, or products.

(d) Incidental retail sales of industrial products or products manufactured on-site if adequate on-site customer parking is provided, display and sales occur only within a permanent building, and the industrial character of the property is maintained.

(e) Incidental and accessory buildings, storage buildings, outdoor storage, warehouses, exposed mechanical appurtenances, and the like, that comprise less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area and are shielded from public view.

(f) Emergency shelters, as provided in Chapter 18.120 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 24-3; Ord. 1934 § 2, 1-13-15).

18.48.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC. Such use permits shall not be granted if the proposed use or structure would be objectionable or detrimental to adjacent properties or to the industrial area in general by reason of traffic, parking, noise, inappropriate design, or signs.

Conditional uses shall be encouraged to be conducted within industrial and office buildings in order to maintain the industrial character of the zoning district. Use permits that propose the construction of new freestanding buildings shall not be approved, with the exception of service stations, unless the gross floor area of the buildings is over five thousand (5,000) square feet.

(a) Retail commercial and service uses, such as restaurants, cocktail lounges (may include ancillary dancing and live entertainment, exclusive of Class II entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430), and service stations to serve the industrial zoning districts.

(b) Outdoor storage activity or mechanical equipment in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area when ancillary to and necessary for the operation of any permitted use.

(c) Kennels.

(d) The following uses when surrounded by a solid board or masonry fence at least six feet high: building materials yards, contractors’ yards, feed and fuel yards, lumber yards, public utility service yards, and similar uses that in the opinion of the Planning Commission may not be objectionable by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, glare, heat, fire hazards, or industrial waste. Materials shall not be stacked or piled so as to be visible above the screen fencing.

(e) Other uses not normally permitted, but that are:

(1) Necessary to permitted uses, such as a residence for security purposes or safe storage of hazardous materials; or

(2) Appropriate for an industrial area, such as lodges and bingo halls.

(f) Emergency shelters, as provided in Chapter 18.120 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 24-4; Ord. 1934 § 3, 1-13-15).

18.48.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 24-5).

18.48.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 24-6).

18.48.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed seventy (70) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 24-7).

18.48.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 24-8).

18.48.090 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of every lot that is adjacent at that side of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 24-9).

18.48.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required for each portion of a lot that is adjacent at rear of lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall be not less than ten feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 24-10).

18.48.110 Maximum building coverage.
Seventy-five percent (75%), subject to required parking, landscaping, and setback. (Zoning Ord. § 24-11).

18.48.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs.

(a) Required Front Yards and Street Side Yards. A landscaped berm or planning division-approved equivalent, not less than thirty (30) inches in height, shall be provided between the required street setback area and any open area used for parking, storage, and the like, except when the open area is necessary for driveways and walkways.

(b) A minimum area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings.

(c) An alternative proposal, equal to or exceeding the open landscaped area provisions provided herein, may be used subject to approval by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 24-12).

18.48.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 24-13).

18.48.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter permanently maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required frontage landscaping.

Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from the street by a minimum six-foot-high solid fence located behind required frontage landscaping.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter, landscaped in screening shrubs and trees, is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. The minimum width of the planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height.

(e) Loading Spaces. A maximum of two loading spaces shall be permitted on the street side of any building within sixty-five (65) feet of the street right-of-way. There is no restriction on the number of loading spaces located more than sixty-five (65) feet from the street right-of-way. Loading areas shall be designated so as not to interfere with required parking access and circulation.

(f) Outdoor Storage and Exposed Mechanical Equipment. Subject to the requirements above listed, outdoor storage and exposed mechanical equipment shall not exceed six feet in height within the first six feet immediately adjacent to the front or street side yard setback line or any interior side or rear lot line. Beyond this point, storage may extend to a maximum height of ten feet. Height of mechanical equipment and any accompanying screening shall be subject to architectural committee approval. (Zoning Ord. § 24-14).

Chapter 18.50
REGULATIONS FOR MH – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.50.010  Application.

18.50.020  Intent.

18.50.030  Permitted uses.

18.50.040  Conditional uses.

18.50.050  Lot area.

18.50.060  Lot width.

18.50.070  Building height limits.

18.50.080  Front yard.

18.50.090  Side yards.

18.50.100  Rear yard.

18.50.110  Maximum building coverage.

18.50.120  Open landscaped area.

18.50.130  Minimum parking requirements.

18.50.140  Additional development standards.

18.50.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply in all MH zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 25-1).

18.50.020 Intent.
This district is intended to encourage sound heavy industrial development in the City by providing and protecting an environment exclusively for such development, subject to regulations necessary to ensure the purity of the air and the waters in the bay area, and the protection of nearby uses of the land from hazards, noise, or other radiated disturbances. (Zoning Ord. § 25-2).

18.50.030 Permitted uses.
None but the following uses, or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are of a similar nature will be permitted.

(a) Any use permitted in the MP and ML districts, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter.

(b) Any manufacturing, processing, assembling, research, wholesale, or storage uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, shall not be objectionable by reason of the production of offensive noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibrations, glare, heat, fire hazards, industrial wastes, or handling of explosives or dangerous materials.

(c) Railroad yards, freight stations, trucking and motor freight stations.

(d) Public utility and public service uses and public utility service yards.

(e) Outdoor storage and exposed mechanical appurtenances.

(f) Incidental retail sales of industrial products or products manufactured on-site if adequate on-site customer parking is provided, display and sales occur only within a permanent building, and the industrial character of the property is maintained.

(g) Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted use. (Zoning Ord. § 25-3).

18.50.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC. Such use permits shall not be granted if the proposed use or structure would be objectionable or detrimental to adjacent properties or to the industrial area in general by reason of traffic, parking noise, inappropriate design, or signs.

Conditional uses shall be encouraged to be conducted within industrial and office buildings in order to maintain the industrial character of the zoning district. Use permits that propose the construction of new freestanding buildings shall not be approved, with the exception of service stations, unless the gross floor area of the buildings is over five thousand (5,000) square feet.

(a) Retail commercial and service uses, such as restaurants, cocktail lounges (may include ancillary dancing and live entertainment, exclusive of Class II entertainment as defined in SCCC 3.40.430), and service stations to serve the industrial zoning districts.

(b) Kennels.

(c) The following uses or uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar in nature: Auctioneer; auto wrecking; bituminous paving plants and manufacturing of bituminous paving products; commercial excavation of building or construction materials; concrete or gravel batching plants; distillation of bones; drilling for and/or removal of oil, gases, or other hydrocarbon substances; dumping, disposal, incineration, or reduction of garbage, sewage, offal, dead animals, or refuse; fat rendering or hog raising; junkyards; manufacturing or storage of acid, cement, explosives or fireworks, fertilizer, gas, glue, gypsum, inflammable fluids, lime, or plaster of Paris; refining or storage of petroleum or its ores; stockyards or slaughter of animals.

(d) Other uses not normally permitted but that are:

(1) Necessary to a permitted use, such as a residence for security purposes or safe storage of hazardous materials; or

(2) Appropriate for an industrial area, such as lodges and bingo halls. (Zoning Ord. § 25-4).

18.50.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 25-5).

18.50.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 25-6).

18.50.070 Building height limits.
Maximum permitted height shall not exceed seventy (70) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 25-7).

18.50.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a street side front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 25-8).

18.50.090 Side yards.
Side yards are required at each side of every lot that is adjacent at that side of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each such side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width.

The street side yard of each corner lot exclusive of front yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. (Zoning Ord. § 25-9).

18.50.100 Rear yard.
A rear yard is required at the rear of each lot that is adjacent at the rear of the lot to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Such rear yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. (Zoning Ord. § 25-10).

18.50.110 Maximum building coverage.
No requirement; subject to required parking and setbacks. (Zoning Ord. § 25-11).

18.50.120 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas containing ground cover, trees, and shrubs:

(a) A minimum of ten feet of the required front and street side yards, exclusive of City-permitted driveway cuts, shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas subject to the approval of the Director of Planning and Inspection.

(b) A minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the required parking area to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings.

(c) An alternative proposal, equal to or exceeding the open landscaped area provisions provided herein, may be used subject to approval by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 25-12).

18.50.130 Minimum parking requirements.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 25-13).

18.50.140 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. At the time of new construction or reconstruction of a building on property, a solid fence of masonry six feet high shall be installed and thereafter maintained by the owner of property in this zoning district on all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan.

Fencing shall not exceed three feet in height in required frontage landscaping.

Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from the street by a minimum six-foot-high solid fence located behind required frontage landscaping.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the general plan. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. The minimum width of the planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height.

(e) Loading Spaces. A maximum of two loading spaces shall be permitted on the street side of any building within sixty-five (65) feet from the street right-of-way. There is no restriction on the number of loading spaces located more than sixty-five (65) feet from the street right-of-way. Loading areas shall be designed so as not to interfere with required parking access and circulation.

(f) Outdoor Storage and Exposed Mechanical Equipment. Subject to the above listed requirements, outdoor storage and exposed mechanical equipment shall not exceed six feet in height within the first six feet immediately adjacent to the front or street side yard setback line, or any interior side or rear lot line.

Beyond the above described storage and equipment setback line, storage may extend an additional one foot in height for each one foot of setback, but shall not exceed the maximum building height established in SCCC 18.50.070.

Height of mechanical equipment and any accompanying screening shall be subject to architectural committee approval. (Zoning Ord. § 25-14).

Chapter 18.52
REGULATIONS FOR B – PUBLIC,
QUASI-PUBLIC, AND PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.52.010  Application.

18.52.020  Intent.

18.52.030  Permitted uses.

18.52.040  Conditional uses.

18.52.050  Lot area.

18.52.060  Lot width.

18.52.070  Building height and coverage.

18.52.080  Front yard.

18.52.090  Side yards.

18.52.100  Rear yard.

18.52.110  Open landscaped area.

18.52.120  Required parking.

18.52.130  Additional development standards.

18.52.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all B zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 26-1).

18.52.020 Intent.
This district is intended to provide for public, quasi-public and public park facilities as specific land use developments. (Zoning Ord. § 26-2).

18.52.030 Permitted uses.
(a) Landscaped public utility facilities without a substantial structure where activity would be limited to occasional maintenance and servicing such as City-owned well sites, City-owned pumping stations, public utility substations whether City-owned or privately owned, telephone company switching stations, and operations which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are similar.

(b) Public parks without recreational facilities where there will be no evening activity or concentration of people such as a memorial site, the Civic Center Park, and other quiet park facilities which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are similar.

(c) Additions to existing public or quasi-public facilities not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of the existing development within a single calendar year and not substantially changing the nature of the operation. (Zoning Ord. § 26-3).

18.52.040 Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(a) Public or private general educational facilities such as elementary, intermediate or high schools, junior colleges, and universities. This provision does not apply to single-purpose educational facilities such as "welding, dancing, and the like."

(b) Municipal and public utility facilities such as fire houses, telephone company business office, post office and the like.

(c) Churches and similar nonprofit facilities such as museums, art galleries, monasteries, and youth facilities.

(d) Cemeteries, airports, golf course of ten acres or more, public utility corporation yards, and other facilities which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are similar.

(e) Public park or recreational facility.

(f) Neighborhood recreational enterprises.

(g) Other public and quasi-public facilities not specifically provided for herein or within other districts of this title which in the opinion of the Planning Commission would most appropriately be placed in the B zoning district. (Zoning Ord. § 26-4).

18.52.050 Lot area.
Each lot shall contain a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet except for public utility well sites, pumping stations, substations and the like involving no major structure for which no minimum is prescribed. (Zoning Ord. § 26-5).

18.52.060 Lot width.
The minimum lot width shall not be less than eighty (80) feet except for public utility well sites, pumping stations, substations and similar facilities not involving a major building for which no minimum is prescribed. (Zoning Ord. § 26-6).

18.52.070 Building height and coverage.
Building height and coverage must be such that maximum height and coverage shall not exceed that allowed in the most restrictive abutting zone district. (Zoning Ord. § 26-7).

18.52.080 Front yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 26-8).

18.52.090 Side yards.
Each lot shall have side yards each having a width of not less than ten feet. (Zoning Ord. § 26-9).

18.52.100 Rear yard.
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 26-10).

18.52.110 Open landscaped area.
The following yards and areas shall be developed into and permanently maintained as open landscaped areas:

(a) Required front yards;

(b) Street side yards of corner lots (with openings for accessways in accordance with City standards); and

(c) A landscaped area equal to ten percent of the required parking area, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings (see also SCCC 18.52.130(b)). (Zoning Ord. § 26-11).

18.52.120 Required parking.
The minimum parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 18.74 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 26-12).

18.52.130 Additional development standards.
(a) Fencing. A solid fence at least six feet high shall be required when any surface parking area is established abutting residentially zoned property.

(b) Landscaped Buffer. A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees shall be installed and permanently maintained adjacent to any residentially zoned property. Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing, or planning division-approved equivalent. Minimum width of planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and maintained functional in each separate planter area.

(c) Lighting. Lighting, if provided, shall be directed away from residential areas and public streets.

(d) Trash Disposal. Each property shall be provided with adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry or solid wood fence at least six feet in height. (Zoning Ord. § 26-13).

Chapter 18.54
REGULATIONS FOR PD –
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AND COMBINED ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.54.010    Application.

18.54.020    Intent.

18.54.030    Permitted uses.

18.54.040    Uses not permitted.

18.54.050    Design standards.

18.54.060    Development plan.

18.54.070    Development schedule.

18.54.080    Community ownership projects.

18.54.090    Community ownership conversion.

18.54.100    Investment apartments – Application and purpose.

18.54.110    Investment apartments – Definitions.

18.54.120    Investment apartments – Application of the general plan.

18.54.130    Investment apartments – Subdivision.

18.54.140    Investment apartments – Tentative map requirements.

18.54.150    Investment apartments – Development standards – Minimum contents of the CC&Rs.

18.54.160    Investment apartments – Improvement plan.

18.54.170    Investment apartments – Inspections.

18.54.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all PD zoning districts. (Zoning Ord. § 27-1).

18.54.020 Intent.
This district is intended to accommodate development that is compatible with the existing community and that:

(a) Integrates uses that are not permitted to be combined in other zone districts; or

(b) Utilizes imaginative planning and design concepts that would be restricted in other zone districts; or

(c) Subdivides land or air space in a manner that results in units not having the required frontage on a dedicated public street; or

(d) Creates a community ownership project. (See definition of “community ownership project” in SCCC 18.06.010.)

Residential community ownership projects require that each household, with a common ownership interest in its project, coupled with a right of ownership or occupancy in its own dwelling unit, be bound together in an owner’s association which is responsible for the maintenance and management of the common area and the improvements within the common area of the project. This mix of individual and common ownership is different from conventional and familiar patterns of housing in the City of Santa Clara. Community ownership in residential projects can provide new opportunities of home ownership at a lower cost than single-family units, and provide housing for people who prefer not to have the responsibility of maintaining a separate lot and building. There are also potential problems associated with residential community ownership, such as owner expectations, maintenance expenses for the entire common area, and the conversion of unsuitable apartments.

To insure that such problems are avoided in both the short and long term, it is the express intent of the City of Santa Clara to treat community ownership projects differently from rentals and to establish rules and standards thereto regulating the construction and conversion to community ownership projects in the City of Santa Clara. (Zoning Ord. § 27-2).

18.54.030 Permitted uses.
Any and all uses are permitted in this district except those excluded in SCCC 18.54.040; provided further, that such use or uses and their location shall be shown in the development plan of the applicant for the particular planned development zoning district as approved. Any change in use requires a rezoning. (Zoning Ord. § 27-3).

18.54.040 Uses not permitted.
Those industrial uses limited to MH zoning districts or involving outdoor storage on more than ten percent of the lot area shall not be allowed in planned developments. (Zoning Ord. § 27-4).

18.54.050 Design standards.
The proposed development plan must be designed to provide an environment of a stable, desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood. It must be generally consistent with the development standards of this title in such a way as to form a harmonious, integrated project of sufficient unity and architectural quality to justify the mixture of normally separated uses or to justify certain exceptions to the normal regulations of this title. These standards include, but are not limited to, the following: on-site parking, landscaping, building lot coverage, height limits, setback requirements, required distances, and buffering between residential and commercial development.

The number of dwelling units which are proposed shall not substantially deviate from the number of dwelling units which would normally be permitted in the area under consideration as indicated on the General Plan. (Zoning Ord. § 27-5; Ord. 1861 § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. 1918 § 1, 2-11-14).

18.54.060 Development plan.
An application for a planned development zoning district shall include and be accompanied by a development plan which, if approved by the City Council, shall become a part of the zoning map of the City of Santa Clara as provided for by SCCC 18.04.030.

(a) Changes in the development plan shall be considered as changes in the zoning map and shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.112 SCCC.

(b) The development plan shall include:

(1) A map showing any and all street systems and lot designs within the proposed planned development zoning district, any area proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public open space, parkways, common open space, playground, school sites, public buildings and other such uses. Compliance with this requirement shall not be construed to relieve the applicant from compliance with the subdivision ordinance or any other applicable ordinance of the City of Santa Clara.

(2) If required by the Zoning Administrator of the City of Santa Clara, a map showing the topography of the proposed district at one-foot contour intervals shall be submitted.

(3) A general land use plan for the proposed district delimiting the area of each of the proposed uses.

(4) A fully dimensioned plot plan for each building site or sites in the proposed planned development zoning district. The required plot plan shall show the exact location of all existing and/or proposed buildings, indicating maximum and minimum distances between buildings, and between buildings and property or building sites, and the location of outdoor storage areas.

(5) An on-site parking and loading plan drawn to scale shall be submitted. The number of required on-site parking spaces shall be the same as required for the particular uses in the zones in which they are otherwise permitted, and required parking spaces shall conform to all the City of Santa Clara on-site parking standards unless exceptions are granted under the PD rezone, as discussed below. The number and size of on-site parking spaces may be altered as part of the development plan when found to be instrumental in achieving the objectives of the PD zoning plan, and the overall objectives of the City as provided in the General Plan. Required parking may also be provided off site, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 18.86 SCCC, Off-Site Parking Provisions.

(6) Elevations and/or perspective drawings of all proposed structures drawn to scale. The purpose of such drawings is to indicate the height of proposed buildings, materials to be used, and the general appearance of the existing and/or proposed structures so that the entire development will have architectural unity and be in harmony with surrounding developments.

(7) When the project involves the conversion of an existing structure to a community housing project, complete as-built drawings may be required by the Zoning Administrator. (Zoning Ord. § 27-6; Ord. 1861 § 2, 8-17-10).

18.54.070 Development schedule.
(a) Construction of the planned development must begin within two years of final approval of the City Council.

(b) Extension of Time Limits. For good cause shown by the property developer, extensions of time may be granted for a period not to exceed two years for each extension. A request for an extension of time shall be made in writing prior to the expiration of the original time schedule or subsequent extensions granted for the development. The Planning Commission may, with or without a public hearing, recommend for or against an extension of time. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may change or extend the time limits imposed by the development schedule, or leave the schedule unchanged as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title. (Zoning Ord. § 27-7).

18.54.080 Community ownership projects.
In addition to the requirements of SCCC 18.54.050 and 18.54.060, the following shall apply to community ownership projects (both new and conversions). In the event of a conflict in requirements, the requirements set forth in this section shall control over SCCC 18.54.050 and 18.54.060.

(a) Physical Standards.

(1) The density of the proposed project shall determine the corresponding zone.

(2) On-site parking shall be provided as required in the corresponding residential (R) zone district and by City Council policy, except as permitted by SCCC 18.54.060(b)(5). At least ten percent of these spaces shall be conveniently arranged and assigned to visitors and the general use of the residents.

(3) Each dwelling unit must have a separate circuit breaker panel and shut-off valves for all plumbing fixtures and gas supply. In addition, all newly constructed projects shall have individual-dwelling-unit meters for all utilities except water. Individual-unit meters for water may be installed at the option of the developer.

(4) All permanent mechanical equipment and major domestic appliances including, but not limited to, dishwashers, washing machines, and air conditioning units, determined by the Building Official to be a potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the Building Official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise.

(5) The walls and floor/ceilings separating dwelling units must meet the applicable fire wall and sound transmission criteria found in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted and amended by the City of Santa Clara, in effect at the time of approval of PD zoning. If architectural plans are available and sufficient in detail, the Building Official may determine the sound transmission class based on laboratory tests of similar designs. If, for any reason, the Building Official is unable to make such a determination, field testing of an existing building shall be made by an acoustical engineer (or professional acoustician) acceptable to the Building Official, and said testing shall be based on a representative sample of walls and ceiling/floors.

(6) The Life Safety System, as adopted in Chapter 15.60 SCCC, and the applicable fire safety requirements found in the Uniform Building and Fire Codes, as adopted and amended by the City of Santa Clara, in effect at the time of approval of PD zoning shall be provided.

(b) Maintenance. In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and in order to avoid disproportionate public expense, the owners’ association shall be responsible for property maintenance of the common area (including, but not limited to, property and facilities) and for the activities necessary to maintain operation for the community ownership project as approved. Said maintenance is dependent on the payment by the unit owners of assessments imposed by the owners’ association.

It is imperative that the unit owner in a community ownership project be held strictly accountable for his/her share of the costs expended by the owners’ association for the health, safety, and welfare of the project. To the extent permitted by law, to accomplish said objective of accountability for health, safety, and welfare matters, the unit owner shall be subject to having a lien placed against his/her unit by the owners’ association. Said imposition of a lien may occur in the event that the unit owner fails to pay for his/her share of expenses incurred by the owners’ association in providing for the health, safety, and welfare of the project. The City encourages the developer to give notice of said authority of the owners’ association to impose said lien on the individual unit in the organizational documents. Said authority to impose a lien is necessary to assure the owners’ association that a unit owner cannot refuse to accept his/her responsibility to pay for expenditures pertaining to the health, safety, and welfare of the community ownership project by refusing to pay assessments imposed by the owners’ association for said purposes.

(c) Organizational Documents.

(1) Prior to approval of final map, the organizational documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. Absent exigent circumstances and if no action is taken by the City Attorney within forty-five (45) days after a complete set of documents has been duly filed with him, the organizational documents shall be deemed approved. For purposes of this section, the phrase “action by the City Attorney” may include any of the following: providing preliminary comments and review, requiring modifications to the organizational documents or meeting with the drafter of the organizational documents.

(2) The organizational documents shall provide that the City, at its option, has the right and authority to veto any amendment to the organizational documents that would adversely affect the long-term maintenance of the project structure or its common areas. To enable the City to exercise said optional veto, the organizational documents shall provide that any amendment shall not become effective until sixty (60) days after notice of such proposed action is filed with the City Council and the Council has not vetoed the amendment. (Zoning Ord. § 27-8; Ord. 1832 § 1, 3-4-08; Ord. 1861 § 3, 8-17-10).

18.54.090 Community ownership conversion.
In addition to those requirements set forth in SCCC 18.54.070 and 18.54.080, the following requirements shall apply to conversion of a residential rental project to a community ownership project.

(a) The conversion of a rental project to a community ownership project presents potential problems due to the fact that the structure may not have been originally designed and constructed for community ownership use. In reviewing applications for conversions, the City of Santa Clara may consider not only the specific standards required of all community ownership projects, but also the following considerations, as applicable, to the type of project.

(1) The condition of the structure and major mechanical facilities.

(2) Size of units.

(3) Open space and recreational facilities.

(4) Adequacy of on-site parking spaces in relation to unit size and potential occupancy. There shall be a requirement that two parking spaces for each dwelling unit be maintained, except as permitted by SCCC 18.54.060(b)(5). Tandem parking may be considered as justification for a parking reduction in certain cases.

(5) The impact of conversion on existing tenants and proposed tenant protection agreements. Ability of residential tenants to find equivalent housing in the City for equivalent rent.

(6) The impact on the City’s rental housing market.

(7) The impact on the public school system.

(8) Where there are significant open spaces, recreational facilities, and/or maintenance responsibilities, a conversion request shall be evaluated only if the apartment complex has over twenty-five (25) units.

(9) Existing roofs less than two years of age are exempted from required fire-resistive material.

If, in reviewing these considerations, the City finds that the proposed conversion is unsuitable for community ownership, the City shall deny the rezoning application and not approve the tentative map.

(b) The conversion of a rental project to a community project presents potential problems for long-term tenant rental accommodations in the City. It is the City Council policy and determination that if the number of rental dwellings in the City drops to forty percent (40%) or less of the total dwellings according to results of hereinafter described tracking system, while such condition persists further conversion of a rental project to a community ownership project is disallowed. Subject to the approval of the City Council, the City Manager or designee shall create and maintain a tracking system that will provide their best available estimates of the tenure of both the existing dwellings in the City and of the approved but not yet converted condominiums and projections of new construction. For all conversion approvals after May 31, 1983, the converter shall report in writing to the City staff every six months on the status of the number of units sold, the number of units available for rental, and the number of existing tenants purchasing units. The report shall continue until it is reported that the final unit was sold. The tracking system is to be implemented administratively.

(c) Under circumstances where conversions are not disallowed, the applicant shall submit proposed leases and other agreements, to be enforceable by the owners and tenants, containing at least the following minimum tenant protection requirements in order that the City Council may make a determination and be assured that the appropriate requirements, including the following minimum requirements, have been or will be complied with.

(1) Each tenant has been or will be given one hundred eighty (180) days’ written notice of the applicant’s intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion. This provision shall not alter or abridge the rights or obligations of the parties in performance of their covenants, including, but not limited to, the provision of services, payment of rent, or the obligations imposed by Sections 1941, 1941.1 and 1941.2 of the California Civil Code.

(2) Each tenant has been or will be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his/her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the California Business and Professions Code, unless the tenant has given prior written notice of his/her intention not to exercise the right.

(3) Each tenant has been or will be given notice of an exclusive right to lease tenant’s present unit in the conversion project. The right shall run for a period of not less than sixty (60) days following City Council approval of PD zoning. Except as otherwise agreed by tenant, each lease document shall be consistent with this subsection (c) and City Council approved conditions, and shall so provide.

(4) Each tenant at the time of City Council approval of PD zoning shall be offered such a lease at the same initial rent and on similar terms and conditions as tenant’s then existing lease except that duration shall be at least one year.

(5) Each tenant at the time of City Council approval of PD zoning who is age sixty-two (62) or older shall be offered such a lease of at least five years.

(6) Each tenant at the time of City Council approval of PD zoning who has a child or children living with the tenant and enrolled in grades first through sixth shall be offered a lease long enough to allow those children to complete sixth grade. No such lease need exceed six years.

(7) The above lease shall contain a provision limiting rent increases to no more than the percentage increase in the San Francisco – Oakland Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (July 1st to June 30th) or its successor index.

(8) Each tenant at the time of City Council approval of PD zoning who does not purchase a unit will be paid a moving allowance prior to relocation. The allowance shall be based on the average of bids obtained by the converter from California-Public-Utility-regulated moving companies for moving possessions of tenants from at least three units which are typical in features with others in the conversion project (such as three-bedroom, two-bedroom, one-bedroom) and with the moves to be for a distance of up to twenty (20) miles and not less than fifteen (15) miles. The bids shall be obtained by the converter within six months of the move.

(9) Each tenant, at the time of City Council approval of PD zoning, who purchases a unit will be given at least a seven percent price discount plus an optional three percent “as is” discount for accepting existing appliances, floor coverings, and draperies.

(d) The applicant shall submit a schedule of conversion timing designed to reduce the number of displaced tenants at any one time to a level that can be assimilated by available rental housing within a radius of ten miles of the conversion project.

(e) A report on the physical condition of the planned conversion and estimated unit owner payments for capital improvements, repairs and maintenance for both the common area and the individual units shall be given by the applicant to potential unit purchasers. The report shall be based on a structural analysis which describes the condition of the following major physical elements of the project: foundations, walls and roofs, mechanical equipment, recreation facilities, parking facilities, and any appliance.

(1) The report shall estimate, to the best knowledge of the applicant, the approximate date when each element will require replacement and the cost of such replacement. In addition, the applicant’s report shall estimate the ongoing maintenance and repair costs to the buyer of the common area, the cost of utility payments that will be billed to the buyer as an individual, and other costs necessary for normal occupancy.

(2) Said report requirement is expressly intended to realistically apprise a potential buyer of costs he/she may reasonably anticipate with respect to the purchase and maintenance of a unit in community ownership project.

(f) The City shall complete, at the applicant’s expense, a pre-sale inspection of a planned conversion project for compliance with the Housing Codes, and all corrective actions must be made, agreements executed, and/or bonds posted to cover such actions, prior to sale.

(g) The applicant shall include a list of all known tenants’ names and addresses with submission of the request for rezoning. Subsequently, the City may notify through mailing all known tenants of the proposed rezoning at least ten days prior to the rezoning hearing. This notification may also inform the tenants of their future rights and alternatives if the conversion is approved. The failure to mail such notice to all of said persons shall not operate to divest the City of jurisdiction to conduct any hearing required to be held.

(h) Commencement of construction for purposes of SCCC 18.54.070 to a community ownership conversion shall mean the completion of the conversion of at least fifteen percent (15%) of the project units within that time period. Where time limits are not met for purpose of commencement of construction, conversion approvals shall no longer be effective unless subjected to a review by the Planning Commission and another separate approval by the City Council is received. Approvals may be further conditioned. (Zoning Ord. § 27-9; Ord. 1861 § 4, 8-17-10).

18.54.100 Investment apartments – Application and purpose.
Except where the context would indicate otherwise, the provisions of Chapter 18.54 SCCC apply to investment apartments. It is the intent of the City to allow a form of ownership of rental family housing combining separate ownership of multiple rental dwelling units with common ownership by the associated unit owners of the land and buildings where such units are located, in the expectation that such form of ownership will promote a higher degree of ownership concern for property maintenance than is commonly associated with multiple-family rental housing. It is further the purpose of these sections to promote a high standard of maintenance of such developments. Of particular concern on conversions of existing apartment projects are fire safety, building security (solid-core doors with door viewers and deadbolt locks), off-street parking, open space, and landscaping. On new investment apartment projects, the provisions of the then-current Uniform Codes and this title applicable to new construction will apply. (Zoning Ord. § 27-10).

18.54.110 Investment apartments – Definitions.
“Investment apartments” and “investment apartment project” are defined in SCCC 18.06.010. (Zoning Ord. § 27-11).

18.54.120 Investment apartments – Application of the general plan.
Because the conversion of apartments to an investment apartment project does not result in a reduction in the City’s supply of rental housing, any provision in the general plan of the City that is designed to restrict the conversion of apartments to condominiums or any other form of common ownership project shall be deemed not to apply to investment apartments. (Zoning Ord. § 27-12).

18.54.130 Investment apartments – Subdivision.
The construction of or the conversion of existing single-owner(s) apartments to investment apartments as described in SCCC 18.06.010 is a subdivision as defined herein in these sections pertaining to investment apartments. Investment apartments shall be consistent with the provisions for condominiums in SCCC 17.05.010 and the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.). In addition to such requirements as may be imposed by these sections pertaining to investment apartments, a subdivision of property in the manner described in SCCC 18.54.110 shall be conditioned upon the following:

(a) Every owner of units shall own as an appurtenance to such units, either (1) an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the entire project (or of the tract in which the ownership is located) or (2) a share in the corporation or voting membership in an association owning the common areas and facilities of the entire project (or of the tract in which the ownership is located).

(b) No unit in the development shall be sold until a corporation, association, property owners’ group, or similar entity has been created with the rights to assess all the properties that are jointly owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the entire development (or in the tract that is part of the entire development) to meet the expenses of such entity, and with the authority to control, and the duty to maintain, all of said mutually available features of the development or tract portion thereof. Such entity shall operate under recorded conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs) that shall include compulsory membership of all owners of units and flexibility of assessments to meet changing costs of maintenance, repairs, services, and the rental/leasing of all units within the property area.

(c) The CC&Rs required herein shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council. They shall be in a form prohibiting rescission or modification without the prior written approval of the City.

(d) No real property interest shall be divided in ownership unless it is first recorded as a separate unit on a recorded final map. (Zoning Ord. § 27-13).

18.54.140 Investment apartments – Tentative map requirements.
(a) Any application for approval of a tentative map for investment apartments shall be accompanied by proposed CC&Rs and a property improvement plan in accordance with this chapter.

(b) Prior to City Council consideration of a final map, CC&Rs shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney’s office pursuant to SCCC 18.54.080(c)(1) and the City’s planning division.

(c) Every tentative map for investment apartments shall be subject to the condition that, prior to approval of the final map and prior to conversion and sale of units, the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining permits and inspections of the subject property by personnel of the appropriate City department as necessary to determine compliance with the requirements imposed by the City in the improvement plan.

(d) Prior to the sale of each block of units, applicant shall file with the City’s inspection division a current structural pest control report issued by a licensed structural pest control operator, showing the subject property to be free of termites, dry rot, fungi, and damage therefrom. Such a report shall be deemed current for not more than ninety (90) days following the date of the inspection. (Zoning Ord. § 27-14).

18.54.150 Investment apartments – Development standards – Minimum contents of the CC&Rs.
The establishment of an investment apartment project shall be subject to the following requirements:

(a) In a conversion situation, an application for a planned development (PD) zoning district shall include and be accompanied by an improvement plan pursuant to SCCC 18.54.160. The Planning and Building Inspection Department may also require an improvement plan for new development if it determines additional information is needed to augment the information submitted with the zoning application. If the improvement plan is approved by the City Council, it shall become part of the zoning map of the City as provided for by SCCC 18.04.030. Changes in the improvement plan shall be considered as changes in the zoning map and shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.112 SCCC.

(b) In addition to any other condition required, a condition of approval shall be that CC&Rs are submitted to and approved by the City prior to approval of the final map by the City Council. In reviewing and approving said CC&Rs, the following additional provisions and conditions shall be considered mandatory:

(1) Provision is to be made for compliance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of the PD zoning approval.

(2) Provision shall be made for professional management of the investment apartment complex. This shall include provision for an on-site office staffed on a full-time basis during normal business hours. The investors and owners shall be required to maintain continuously on file with the Planning and Inspection Department of the City the name and mailing address of the manager.

(3) Provision shall be made for the service on the manager of any notice, order, or summons (collectively referred to as “notice”) by the City or other party. Said notice shall be valid and binding on all of the associated owners with respect to the enforcement actions by the City.

(4) Provision shall be made for the recording of the name and address of any successors to the responsible management.

(5) Provision shall be made for fixing and determining responsibility for all service and utility connections.

(6) Provision shall be made for responsibility for maintaining all common walls and structures, and for collection of the cost of repair or maintenance thereof. The associated owners shall collectively be responsible for maintenance and management expenses of all grounds, buildings, and structures on the project site, excluding only the interior surfaces of the dwelling units.

(7) Provisions shall be made requiring management to be responsible for compliance with all terms, conditions, and provisions of City approval, any precise plan approval, and compliance with the zoning, building, and other ordinances of the City.

(8) Provision shall be made that (a) all dwelling units shall be charged rent, (b) no person or persons, including investors or owners, shall be permitted to occupy any unit thereof without payment of rent thereto, or to own fewer than two units, and (c) each unit shall pay the homeowners’ fees to assure proper maintenance of the project.

(9) The CC&Rs shall contain a provision to the effect that use of the premises for investment apartment ownership purposes shall continue only during the existence and compliance with the terms and conditions of the approval of the investment apartment project.

(10) There shall be no amendment to the CC&Rs without the prior approval of the City.

(11) The CC&Rs shall contain a provision that the aforementioned enumerated conditions shall run in favor of the City, a municipal corporation, as well in favor of all other persons interested in said subdivision, and, in the event of violation, may be enforced by the City, but the failure of the City to so enforce shall not bar enforcement in any future proceedings brought by the City or any other interested party.

(c) All properties originally permitted as apartment structures shall be inspected by the City’s inspection division and appropriate fees paid. The corrections set forth in the inspection division’s inspection report shall be included in the proposed improvement plan.

(d) The subdivision of multiple-family residential units to investment apartment units shall result in individual ownership of not less than two dwelling units for each ownership (including, but not limited to, ownership by individual(s), firm(s), association(s), organization(s), partnership(s), corporation(s), etc.) and all dwelling units shall be maintained as rental units.

(e) Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, an existing multiple-family development that is subdivided into investment apartments may comply with the zoning regulations in effect at the time the development was originally constructed.

(f) Each dwelling unit within the investment apartment project shall be provided with a fire-warning system, in conformity with the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the City. Smoke detector(s) shall be required for each unit. Such fire-warning system shall be defined as a pull station fire alarm system in each alcove area entryway to units. This alarm system is to have central station monitoring with off-site annunciation at the central monitoring station by individual building to minimize Fire Department response times. Prominent project “you are here” signs shall be permanently installed at each vehicle entrance to the project that clearly show building addresses and locations. Each building shall have an individual street address painted prominently on each building in contrasting colors to facilitate ease of identification.

(g) For conversions, parking shall be provided in the amount of no less than one and one-half parking spaces per unit, except as permitted by SCCC 18.54.060(b)(5).

(h) All investment apartment projects shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as a PD rezoning prior to the granting or issuance of the final map. (Zoning Ord. § 27-15; Ord. 1861 § 5, 8-17-10).

18.54.160 Investment apartments – Improvement plan.
(a) An improvement plan for conversions (or as required by the planning division for new construction) is to be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as a part of the PD rezoning. Emphasis shall be on the following matters: fire safety, building security, off-street parking, open space, and landscaping. The improvement plan shall also provide that all existing on-site facilities that are to be retained are to be brought to a reasonably sound and attractive condition.

(b) Any application for approval of a improvement plan as part of the PD zoning application shall be accompanied by the following:

(1) A site plan showing all existing and proposed structures, including walls and fences, landscaping, irrigation systems (valve and sprinkler head location only), and driveways and parking areas.

(2) A statement of the current and proposed ownership of the subject property and its current and proposed use.

(3) A description of the property, including acreage and number of existing and proposed dwelling units categorized by the number of bedrooms in each unit.

(4) A statement of proposed improvements and estimated costs as well as a projected time frame for all improvements.

(5) A statement of the current and proposed management program, including structural maintenance and parking assignments.

(6) A statement of current and projected rents extending to twelve (12) months after conversion to investment apartments.

(7) A statement of proposed assessments and fees to be charged to owners of dwelling units after conversion to investment apartments. (Zoning Ord. § 27-16).

18.54.170 Investment apartments – Inspections.
As a condition to obtaining the inspections of the subject property required by this chapter, the applicant shall pay such inspection fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Zoning Ord. § 27-17).

Chapter 18.56
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – MASTER COMMUNITY ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.56.010  Application.

18.56.020  Intent and purpose.

18.56.030  Size and use requirement.

18.56.040  Permitted uses.

18.56.050  Procedure for applying for PD-MC zoning district generally.

18.56.060  Master community plan – Submittal and approval procedures.

18.56.070  Master community plan – Contents.

18.56.080  Development area plans – Submittal and approval procedures.

18.56.090  Development area plan – Contents.

18.56.100  Development schedule.

18.56.110  Architectural committee review not required.

18.56.120  Modifications to master community plan and development area plan.

18.56.010 Application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all planned development – master community (PD-MC) zoning districts. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.020 Intent and purpose.
The PD-MC district is intended to create regulations for large-scale integrated development that is compatible with the existing community and that:

(a) Integrates uses that are not permitted to be combined in other zoning districts, and/or utilizes planning and design concepts that would be restricted in other zoning districts;

(b) Subdivides land or air space in a manner that results in units not having the required frontage on a dedicated public street;

(c) Will be developed in phases. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.030 Size and use requirement.
The PD-MC zoning designation shall be available only for sites of at least twenty-five (25) contiguous acres where a mixture of residential with commercial, office, research and development and/or public uses is proposed. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.040 Permitted uses.
Certain uses may be specifically permitted or permitted by use permit or may be disallowed from any PD-MC plan in accordance with provisions hereinbelow. The PD-MC approval by the City may also require that specific types of uses be incorporated into the overall plan.

(a) Any residential, commercial, office, research and development or public uses may be authorized if they are in harmony with other authorized uses and serve to fulfill the function of the planned development while complying with the City's general plan.

(b) The following uses may be permitted in this zoning district if they are approved specifically through the zoning entitlement process or approved through a use permit process as specified in Chapter 18.110 SCCC, Use Permits.

(1) Auto service or repair;

(2) Drive-through restaurants and services;

(3) Beer and wine or alcoholic beverage service;

(4) Live entertainment and dancing.

(c) The following uses are prohibited:

(1) Auto sales;

(2) Appliances and bulk item sales;

(3) Industrial uses and uses involving quantities of hazardous materials that may have potentially significant health consequences;

(4) Wholesaling, warehousing and storage (indoor and outdoor) operations;

(5) Contractor's yards and other similar uses;

(6) Other uses that, in the opinion of the City Council, are incompatible with the character and nature of the uses provided and approved in the master community plan. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.050 Procedure for applying for PD-MC zoning district generally.
Applications for a PD-MC district and subsequent site development shall be submitted as separate applications as provided in this article. Such applications are described as the master community plan and the development area plan. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.060 Master community plan – Submittal and approval procedures.
An application for rezoning to a PD-MC zoning district shall include a master community plan that, if approved by the City Council, shall become a part of the zoning map of the City of Santa Clara through the procedures provided for by Chapter 18.112 SCCC, Amendments. The master community plan shall conform to the City's general plan. Overall residential density shall conform to the City's general plan, although individual housing types could be greater or less than the average. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.070 Master community plan – Contents.
The master community plan shall include the following information, subject to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Inspection:

(a) A master community summary providing, in narrative form:

(1) A general description of the proposed development; including a legal description of the property in the district;

(2) Definitions of the land use designations (including density ranges and, in the case of residential designation, product types) shown on the master community graphics (as required by subsection (b) of this section);

(3) A table setting forth the minimum and maximum total dwelling units, the minimum and maximum nonresidential square footage, and the minimum acreage for open space, public uses and any other uses for the district at buildout;

(4) A description of:

(A) Residential neighborhoods;

(B) Mixed use neighborhoods;

(C) Commercial, office and/or research and development uses;

(D) Open space and parks;

(E) Public buildings and schools; and

(F) Any other proposed uses; and

(5) Financing, if any, for on- and off-site infrastructure improvements.

(b) Master community graphics showing generally:

(1) Land use designations for each distinct use in the master community district (each such designated area is hereinafter referred to as a "land use area") and in adjacent areas outside the district;

(2) A public circulation system (including street classifications and cross sections, pedestrian paths and bikeways);

(3) Public buildings and schools;

(4) Open space and parks; and

(5) A preliminary public infrastructure plan (including drainage, sewerage, water, power and telecommunication utilities).

(c) A map showing the existing topography of the district at one-foot contour intervals, if required by the Zoning Administrator of the City of Santa Clara.

(d) Design guidelines and development standards for:

(1) Site Planning.

(A) Site coverage;

(B) Setbacks;

(C) Building heights;

(D) Private outdoor areas, including open space and yards; and

(E) Parking;

(2) Architectural Character.

(A) Style;

(B) Scale; and

(C) Building materials;

(3) Landscaping;

(4) Signage; and

(5) Lighting. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.080 Development area plans – Submittal and approval procedures.
(a) An application for development within a PD-MC district shall include a development area plan, which may be submitted at any time subsequent to submittal of the PD-MC district application. A development area plan shall be a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of the project or ten acres, whichever is less, unless the development area includes property designated for a public use on the master community graphics or is proposed for use as affordable housing, in which case no minimum acreage shall apply. The Director of Planning and Inspection has authority to waive this minimum acreage requirement under exceptional circumstances.

(b) Although not a legislative action, consideration of development area plans shall include notification to surrounding property owners and neighbors in the same fashion as the original master community plan hearings.

(c) The Planning Commission will consider the development area plan application concurrent with or after its consideration of the master community plan application or after Council action on the master community plan, and shall make a written recommendation on the development area plan to the City Council.

(d) In order to approve a development area plan application, the City Council shall find that the proposed development conforms to the master community plan approved by the City Council.

(e) The area of a single land use area in a development area plan may vary by up to fifteen percent (15%) from the area shown on the master community plan graphics; provided, that the overall minimum and maximum residential units, the overall minimum and maximum nonresidential square footage and the overall minimum public use open space acreage designated on the master community graphics are maintained.

(f) In the case of a residential land use area, the development area plan may allow for residential uses that are more or less dense than the density designated on the master community plan graphics; provided, that the overall residential density ranges designated for that land use area are maintained. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.090 Development area plan – Contents.
The development area plan application shall include the following information, subject to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Inspection:

(a) A summary showing how the development area plan conforms to the master community plan, the total dwelling units in the plan by type (such as detached single-family, multifamily and the like), the square footage of nonresidential uses and a parking calculation of required and provided spaces by use.

(b) Development area plan graphics showing:

(1) Areas of proposed land uses, including open space;

(2) All streets, pedestrian ways and bike ways;

(3) A preliminary infrastructure plan;

(4) A proposed plot plan for each building site in the plan (or, in the case of single-family residences, a typical plot plan) showing the existing and/or proposed buildings (indicating maximum and minimum distances between buildings, between building and property or building site boundaries, percentage of building coverage and percentage of landscaping, if applicable), paving and areas to be landscaped;

(5) A parking and/or loading plan drawn to scale;

(6) Preliminary elevations of all proposed structures drawn to scale. The purpose of such drawings is to indicate the building heights, materials, fenestration, colors, and the general appearance of the existing and/or proposed structures so that the entire development will have architectural unity and be in harmony with surrounding developments;

(7) Preliminary floor plans of the proposed structures;

(8) Preliminary landscaping plan; and

(9) Fencing, trash disposal and recycling storage areas.

(c) A tentative subdivision map or vesting tentative map for the development area plan.

(d) A map showing the existing topography of the district at one-foot contour intervals, if required by the Zoning Administrator of the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.100 Development schedule.
Construction in each development area must begin within two years of final development area plan approval by the City Council.

For good cause shown by the developer, the Planning Commission may, at a public hearing, grant extensions of time for up to two years for each extension. An application for an extension must be filed within two years of the date of Council approval of the development area plan. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.110 Architectural committee review not required.
Notwithstanding SCCC 18.76.020, Architectural review process, no review by the City's architectural committee shall be required for any approvals or permits granted for development within a PD-MC district. The review of the development area plans by the Planning Commission and City Council shall constitute an equivalent of the review envisioned by Chapter 18.76 SCCC, Architectural Review.

After the initial approval and construction of the development area plan, remodels and additions to the buildings and sites in the master community plan shall be handled through the usual architectural review requirements of Chapter 18.76 SCCC, Architectural Review, in accordance with the design guidelines and development standards. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

18.56.120 Modifications to master community plan and development area plan.
Modifications to a master community plan shall be considered changes to the zoning map and shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.112 SCCC, Amendments.

The Director of Planning and Inspection shall have the authority to grant minor modifications to a development area plan not to exceed ten percent of the number proposed for modification, limited to lot area, lot width, building height, setbacks, parking number or dimensions, building coverage, landscaping and fencing dimensions. Major modifications to a development area plan shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in SCCC 18.56.080, Development area plans – Submittal and approval procedures. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2-15-00).

Chapter 18.58
REGULATIONS FOR HT – HISTORIC COMBINING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.58.010    Application.

18.58.020    Intent.

18.58.030    Designation.

18.58.040    Permitted and conditional uses.

18.58.050    Conversion of residential structures to commercial use.

18.58.060    Architectural control.

18.58.070    Demolition restriction.

18.58.080    Maintenance covenant.

18.58.090    Other regulations.

18.58.010 Application.
The regulations in this chapter shall apply to each zone district to which the zoning suffix HT is combined, creating a historic combining zone district. (Zoning Ord. § 29-1).

18.58.020 Intent.
The historic combining zone district is intended to preserve historic landmarks that represent important elements of the City’s past and contribute to the community’s identity and educational resources. The conversion of residential structures to commercial use should only be considered when continued residential use is no longer feasible or desirable and when the commercial use will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. Likewise, in order to preserve the original residential character of such landmarks, should commercial use of such properties cease in part or completely, a reversion to residential use may be granted and the structure thereafter used in part or completely as a single-family residence through the process established in this chapter. (Ord. 1889 § 1, 8-16-11; Zoning Ord. § 29-2).

18.58.030 Designation.
The provisions in this section for processing zoning and rezoning requests control to the extent that they are in conflict with the procedures prescribed in Chapter 18.112 SCCC. Otherwise, the procedures of Chapter 18.112 SCCC apply and the provisions of this section merely implement them. Upon initiation of a rezoning request, the planning division shall refer the request to the Historical and Landmarks Commission for a report on the property’s historical and architectural values.

In making its recommendations, the Historical and Landmarks Commission shall consider the listings in the National Register of Historic Places, the California Historical Landmarks Program, the Santa Clara County Preliminary Inventory of Historic Landmarks, the City’s historic survey, and other compilations of historical buildings and sites. The Commission shall evaluate the proposed landmark for its historical or cultural uniqueness or as an outstanding local example of an architectural style or building technique.

The report of the historical and landmarks Commission shall be made within sixty (60) days of the notification by the planning division and shall be included in the staff report to the Planning Commission on the rezoning request.

The planning division may also refer the rezoning request to other groups or individuals with historical or architectural expertise which have requested such referral.

Designation and any particular historic combining zone district use shall be based on a detailed plot plan of the property, color photographs of all exterior elevations and major interior rooms, a description of historic, architectural and use characteristics of the building and property, report of the Historical and Landmarks Commission and any particular use and area therefor with conditions designated which receive a final zoning approval. Upon approval by a minimum of five affirmative votes of the City Council, such plot plan, photographs and reports, along with special City Council approved historic combining zone district use, shall become a part of the zoning map of the City of Santa Clara as provided for by SCCC 18.04.030, and the property shall be zoned and the uses shall be restricted to the particular authorized historic combining zone district use or uses as restricted, conditioned and approved in the action approving addition of the HT suffix in addition to uses of other zone district combined to the extent they are not limited or prohibited in the zoning approval. (Zoning Ord. § 29-3).

18.58.040 Permitted and conditional uses.
Except as provided in SCCC 18.58.030, 18.58.050 and 18.58.080, permitted and conditional uses and restrictions are those specified by the zone district subject to the restrictions contained in this chapter and the uses approved by the City Council as an appropriate historic combining zoning use for the particular property at the time of the historic combining zone zoning or rezoning. (Ord. 1889 § 2, 8-16-11; Zoning Ord. § 29-4).

18.58.050 Conversion of residential structures to commercial use.
Within a historic combining zone district, a residential structure is exempt from SCCC 18.60.010(a), which prohibits conversion of residential structures, and may be converted to an alternate use or to a mixed residential/commercial use upon approval of a historic combining zone district zoning or rezoning by the City Council, subject to the following conditions:

(a) That the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Council that the structure is no longer feasible or desirable for only residential use, based upon at least two of the following:

(1) Its large floor area is substantially above the average range of a single-family house in the City;

(2) Its location on a major street or in a neighborhood is adverse to residential use;

(3) Its dilapidated condition makes rehabilitation for only residential use economically infeasible.

(b) That the proposed use is compatible with the historical and basic residential character of the structure. Exterior changes shall be minor and architecturally compatible. Interior changes shall not prevent future residential use and shall be reversible without a major expenditure upon cessation of the nonresidential use. Required parking shall be provided on-site and in a manner consistent with the preconversion character of the property. The following uses may be considered compatible with adequate on-site parking:

(1) Boarding house or bed-and-breakfast establishment;

(2) Antique store;

(3) Art gallery or studio;

(4) Office for architect, lawyer, interior decorator, and other nonmedical professionals; and

(5) Other uses which in the opinion of the Planning Commission are similarly compatible.

(c) In conjunction with the HT zoning, the tenants (with the written approval of the property owner), property owner(s), and successors to the property owner shall have the option of using the State Historic Building Codes, as appropriate, and the Secretary of Interior Standards on all work done to qualified and eligible building structure(s), as appropriate.

(d) That the proposed use is compatible with the neighborhood in terms of its appearance, provision of parking and creation of activity or noise.

(e) A residential structure on any property zoned for HT combining use may be used as a single-family residence, either in whole or in part in combination with other allowed uses of the site under the approved HT combined zoning designation, subject to the following:

(1) A proposal to change any portion of the property to a single-family residential use must conform to the definition of a single-family dwelling in SCCC 18.06.010(d)(9) and requires that an application for an HT permit be filed with the Zoning Administrator, with accompanying processing fees and including a description, plot plan and floor plan indicating any physical changes; such changes are subject to the requirements of the City’s zoning and applicable building codes.

(2) The granting of an HT permit may require that commercial improvements, such as signs and parking lots, be altered or removed, or that certain residential improvements, such as landscaped yards and residential parking, be added to the property when the approved commercial use is abandoned or diminished on the property, subject to the architectural control provisions of SCCC 18.58.060, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

(3) Subsequent reintroduction and/or minor expansion of commercial uses allowed under the previously approved HT zoning for the property may be approved by the Zoning Administrator through the process of an HT permit, as described above, and subject to the requirements of the original HT combining zone district action, in conformance with this chapter. A substantial deviation from the originally approved uses or conditions may require a new HT combining zoning or planned development zoning.

(4) Granting an HT permit requires that the Zoning Administrator make all of the following findings:

(A) That the proposal is consistent with the City’s adopted General Plan;

(B) That the granting of the HT permit will not be detrimental to:

(i) The safety, health, peace, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood; and

(ii) The property or improvements in the neighborhood;

(C) That the HT permit will not impair the integrity and character of the applicable zoning district or the historic integrity of the property and is in keeping with the purposes and intent of this title; and

(D) That the reversion from the uses allowed under the HT zoning district to residential uses conforms to the requirements of the R1-8L or R1-6L zoning districts or that the reversion from residential uses to the uses allowed in the HT zoning district conforms to the requirements of the HT zoning as approved by the City for the subject property.

(5) The Zoning Administrator may designate such conditions with the HT permit as deemed necessary to secure the purposes of this title and may require guarantees and evidence of compliance with such conditions.

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of SCCC 18.112.060, notice of pending HT permit applications shall be provided to immediately adjacent property owners, including those separated from the subject property by public rights-of-way, and to all persons requesting such notices at least ten calendar days prior to any Zoning Administrator action. If neither the applicant, nor the subject property owner, nor any notice recipient requests a hearing before the Zoning Administrator within the ten-day notice period, the Zoning Administrator may act on the HT permit. If a request for hearing is received by the Zoning Administrator within the ten-day notice period, the Zoning Administrator shall conduct a hearing within thirty-five (35) calendar days of receipt to review all comments and documents prior to taking action on the HT permit.

(7) In the event the applicant, property owner or any notice recipient is not satisfied with the decision of the Zoning Administrator on the HT permit, within seven calendar days following such decision, a written appeal may be made to the Director of Planning and Inspection for a final determination within ten business days of receipt of such appeal. In the event that the applicant is not satisfied with the decision of the Director of Planning and Inspection, a written appeal may be made to the City Council at the office of the City Clerk within seven calendar days following such decision. The Council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the written appeal.

(8) Any HT permit granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator if the basis of approval is found to be invalid or if any of the conditions of approval of such permit are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, or if the Zoning Administrator finds that the continuance of the HT permit will endanger the public health, safety or welfare. The revocation decision by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed by the applicant or property owner subject to the HT permit, within seven calendar days following such decision, by a written appeal to the Director of Planning and Inspection for a final determination within ten business days of receipt of such appeal. (Ord. 1889 § 3, 8-16-11; Zoning Ord. § 29-5).

18.58.060 Architectural control.
No exterior or interior changes may be made that would compromise the historic integrity of the building, property or significant landscaping features within a historic combining zone district. Minor improvements, excluding changes such as painting or other activities associated with routine maintenance that need no approval, may be approved by the Zoning Administrator or by the Architectural Committee, Planning Commission and/or the City Council upon referral by the Zoning Administrator. Any request for approval may be denied by the Zoning Administrator if he/she, or any other reviewing body upon referral by the Zoning Administrator, finds that such request would jeopardize the building’s architectural or historical integrity or value. (Ord. 1889 § 4, 8-16-11; Zoning Ord. § 29-6).

18.58.070 Demolition restriction.
No structure in a historic combining zone district shall be intentionally demolished or caused to be demolished, or altered, or caused to be altered, in violation of SCCC 18.58.060 without prior removal of the historic combining zone designation and rezoning to an alternate zoning district in conformance with the City’s adopted General Plan, herein prescribed zoning procedures, and environmental review as prescribed in the California Environmental Quality Act in effect at the time of application for such removal of the zone designation. Processing of any rezoning request associated with a proposed demolition shall include sufficient time for the City, a historical society, or any interested party, to prevent such demolition by purchase or renovation of the property. Thereafter, the City Council may approve the application for the rezoning and demolition following a determination that no means of preservation is feasible and the applied-for zoning is appropriate. Exclusion from ordinance and code requirements, and each use attained through application of the historic combining zone district, is automatically removed on elimination of the historic combining zone district designation. The property shall thereafter comply with the regulations of the zone district as approved by the City Council. For historical structures on properties with an HT zoning designation that have been substantially destroyed unintentionally by fire, explosion, or by war, earthquake, or flood, an application for a rezoning to remove the HT zoning designation is required. The Zoning Administrator shall process said rezoning application and notify the Historical and Landmarks Commission. Comments from that Commission shall be included in the staff report for Planning Commission and City Council consideration in the context of the rezoning. (Ord. 1889 § 5, 8-16-11; Zoning Ord. § 29-7).

18.58.080 Maintenance covenant.
As a condition of historic combining zone designation, the property owner shall enter into a recordable covenant agreement with the City agreeing to maintain the historic structure and property to standards acceptable to City. The covenants will include but not be limited to addressing routine as well as long-term maintenance and will run with the title to the property until or unless the “HT” designation is removed. (Zoning Ord. § 29-8).

18.58.090 Other regulations.
Lot size, building height and coverage, setbacks, landscaping, internal parking arrangement and use limitation, and additional development standards shall be determined by the plot plan and reports approved as part of the historic combining zone district zoning or rezoning. Structures within a historic combining zone district shall be considered legally conforming while the property is so zoned and used in accordance with the historic combining zone district approval. Upon loss of historic combining zone district zoning, subject structures shall assume the status as existed prior to receipt of the historic combining zone district designation to the extent that there was any intervening change in law or ordinance, exclusive of historic combining zone district zoning or rezoning, changing such status. (Zoning Ord. § 29-9).

Chapter 18.60
SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN
ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.60.010  Policy.

18.60.020  Special permits required in industrial zoning districts.

18.60.030  Special permits required in other zoning districts.

18.60.040  Public utility and public service uses.

18.60.050  Electric power plants and water wells.

18.60.060  Temporary use of a mobile home.

18.60.070  Approval of development agreements pursuant to Chapter 17.10 SCCC.

18.60.010 Policy.
(a) To provide for encouragement of high-grade development within the city limits, the conversion of existing dwellings into commercial use or other than residential uses is prohibited unless a variance is approved.

(b) No section of this title is intended to preclude the installation, construction, use, or maintenance of public utility lines or underground utilities which comply with all other applicable Federal, State, County, or City laws and regulations. (Zoning Ord. § 30-1).

18.60.020 Special permits required in industrial zoning districts.
(a) Temporary use of trailer coaches for emergency working facilities for industrial and commercial purposes may be authorized by special permit from the City Manager or his/her designee for a period of up to two years while temporary activities or construction of necessary added facilities are under way. Extensions may be granted as deemed appropriate by the City Manager or his/her designee upon submittal of information providing sufficient justification for said extension.

(b) Temporary uses and structures not regulated by this title shall not be permitted unless a special permit is first approved by the City Manager or his/her designee. (Zoning Ord. § 30-2).

18.60.030 Special permits required in other zoning districts.
(a) Temporary use of trailer coaches for emergency working facilities for industrial and commercial purposes may be authorized by special permit from the City Council for a period of up to two years while temporary activities or construction of necessary added facilities are under way. Extensions may be granted as deemed appropriate by the City Council upon submittal of information providing sufficient justification for said extension.

(b) Temporary uses and structures not regulated by this title shall not be permitted unless a special permit is first approved by the City Council.

(c) To the extent not preempted by the laws of the State of California, (i) for those twenty-four (24)-hour care facilities providing the types of care identified in the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1500 et seq.), (ii) those facilities identified under the auspices of the State Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs (California Health and Safety Code Section 11750 et seq.), and (iii) for all other facilities providing care and/or treatment in a residential or planned development zoning district, the City requires that a special permit first be obtained from the City Council after a hearing with public notice.

In order to grant such a special permit, the findings of the City Council shall be:

(1) The facility, under the circumstances of the particular case, is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(2) The facility will not be detrimental to the health or safety of the persons residing in the neighborhood;

(3) The facility will not be detrimental to the property or improvements in the neighborhood;

(4) The facility will not impair the integrity or character of the zoning district; and

(5) The facility will not create a significant increase in the traffic to and from the premises or in the on-street parking within five hundred (500) feet.

Such a special permit shall be valid for a one-year period and, at applicant's request and expense, shall be reviewed annually by the City Council based on the continuing validity of the required findings after a public hearing following notice given pursuant to the provisions of SCCC 18.112.060. (Zoning Ord. § 30-3).

18.60.040 Public utility and public service uses.
Public utility and public service uses as defined in Chapter 18.06 SCCC are permitted in the following zone districts:

(a) Residential, professional office, and planned development zoning districts if conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and only after first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC.

(b) General office, commercial, and light industrial zoning districts if conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. (Zoning Ord. § 30-4).

18.60.050 Electric power plants and water wells.
The construction or operation of electric power plants, or the drilling, construction, or operation of water wells, is permitted only in MP, ML, MH or B zoning districts, and only after first securing a use permit in each case as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC. (Zoning Ord. § 30-5).

18.60.060 Temporary use of a mobile home.
No mobile home, motor home, house car, trailer coach, travel trailer, camp car, van, bus, truck or other vehicle may be used as living or sleeping quarters in any place in the City outside of a lawfully operated mobile home park except as may be authorized under Chapter 2.140 SCCC or in SCCC 18.60.020 or 18.60.030. Under this section, with the consent of the owner of a residentially improved lot, any such vehicle or combination of them may be used on such residentially improved lot so long as the cumulative time the vehicle or vehicles are used for living or sleeping quarters does not exceed all or part of fourteen (14) days within any period of six consecutive months. (Zoning Ord. § 30-6).

18.60.070 Approval of development agreements pursuant to Chapter 17.10 SCCC.
Each City-approved development agreement approved in accordance with Chapter 17.10 SCCC, Article I, (Government Code Section 65864 et seq.), including any development control map and all notations, references, and regulations that are part thereof, all of which are on file for public inspection in the City of Santa Clara Planning and Inspection Department, are incorporated by reference into and made a part of this chapter. (Zoning Ord. § 30-7).

Chapter 18.62
SPECIAL YARD AND AREA REGULATIONS
Sections:

18.62.010  Public street frontage required.

18.62.020  Building site area.

18.62.030  Yards.

18.62.040  Improvement on through lots.

18.62.050  Rear yard – Modification corner lots.

18.62.010 Public street frontage required.
Except where otherwise provided for in this title, no building permit may be issued for any building or structure on any property unless said property abuts for a minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet directly upon a public street. No building permit may be issued for any building or structure upon property which abuts solely upon a private road easement or other access not a public road, or for any property which abuts solely upon the end of a street which is not a publicly dedicated cul-de-sac. (Zoning Ord. § 31-1).

18.62.020 Building site area.
(a) Any lot or parcel of land and of record on January 11, 1955, and where no adjoining land at such date or thereafter in the same or common ownership with said parcel may be used as a building site, even when of less area or width than that required by the regulations for the district in which it is located, provided the lot area has not been decreased to less than five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet since January 11, 1955, and subject also to the requirements of all other sections of this title, and all other pertinent ordinances of the City.

(b) The building site area is also deemed adequate of the property included in and assessed for a parking assessment district where the prescribed parking is provided by means of said parking district and such parking is approved by the City Council for the specific use proposed. (Zoning Ord. § 31-2).

18.62.030 Yards.
(a) Where four or more lots in a block have been improved with buildings, the minimum required front yard for main buildings shall be the average of the front yards of the improved lots if less than the front yard requirements.

(b) Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, and canopies shall not extend more than four feet into any required front yard, rear yard, or corner lot side yard; they may project to within two feet of any interior side lot line. Fireplace chimneys shall project not more than two feet into any required yard.

(c) Open uncovered porches or landing places not exceeding three feet in height may project to within three feet of any side lot line, and not exceeding six feet into any required front yard. Steps or stairs necessary for access are not to be included as part of the projection.

(d) Whenever an official plan line has been established for any street, required yards shall be measured from such line and in no case shall the provisions of this title be construed as permitting any encroachment upon any official plan line.

(e) On any parcel of land having an average width of less than fifty (50) feet, which parcel was of record on January 11, 1955, or is shown as a lot on any subdivision map on file in the office of County Recorder of the County of Santa Clara on said date and where no adjoining land is in the same or common ownership with said lot or parcel, then the width of each interior side yard may be reduced to ten percent of the width of such parcel, but in no case to less than three feet.

(f) Access yards and distance between buildings for dwelling groups shall be required as follows.

(1) Distance between buildings in any dwelling group shall be a minimum ten feet.

(2) Any yard providing access to a single row of group dwellings shall be a minimum twelve (12) feet.

(3) Inner court providing access to a double-row dwelling group shall be a minimum twenty (20) feet.

(g) The minimum frontage requirement for cul-de-sac turnaround areas shall be thirty-five (35) feet.

(h) No swimming pool or any accessory feature thereof shall be located within any required front or corner lot street side yard setback area.

(i) Swimming pools (to include "doughboy" or similar portable-type pools) shall not be located within five feet of any property line. Pumps and filter installations must also comply with this same five-foot setback requirement unless they are located outside the required twenty (20)-foot rear yard setback area, in which case no setback from the property line is required. Depth of excavation shall not exceed the horizontal distance from any building, with a minimum distance of five feet from said building. Property on which any swimming pool is located shall be fenced to afford a six-foot fence and to prevent access thereto by unauthorized persons. Gates shall be secured with self-latching devices, located at least five feet above ground level, at all times during which the pool is unattended.

(j) In computing the depth of a rear yard, for any building where such yard opens onto an alley, one-half of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard. (Zoning Ord. § 31-3).

18.62.040 Improvement on through lots.
Where a through lot is improved as one building site, the main building or buildings shall conform to the requirements of the classification of the frontage occupied by such main building or buildings, and no accessory building or buildings or structures shall be located closer to either street than the distance constituting the front yard on such street. Through lots two hundred (200) feet or more in depth may be improved as two separate lots, with the dividing line midway between the street frontages, provided the area of each one-half lot meets the lot area requirement of the zone in which such property is located, and all buildings and structures on each such one-half lot shall be subject to the controls applying to the street upon which such one-half lot faces. (Zoning Ord. § 31-4).

18.62.050 Rear yard – Modification corner lots.
For a good cause shown the City Planner may vary the location of a required rear yard area on a corner lot from opposite the front yard setback to the interior side lot line. Said substituted rear yard location shall contain, from the front setback line to the normal rear lot line, an area at least equal in square footage to that required as a result of a normally located required rear yard setback. The resulting interior side yard (opposite the required front yard setback) shall not be less than five feet. (Zoning Ord. § 31-5).

Chapter 18.64
SPECIAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Sections:

18.64.010  Height limits.

18.64.020  Fences in residential zoning districts.

18.64.030  Fences in other zoning districts.

18.64.040  Eight-foot fences.

18.64.010 Height limits.
The regulations of this title pertaining to height requirements shall be subject to the following additional requirements, conditions, and exceptions.

(a) Subject to any other provision of law, the height limitations contained in the schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other mechanical appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy or to be used for any commercial or advertising purposes.

(b) The height limitations of this title shall not apply to flagpoles, sculpture, antennas and radio towers; provided, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such a height with respect to the surrounding conditions and circumstances. (Zoning Ord. § 32-1).

18.64.020 Fences in residential zoning districts.
In any residential zoning district or in any PD district the following regulations pertaining to fence, hedges, and screen planting shall apply.

(a) Fences, hedges, and screen plantings shall not exceed three feet in height in required front yards or the street side or corner lot side yards adjacent to key lots.

(b) A six-foot fence may be erected on the street side of a corner lot thirty-five (35) feet from the street corner where two corner lots have a common rear property line.

(c) Fences or hedges not exceeding six feet in height may occupy any other portion of a lot.

(d) The vertical dimension of the fence shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade on both sides of any such fence. (Zoning Ord. § 32-2).

18.64.030 Fences in other zoning districts.
(a) In all zoning districts other than residential and PD zoning districts, fences exceeding six feet in height shall be regarded as structures; any fence exceeding six feet in height shall not be erected without first obtaining a building permit.

(b) Where other zoning districts are adjacent to such residential or PD districts, fences shall not exceed six feet in height on common lot lines; provided, however, that fences on common lot lines shall not exceed three feet in height beyond the front or side setback of such adjacent residential or PD district lot. (Zoning Ord. § 32-3).

18.64.040 Eight-foot fences.
(a) Required fencing surrounding the immediate swimming pool areas may be erected and maintained up to, but not more than, eight feet in height.

(b) Rear yard fencing abutting on any major thoroughfare of four or more motor vehicular traffic lanes may be erected and maintained up to, but not more than, eight feet in height. Such fencing shall be subject to architectural committee review in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.76 SCCC and shall be subject to the prior approval as therein prescribed. (Zoning Ord. § 32-4).

Chapter 18.66
SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Sections:

18.66.010  Intent.

18.66.020  Detached accessory buildings.

18.66.030  Attached accessory buildings.

18.66.040  Attached patio roof structures.

18.66.010 Intent.
The purpose of accessory building regulations is to provide for adequate yard areas, access, space between buildings, and to prevent inadequate driveways which result in cars being parked across sidewalk areas. Unless City approval has been given and occupancy permits have been issued, these buildings are not intended for residential occupancy. Therefore, standards for accessory building setbacks and allowed coverage of rear yard areas vary from those required for accessory units which can be approved on certain lots in single-family residential zoning districts. For these reasons, the following accessory building regulations are adopted. (Ord. 1680 § 4, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 33-1).

18.66.020 Detached accessory buildings.
Detached accessory buildings (garages, carports, or other structures) are permitted in residential zone districts subject to the following special requirements.

Such accessory buildings shall be allowed only when constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to, the main building and may not exceed four hundred eighty (480) square feet in area. Maximum height shall be one story, but not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.

(a) Minimum Driveway. Said uses shall be located on a lot so as to provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet of driveway between said use and any street right-of-way line.

(b) Front Yard. Said uses shall not be located in front of the main building, unless they are garages or carports which otherwise meet the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located.

(c) Side Yard. When any portion of said use is located to the side of the main building, said use shall provide and maintain the same front, side and rear yard setbacks as required for the main building, subject to minimum driveway requirements.

(d) Coverage of Rear Yard Areas. A detached accessory building may cover not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of any rear yard.

(1) Rear yard: said use shall be located at least five feet from the rear property line.

(2) Side yard: said use shall be located at least three feet from any interior side property line.

(3) Accessory buildings are prohibited in any public utility easement area, unless an encroachment permit and other necessary approvals are obtained.

(e) Alley Setback, Side Street Line. Said uses shall be at least five feet from any alley and shall be subject to the same minimum setback of the side yard on the street side of corner lots as required for main buildings, subject to minimum driveway requirements.

(f) Setback from Main Building. Any portion of said use shall be at least six feet from the main building.

(g) Reversed Corner Lot. Said uses located on a reversed corner lot adjacent to a key lot shall not project beyond the required front yard line of the adjacent key lot if it is located within twenty (20) feet or less to said common lot line. In no case shall a detached accessory building, carport, or similar structure be located nearer to the side lot line than the width of the side yard required on the lot for the main building.

(h) Breezeway Connections. Said use may be connected to the main building by a breezeway or other similar structure but shall not be considered as an attached accessory building, carport, or similar structure. Said breezeway shall not project nearer the side lot line than the minimum side yard required for the main building. (Ord. 1680 § 4, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 33-2).

18.66.030 Attached accessory buildings.
Attached accessory buildings not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet in area are permitted in residential zone districts subject to the following special requirements. These buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building.

(a) Minimum Driveway. Said uses shall be located on a lot so as to provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet of driveway between said use and any street right-of-way line.

(b) General Setback Requirements. Said use shall provide and maintain the same front, side and rear yard setbacks as required for the main building, subject to minimum driveway requirements.

(c) Reversed Corner Lots. On a reversed corner lot, said use may project into the rear yard area; provided, that total required rear yard area is maintained; and provided, that the projecting portion thereof does not extend beyond the front setback line of the adjacent key lot if it is located within twenty (20) feet or less to said common lot line, nor nearer to the side lot line than the width of the side yard required on the lot for the main building.

(d) Projection – Corner Lot. On a corner lot, said use may project into the rear yard; provided, that total required rear yard is maintained, and provided the projection portion thereof does not extend nearer to the side lot line than the width of the side yard required on the lot for the main building.

(e) Nonprojection – Rear Yard. When said use does not project into the required rear yard area, it may be erected in accordance with all setback provisions applicable to the main building, subject to minimum driveway requirements.

(f) Public Utility Easements. Accessory buildings are prohibited in any public utility easement area. (Ord. 1680 § 4, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 33-3).

18.66.040 Attached patio roof structures.
Attached patio roof structures in residential zone districts may encroach into fifty percent (50%) of the required rear yard depth; provided, that such patio roof structure shall not exceed forty percent (40%) coverage of the required rear yard area. Such roof structures shall be considered as building coverage, and shall not be enclosed on more than two sides. (Ord. 1680 § 4, 11-14-95; Zoning Ord. § 33-4).

Chapter 18.68
SERVICE STATION STANDARDS
Sections:

18.68.010  Intent.

18.68.020  Minimum site development and maintenance standards.

18.68.030  Standards for service stations.

18.68.040  Cessation of sale of motor vehicle fuels.

18.68.050  Conversion of a full-service station to self-serve only.

18.68.060  Nonconforming outdoor display and storage.

18.68.010 Intent.
The objectives of these standards are to:

(a) Promote design which will be architecturally compatible with other activities to be found in areas where service stations will be located.

(b) Control those aspects of the service station activity and other uses on site which may be damaging to surrounding areas and to confine their effect to the service station site.

(c) Minimize congestion and hazard inherent in an activity of this type. (Zoning Ord. § 34-1).

18.68.020 Minimum site development and maintenance standards.
In addition to the design standards set forth by the zone district in which the service station is located, the following shall apply:

(a) The following minimum landscaped improvements shall be installed and permanently maintained:

(1) A fifteen (15)-foot-wide planter area adjacent to any property line along a public street, with the exception of architectural committee-approved driveway entrances. Minimum planter width shall be measured from the street right-of-way or official plan line.

(2) A five-foot-wide planter area adjacent to all other property lines.

(3) Each planter area shall be landscaped with ground cover, screening shrubs, and trees. Trees shall be spaced at either a minimum distance of thirty-six (36) feet on center or in an alternative design to accomplish an equivalent density of screening and degree of shading, as approved by the architectural committee in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.76 SCCC.

(4) Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or planning division-approved equivalent. An automatic irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area.

(b) Service station roofs shall be well designed with generous overhangs; the roofing shall be incombustible materials such as simulated shake or shingle, clay tile, cement tile, slate or other similar materials.

(c) Exterior walls of service stations shall be well designed and compatible with adjoining properties.

(d) The entire service area of the service station shall be paved with a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt. Any unpaved area of the site shall be landscaped and separated from the paved areas by a six-inch concrete curb or other equivalent planning division-approved barrier.

(e) Gasoline pump islands, canopies, compressed air connections, restrooms and similar facilities shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way or official plan line.

(f) Points of cash or other payment shall be designed so as to provide a safe and adequate customer queuing area. Outdoor walk-up service facilities shall be located and designed so as to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties zoned residential or designated as residential in the general plan.

(g) Hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubrication, greasing, automobile washing and other service equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building.

(h) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a solid masonry fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height and similar in color, module, and texture to those materials utilized in the building shall be erected and permanently maintained along all common property lines with residentially zoned property or with property designated as residential in the general plan, or as approved by the architectural committee.

(i) Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and screened from direct view from the street right-of-way.

(j) Signs on the service station premises shall be so located as to not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. A minimum sight-distance triangle shall be maintained, as determined by the Engineering Department. All signs, except window signs not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of individual window area, shall be constructed and maintained within a permanent sign structure, as permitted by Chapter 18.80 SCCC, Sign Regulations.

(k) Auto service buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines a minimum distance of forty (40) feet to provide an adequate area for maneuvering vehicles in the service area and to provide adequate visibility, particularly at intersections.

(l) Driveway locations and accesses shall be provided in accordance with adopted City standards.

(m) An adequate and accessible trash disposal area shall be provided. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view by a masonry enclosure, with solid wood gates, at least six feet in height.

(n) A minimum of eight marked parking spaces shall be provided for customers and employees. For self-service stations with no accessory uses, such as tune-ups or accessory sales, only two such marked spaces need be provided. All such spaces shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any street right-of-way or official plan line.

(o) Water and compressed air services shall be available and functioning for public use during station operating hours.

(p) A fully stocked or equipped restroom shall be consistently maintained so as to be available to the public during operating hours. Restroom facilities shall be designed to accommodate the disabled. (Zoning Ord. § 34-2).

18.68.030 Standards for service stations.
(a) The use of the automobile service station site shall be limited to the retail sales of motor fuel and oil for automobile vehicles; including grease racks, battery and ignition services, tire repair and sales, and other accessory sales and services for automobiles; but shall exclude major automobile repairs, tire recapping, steam cleaning, automatic car washing, painting, body and fender work, engine overhaul, or other work of a similar nature. Nonautomotive sales shall be limited to the following customer convenience items: soft drinks, candy bars, and cigarettes. Operation of accessory sales and services shall be limited to those hours that motor vehicle fuels are offered for sale on site.

(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no sales, rentals, leasing, dead storage, repair work or dismantling of any kind shall be permitted on the service station site. No vehicle which is waiting for service, or which has been serviced, shall be parked outside a building on the service station site for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours.

(c) The combination of the retail sales of alcoholic beverages, other than beer and wine, and highway motor vehicle fuels on the same lot is prohibited.

(d) Other uses and activities such as mechanical car-washing facilities, customer convenience stores, sale of beer and wine, major automobile repair, rental or leasing of automobiles, trucks or trailers, outdoor vending machine installations or liquid propane gas installations, and the like not specifically mentioned above, shall be permitted only with a specific use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.110 SCCC, except that where the concurrent sales of motor vehicle fuel and beer and wine is requested by an applicant, the specific requirements regarding findings of the Planning Commission, SCCC 18.110.040, shall not apply and the provisions regarding such findings as set forth in this section shall apply.

(e) For purpose of this subsection, the term "alcoholic beverages" does not include beer and/or wine. The combination of the retail sales of alcoholic beverages and highway motor vehicle gasoline on the same lot is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply where the exercise of the rights and privileges were conferred by a duly issued State Alcoholic Beverage Control license for the lot where the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license is consistent with a valid zoning ordinance of the City, and the lot is used in the exercise of such rights and privileges at the time of the effective date of this subsection (e), and while such license continues in operation under the following conditions:

(1) The premises retain the same type of retail liquor license within a license classification.

(2) The licensed premises are operated continuously without substantial change in mode or character of operation.

(f) Subject to the restrictions and limitations of Subdivision (b) of California Business and Professions Code Section 23790.5, the City Planning Commission may deny permission, or grant conditional permission, to an individual applicant to engage in the concurrent retailing of motor vehicle fuel with beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption pursuant to this conditional use permit chapter based on appropriate health, safety, or general welfare standards set forth below:

(1) The conditional permission for any concurrent retailing of motor vehicle fuel with beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption may be granted only by first securing a use permit in each case. The procedure for processing an application for a use permit to engage in the concurrent retailing of motor vehicle fuel with beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption shall be as provided in Chapter 18.110 SCCC, exclusive of SCCC 18.110.040. For the purpose of supporting the Planning Commission's decision to grant or deny such a use permit application, the following procedure regarding the findings of the Planning Commission shall be used in lieu of SCCC 18.110.040.

(2) In order to grant any use permit, written findings of the Planning Commission shall be:

(A) That the establishment or operation of the use, under the circumstances of the particular case, is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(B) That said use will not be detrimental to any of the following:

(i) The health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use;

(ii) Property or improvements in the neighborhood of such proposed use; or

(iii) The general welfare of the City;

(C) That said use is in keeping with the purposes and intent of this title.

(3) The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in connection with the use permit as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title, and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with by the applicant.

(4) In order to deny any use permit, written findings of the Planning Commission shall be:

(A) That the establishment or operation of the use, under the circumstances of the particular case, are neither essential nor desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(B) That said use will be detrimental to any of the following:

(i) The health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use;

(ii) Property or improvements in the neighborhood of such proposed use; or

(iii) The general welfare of the City;

(C) That the applicant has not provided substantial evidence in view of the whole record to justify grant of the use permit.

(5) It is a requirement that the findings be based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record to justify the ultimate decision.

(6) In developing findings, the consideration shall be given to criteria which include the following:

(A) The number of locations of retail on-sale and off-sale licenses in the neighborhood, and the proximity to other establishments dispensing, for sale or other consideration, alcoholic beverages including beer and/or wine;

(B) The proximity to churches, schools, hospitals, playgrounds, nonprofit youth facilities, residences, and other similar uses;

(C) Traffic impacts, lighting, noise, odor, littering and trash disposal, and pedestrian movement;

(D) Availability of parking;

(E) Public loitering, nuisance, conduct of illegal activities on and outside the premises, or other crime problems;

(F) Security and law enforcement problems;

(G) Hours of operation;

(H) Consistency with the City's general plan;

(I) Physical problems with the site, such as size, setbacks, site coverage, fencing and visual screening, landscaping, maintenance requirements, architecture and design, maximum or minimum square footage of any store;

(J) Limits on alcoholic beverage retailing, such as square footage limitations, restrictions on location on the premises of those displays, and requirements that beer may only be sold unchilled;

(K) Signage regulations;

(L) Whether the proposed use will detrimentally affect any residentially zoned neighborhood in the area;

(M) Any other regulations the City, County, or State place on either of these uses when not combined with the other. (Zoning Ord. § 34-3).

18.68.040 Cessation of sale of motor vehicle fuels.
The cessation of sale of motor vehicle fuel(s) on the service station site for a continuous period exceeding two hundred ten (210) days may be cause for the City to request property owner and/or tenant removal of all service station improvements, including pump islands, buildings, underground storage tanks and accessory improvements. (Zoning Ord. § 34-4).

18.68.050 Conversion of a full-service station to self-serve only.
Any service station functioning as a full-service station as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not convert its last full-service isle to self-serve unless a new use permit is applied for and obtained, and all conditions of use permit approval are complied with. (Zoning Ord. § 34-5).

18.68.060 Nonconforming outdoor display and storage.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title to the contrary, outdoor displays and storage which do not conform to this chapter, but which lawfully existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be discontinued within ninety (90) days of such effective date. (Zoning Ord. § 34-6).

Chapter 18.70
USE REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIED REGULATED BUSINESSES
Sections:

18.70.010  Policy.

18.70.020  Application.

18.70.030  Definitions.

18.70.040  Use permit required.

18.70.050  Anti skid-row regulations.

18.70.060  Required findings for grant of a use permit.

18.70.070  Policy for tattoo or branding parlors, body-piercing establishments, check-cashing shops and pawn shops.

18.70.080  Application.

18.70.090  Additional definitions.

18.70.010 Policy.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations to prevent the adverse effect of the concentration or clustering of certain uses of real property, specifically adult book stores, adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, massage parlors, nude encounter studios, nude photography studios, and other uses, as specified in SCCC 18.70.090 (hereinafter referred to collectively as "regulated businesses"). Such uses have serious objectionable characteristics especially when several of them are located in close proximity to each other. Such concentration tends to create a "skid-row" atmosphere and has a deleterious effect upon the adjacent area. Regulation of the locations of these uses is necessary to insure that such adverse effects will not cause or contribute to the blight or the downgrading of neighborhoods and businesses situated in proximity to said "regulated businesses."

The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter are necessary and will tend to prevent the clustering of such "regulated businesses." The regulations hereinafter set forth will serve to help prevent the deleterious effects of blight and the resultant downgrading of real property values. The regulations will also serve to promote the orderly planning, development and utilization of neighborhood and business premises. (Ord. 1715 § 1, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-1).

18.70.020 Application.
The provisions of this chapter apply to the hereinafter "regulated businesses" regardless of the zoning district in which they are located. (Zoning Ord. § 35-2).

18.70.030 Definitions.
Some definitions, particularly relevant for this chapter, are contained herein for convenience of reference:

(a) The "regulated businesses" are itemized and defined as follows:

(1) "Adult book store" means a building or portion thereof used by a business which has as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade for sale to the public, or certain members thereof, books, magazines or other publications which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as hereinafter defined).

(2) "Adult cabaret" means a building or portion thereof or area used for the presentation or exhibition or featuring of topless and/or bottomless dancers, persons engaging in "specified sexual activities" (as hereinafter defined), strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers for observation by patrons or customers.

(3) "Adult motion picture theater" means a building or portion thereof or area, open or enclosed, used for the presentation of motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as hereinafter defined) for observation by patrons or customers.

(4) "Adult novelty store" means a building or portion thereof used by a business which has a substantial or significant portion (over twenty-five percent (25%) of the business' stock in trade for sale or rental to the public or over twenty-five percent (25%) of its gross dollar of business or, if applicable, over twenty-five percent (25%) of the actual display area of the store) of its stock in trade for sale or rental to the public, or certain members thereof, adult-oriented novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis or use for "specified sexual activities" (as hereinafter defined).

(5) "Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals is required to obtain a massage permit from the Chief of Police, under the applicable sections of the City Code, and engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, for consideration or compensation (as hereinafter defined), massages, baths or health treatments involving massages or baths as regular functions. Exempted from this definition are massage therapists operating in conjunction with and on the same premises as a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, nurse or any physical therapist (State-licensed professions or vocations) who are duly State-licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California.

(6) "Nude encounter studio" means a building or portion thereof or area used, upon payment of any compensation (as hereinafter defined), for permitting the patron or customer to meet, be present privately, or otherwise "encounter" a person or persons who are topless and/or bottomless and are employed for such purpose (as hereinafter defined) by the operator of such establishment.

(7) "Nude photography studio" means a building or portion thereof or area used upon payment of any compensation (as hereinafter defined), for permitting the patron or customer to photograph a person or persons who are topless and/or bottomless and who are employed for such purpose (as hereinafter defined) by the operator of such establishment.

(b) Miscellaneous Definitions.

(1) "Compensation" means any levy, fee, gift, toll, charge, etc., whether in currency, service, ticket, token, or other device.

(2) "Employed for such purpose" means a person employed for such purpose by the establishment operator shall include employees and independent contractors who give compensation to the operator for the privilege of using the facilities. This definition excludes customers.

(3) "Specified sexual activities" means:

(A) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and

(B) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus or sodomy; and

(C) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; and

(D) Bestiality.

(4) "Specified anatomical areas" means:

(A) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 1715 § 2, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-3).

18.70.040 Use permit required.
Those uses defined as "regulated businesses" in SCCC 18.70.030 and 18.70.090 may be established only by first securing a use permit in each case as provided in SCCC 18.70.060 and Chapter 18.110 SCCC. (Ord. 1715 § 3, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-4).

18.70.050 Anti skid-row regulations.
Excepting the provisions of Chapter 18.94 SCCC pertaining to nonconforming uses, no lot or parcel of property in any zoning district or any building or structure thereon, or any portion thereof, within the city, shall be used for a "regulated business" at a location closer than five hundred (500) feet from another "regulated business" (as defined in SCCC 18.70.030 and 18.70.090) nor five hundred (500) feet from the below-indicated uses (whether such use is within or outside the City of Santa Clara):

(a) School property line (universities, community colleges, high schools, junior high schools, elementary and nursery schools).

(b) State-licensed child care centers and/or large family day care facilities.

(c) Hotels, motels, or lodging houses.

(d) Bowling alleys, ping-pong centers, electric-game centers, pool and billiard halls.

(e) Any lot or parcel zoned single-family residential. (Ord. 1715 § 4, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-5).

18.70.060 Required findings for grant of a use permit.
Notwithstanding any provision elsewhere in this title to the contrary, and in addition to the findings required to be made in issuing a use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.110 SCCC, the Planning Commission may grant a use permit to a "regulated business" only if it shall find that the proposed use at the proposed location, subject to such conditions, as it may impose:

(a) Will not be contrary to the public interest or unreasonably injurious to the use of nearby properties;

(b) Will conform to the spirit and intent of this title;

(c) Will be consistent with the applicable zoning district designation and the section of this title governing it;

(d) Will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid-row" area;

(e) Will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation;

(f) Will not interfere with any program of urban renewal or redevelopment;

(g) Will be in compliance with all applicable City codes and regulations; and

(h) Will not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any other use regulated by this chapter nor within five hundred (500) feet of those uses identified in SCCC 18.70.050(a) and (b).

Except as otherwise expressly provided, the regulations set forth in this chapter are intended to be in addition to and not in lieu of other regulations of this title applicable to any of the above specified uses; and, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall not be deemed to repeal or amend any other provision or provisions of "the Code of the City of Santa Clara, California" or of this chapter, which are applicable to the above-mentioned uses or activities nor be deemed to excuse noncompliance with other such provisions. (Ord. 1715 § 5, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-6).

18.70.070 Policy for tattoo or branding parlors, body-piercing establishments, check-cashing shops and pawn shops.
The City of Santa Clara intends to adopt reasonable regulations to prevent the adverse effects of the concentration or clustering of certain uses and to prevent the negative effects of these uses individually upon an area. These uses include tattoo or branding parlors, body-piercing establishments, check-cashing shops and pawn shops. These uses have been demonstrated to have a detrimental impact individually or when located in close proximity to each other. These concentrations tend to create a "skid row" atmosphere and have a deleterious effect upon the adjacent area. Regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that the negative impacts will not cause or contribute to the blight or the downgrading of neighborhoods and businesses in proximity to these listed businesses.

The regulations set forth below are necessary and will tend to prevent the clustering of these uses. This chapter will also serve to promote the orderly planning, development and utilization of neighborhood and business premises.

In a summary entitled "Secondary Effects of Crime" ("the study"), the Santa Clara Police Department reviewed studies conducted in Oakland California; St. Paul, Minnesota; Seattle, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; and in the City of Santa Clara, and concluded that specified regulated uses do have numerous negative effects upon the area and lead to increasing calls for service in response to crime. The study identified tattoo or branding shops and body-piercing establishments as a magnet for organized crime and gang activity, and found that these establishments had excessive calls for service. The study also noted that check-cashing shops were also a center of criminal activity resulting in extra calls for service. The study included information that pawn shops are ready buyers for stolen property with many related police calls. (Ord. 1715 § 6, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-7).

18.70.080 Application.
The provisions of SCCC 18.70.070 through 18.70.090 apply to tattoo or branding parlors, body-piercing establishments, check-cashing shops and pawn shops regardless of the zoning district in which they are located. Tattoo or branding parlors, body-piercing establishments, check-cashing shops and pawn shops shall be deemed to be regulated businesses for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1715 § 7, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-8).

18.70.090 Additional definitions.
Some definitions, particularly relevant for this chapter, are contained herein for convenience of reference:

(a) "Body-piercing shop" means a building or portion thereof where piercing of human body parts is administered or from which a body-piercing business or service is operated. This shall not include establishments which limit their piercing to ears only.

(b) "Check-cashing shop" means a building or portion thereof where checks or money orders are cashed or money orders or wires are issued and these services are a significant part of the business (over twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross dollar volume of business). This chapter does not regulate banks, savings and loan institutions, credit unions, or other banking organizations regulated by State or Federal law.

(c) "Pawn shop" means a building or portion thereof where personal property is received and for which money is advanced, with the right of privilege granted to the person to whom said money is advanced to reclaim such property upon repayment of said money, together with all legal charges incident thereto. This chapter does not regulate banks, saving and loan institutions, credit unions, or other banking organizations regulated by State or Federal law.

(d) "Tattooing or branding shop" means a building or portion thereof where the tattooing or branding of human body parts is administered or from which a tattooing or branding business or service is operated.

(e) Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar in nature. (Ord. 1715 § 8, 9-15-98; Zoning Ord. § 35-9).

Chapter 18.72
PROHIBITION OF SUPERSTORE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

18.72.010    Intent.

18.72.020    Activities prohibited.

18.72.010 Intent.
This chapter is intended to prevent the adverse effects of large retail stores that include a significant amount of floor space for grocery sales, including but not limited to the following: negative impacts on vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian circulation patterns; an increase in noise, parking, light and glare resulting from intensification and concentration of such retail uses; conflict in adjacent land uses; economic effects on the residential and business community; and potential adverse effects on real property values resulting from diminished neighborhood and/or regional shopping centers. The regulations will also serve to promote the orderly planning, development and utilization of neighborhood and business premises. (Ord. 1843 § 2, 5-5-09).

18.72.020 Activities prohibited.
Superstores, as defined in SCCC 18.06.010(s)(11), shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, including planned development districts, within the City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 1843 § 2, 5-5-09).

Chapter 18.74
PARKING REGULATIONS
Sections:

18.74.010    Off-street parking.

18.74.020    Required off-street parking.

18.74.030    Size and access.

18.74.035    Uniform parking stalls and drive aisles.

18.74.040    Development standards.

18.74.050    Driveway standards.

18.74.060    Construction permit required.

18.74.075    Bicycle parking standards.

18.74.010 Off-street parking.
(a) Purpose. To alleviate or prevent congestion of the public streets, and to promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading of motor vehicles, in accordance with the use to which property is put.

(b) Scope of Regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows.

(1) When the intensity of use by any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units or measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.

(2) Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereinafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to parking and loading provisions of this chapter.

(3) For single-family homes with existing, nonconforming, two-car garages, additional residential floor area can be approved without the parking as long as the garage is fully accessible and has at least seventeen (17) feet by seventeen (17) feet inside dimensions and a garage door, or doors, at least fifteen (15) feet wide.

(4) For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by this chapter. (Zoning Ord. § 37-1).

18.74.020 Required off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided as required in the following schedule (for required residential parking refer to residential chapters):

(a) “A” definitions:

(1) Agricultural Uses, Labor Camps, Agricultural Roadside Stands. As specified in use permit approval.

(2) Amusement or Recreational Enterprises (Not Specifically Referred to in This Schedule). As specified in use permit approval but in no case less than one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

(3) Auditoriums of a School, Church, College or Institution. One parking space for each six individual seats or equivalent or one space per fifty (50) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater.

(4) Auditoriums Other than School, Church, College or Institution. One parking space for each four seats or one space per thirty-two (32) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater.

(5) Auto Accessory Sales and Service. One space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

(6) Auto Laundry. Reservoir parking spaces equal to five times the capacity of the laundry shall be provided plus one space for each two employees.

(7) Auto Repair and Service. One space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than six spaces.

(8) Automobile, Boat, Mobile Home, Trailer Sales or Rental. One space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area plus one reserved space for each two employees; but in no case less than six spaces.

(b) “B” definitions:

(1) Bowling Alleys. Five spaces for each alley plus additional spaces as may be required herein for accessory uses such as restaurants, bars, and the like.

(c) “C” definitions:

(1) Cemeteries, Mausoleums. As specified in use permit approval.

(2) Churches.

(A) One space for each six individual seats or equivalent in the auditorium or church or one space per fifty (50) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater, plus one space for each classroom or office.

(B) For convents, parish houses and the like – one space for each automobile owned and/or operated by the church.

(C) For administration offices accessory to the church operation – one space for each office.

(3) Convalescent Homes, Rest Homes, Nursing Homes, Sanitarium, Etc. One space for every four beds plus one space for each two employees (other than the staff doctors) plus one space for each doctor assigned to the staff, but in no case less than one space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area.

(d) “D” definitions:

(1) Drive-In Theaters. As specified in use permit approval.

(2) Data Centers. One space per four thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area.

(e) Reserved for future use.

(f) “F” definitions:

(1) Financial and General Business Offices, Banks and Real Estate. One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.

(2) Fraternity House, Sorority House, Dormitories, Boarding House. One space per sleeping room.

(3) Furniture and Major Appliance Stores or Furniture Repair Shops. One space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.

(g) “G” definitions:

(1) Golf Driving Ranges. One space for each tee plus one space for each employee.

(h) “H” definitions:

(1) Hospitals. One parking space for each two beds plus one space for each two employees (other than staff doctors) plus one space for each doctor, but in no case less than one space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.

(2) Hotels and Motels. One space for each lodging unit or dwelling unit.

(3) Heavy Industrial (MH – Industrial Uses Except Warehousing and Wholesale Establishments). Permitted professional office and commercial uses shall provide parking for the specific use as required in this section.

(A) One parking space per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area or one space per three employees on the shift during which the greatest number of employees is used, whichever is greater.

(i) Reserved for future use.

(j) Reserved for future use.

(k) Reserved for future use.

(l) “L” definitions:

(1) Light Industrial (ML – Industrial Uses). Permitted professional office and commercial uses shall provide parking for the specific use as required in this section.

(A) One parking space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area or one space per three employees on the shift during which the greatest number of employees is used, whichever is greater.

(2) Planned Industrial (MP – Industrial Uses). Permitted professional office and commercial uses shall provide parking for the specific use as required in this section.

(A) One space for each four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor space.

(3) Lodges and Clubs. One space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor space.

(m) “M” definitions:

(1) Medical and Dental Offices. Five spaces for each doctor or dentist but in no case less than one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.

(2) Medical Laboratories. One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.

(3) Mortuaries – Funeral Home. One space for each five individual seats or equivalent in a chapel or public assembly room or one space per forty (40) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater, plus one space for each funeral vehicle.

(4) Museums, Art Galleries.

(A) One parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of public display area (not including storage, work rooms and the like) for the first two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; with a minimum of fifteen (15) parking spaces required; then one parking space for each additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet of display area from two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet to and including five thousand (5,000) square feet; then one parking space for each additional two hundred (200) feet of display area from five thousand (5,000) square feet to and including ten thousand (10,000) square feet; then one parking space for each additional five hundred (500) square feet of display area over ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

(B) One truck loading dock shall be provided for buildings with a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more.

Example of Parking Requirements

1,500 square feet or less

minimum 15 spaces

2,500 square feet

minimum 25 spaces

5,000 square feet

minimum 41 spaces

10,000 square feet

minimum 66 spaces

(n) “N” definitions:

(1) Nursery, Preschool. One space per classroom or office but in no case less than three spaces.

(o) “O” definitions:

(1) Office – Business, Professional, Financial, Banks, Real Estate. One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. Office use not exceeding ten percent of an industrial building’s floor space shall require parking at the industrial ratio.

(p) “P” definitions:

(1) Public Utility and Public Service Uses and Public Utility Service Yards. One space for each three employees on the maximum shift plus one space for each vehicle permanently assigned to the facility.

(q) Reserved for future use.

(r) “R” definitions:

(1) Research Laboratories. One space for each seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area occupied exclusively by laboratory equipment, plus one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.

(2) Restaurants, Bars and Taverns. One space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area or one space for each three seats, whichever is greater.

(3) Retail Stores, Shops and Services. One space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

(s) “S” definitions:

(1) Schools – Business, Professional and Trade Schools. One parking space for each classroom or office plus one space for each five students attending classes on the premises at any time during any twenty-four (24)-hour period, but in no case less than one space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

(2) Schools – High Schools, Colleges and Universities. One parking space for each classroom or office plus one space for each ten students attending classes on the premises at any time during any twenty-four (24)-hour period.

(3) Schools – Nursery, Elementary and Intermediate (Public or Private). One parking space for each classroom or office but in no case less than three spaces.

(4) Self-Storage Facilities. One space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area.

(5) Stadiums, Arenas, Auditoriums (Other than Church, College or Institutional Auditorium), Convention Halls, Dance Halls, Exhibition Halls, Skating Rinks and Other Similar Places of Assembly. One parking space for each four seats or one space per thirty-two (32) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater.

(t) “T” definitions:

(1) Theaters. One parking space for each four seats or one space per thirty-two (32) square feet of usable seating area, whichever is greater.

(u) Reserved for future use.

(v) Reserved for future use.

(w) “W” definitions:

(1) Warehousing and Wholesaling Establishments in MH Zone Only. One space for each three employees on the maximum shift or one space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.

(x) Reserved for future use.

(y) Reserved for future use.

(z) Reserved for future use. (Zoning Ord. § 37-2; Ord. 1984 §§ 1, 2, 8-21-18).

18.74.030 Size and access.
All off-street parking facilities shall be designed and laid out in accordance with at least the minimum requirements as shown on the figures following this chapter.

The compact-size dimensions may be used for up to fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces in all commercial, industrial, institutional, and unassigned stalls in residential lots with more than twenty-five (25) spaces. In order that standard cars are not parked in compact spaces so as to block aisles, and in order that compact cars are not parked in standard spaces, reducing the availability of standard spaces, the design of the parking facilities shall be clearly marked and arranged so that the compact spaces are convenient and will be used by preference for parking compact cars and so that it is physically difficult for standard-size cars to use compact spaces. The recommended layout is a twenty (20)-foot wide one-way aisle with forty-five (45) or sixty (60)-degree standard spaces on one side and ninety (90)-degree compact spaces on the other.

Parking spaces not open on both sides shall have an extra foot in width.

In duplex and multifamily residential development where two garage doors face each other, the back-out space between the doors must be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet. (Zoning Ord. § 37-3).

18.74.035 Uniform parking stalls and drive aisles.
As an alternative to a mixture of standard-size and compact spaces, off-street parking facilities may be designed with one hundred percent (100%) uniform-size stalls, measuring eight and one-half feet in width and seventeen (17) feet in depth. For parking facilities using the uniform stall dimensions, the minimum drive aisle width is twenty-four (24) feet. (Ord. 1992 § 2, 11-27-18).

18.74.040 Development standards.
(a) Surfacing. All open required off-street parking areas shall be improved with two inches plant mix asphalt on six inches base rock with a prime coat and a seal coat, or five inches concrete with 10 x 10 x 10 wire mesh and expansion joints.

Asphalt driveway areas which provide access to trash enclosures shall be improved with three inches plant mix asphalt on eight inches base rock with a prime coat and a seal coat.

(b) Drainage. Proper drainage is required for all surfaced areas.

(c) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed and maintained so as not to interfere with persons using any public street or improvement or to unnecessarily interfere with the use and enjoyment of property of any person.

(d) Signs. Directional signs are permitted on parking areas in accordance with the sign regulations of Chapter 18.80 SCCC.

(e) Screening and Landscaping. All open automobile parking areas which abut upon a public street right-of-way shall provide landscaping to a depth of at least ten feet of said street right-of-way and of any plan line, with openings for walkway or drive purposes in accordance with City standards.

An additional five percent of the gross lot area shall be devoted to landscaping. Major canopy trees shall be provided throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. Trees shall be spaced at either a minimum distance of thirty-six (36) feet on center or in an alternative design to accomplish an equivalent density of screening and degree of shading, as approved by the architectural committee.

(f) Fencing. A solid fence at least six feet in height shall be required on all common property lines when any parking facility is established abutting residentially zoned property.

(g) Walkway. A walkway, if provided adjacent to a building and parking stalls, shall be at least four feet in width.

(h) Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted within any required off-street parking area. The sale of gasoline, motor oil or any other merchandise is also prohibited within any required off-street parking area.

(i) Location of Accessory Off-Street Parking Facilities. The location of off-street parking and garage spaces shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use served except as otherwise provided in this title.

(j) Existing Parking and Loading Facilities. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities which are located on the same lot or parcel as the building or use served and which were in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or were provided voluntarily after such effective date, shall not hereafter be reduced below or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for a similar new building or use.

(k) Parking Assessment District. Off-street parking facilities may be provided collectively for all building structures or uses located within a parking assessment district. The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council waiving of the parking requirements of this title for properties within a parking assessment district.

(l) Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space. Each space shall be individually accessible.

(m) Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading facilities in excess of the requirements of this title to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided, that all regulations herein governing the location, size and access design, improvement and operation of such facilities are adhered to.

(n) Use of Parking and Garage Facilities. Off-street parking and garage facilities serving a residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be used solely for the storage of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking and garage facilities serving a residential structure be used for storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of business or manufacturing establishments.

(o) Mixed Uses. When two or more uses are located on the same zoning plot or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the separate requirements for each such use as required by the subject zoning district shall be required. No parking space or portion thereof shall serve as required space for more than one use.

(p) Other Uses. For uses not specifically listed in this chapter, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most similar listed use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. (Zoning Ord. § 37-4).

18.74.050 Driveway standards.
(a) Driveways (On-Site).

(1) Back-out parking into the street right-of-way is prohibited except for single- and two-family dwellings.

(2) One-way driveways for residences serving not more than three garages or parking spaces shall be at least a minimum width of ten feet (eight-foot pavement with one-foot clearance on each side).

(3) Two-way driveways providing access to less than twenty-five (25) residential parking spaces or garage spaces shall be at least a minimum width of fourteen (14) feet (twelve (12) feet of pavement with one-foot clearance on each side).

(4) Two-way driveways providing access to twenty-five (25) or more residential parking spaces or garage spaces shall be at least a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet (twenty-four (24)-foot pavement with one-foot clearance on each side).

(5) One-way driveways providing access to all properties other than residential shall be a minimum width of at least fourteen (14) feet (12 feet of pavement with one-foot clearance on each side).

(6) Two-way driveways providing access to all properties other than residential shall be a minimum width of at least twenty-two (22) feet (twenty (20) feet of pavement with one-foot clearance on each side).

(b) Minimum Turning Radius. Whenever the alignment of a driveway changes, the minimum inside turning radius of such driveway shall be twenty-five (25) feet.

(c) Driveways (Off-Site).

(1) No person, firm, or corporation shall construct or maintain any driveway across any curbing or sidewalk, or connecting with any uncurbed roadway without first securing a City permit. All construction of such driveways shall be done in conformity with City of Santa Clara standards and specifications, and shall be subject to City inspection.

(2) Widths of driveways shall be measured along lowered curb section and shall not exceed thirty (30) feet or be less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. For one- and two-family residences, driveways shall not exceed twenty (20) feet or be less than twelve (12) feet in width nor exceed two in number for each property. Approaches to one-lane driveways may be twenty (20) feet wide.

(3) Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the frontage upon any street of the parcel of land to be served thereby shall be devoted to driveways, except that, in cases of narrow frontages on cul-de-sacs, normal driveways may be permitted subject to approval of the City Engineer.

(4) Driveways on the same property shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet apart.

(5) Driveways located in proximity to street intersections should, in general, satisfy the following minimum criteria and shall be otherwise located if so required by the City Engineer:

(A) Located no closer than thirty-five (35) feet from the curb line of the intersecting street and not within the curved portion of a constant radius curb return in any case except for curb returns of greater than sixty (60) feet constant radius where driveway encroachment may not exceed one-eighth of the total arc length.

(6) No driveway shall be located within an intersection crosswalk, which is defined by the prolongation of the boundary lines of sidewalks.

(7) Driveways may start from property line, but in no case may driveways on adjoining properties be closer than three feet except where mutual easements described in deeds provide for a common driveway along the property line. Such common driveways shall be subject to all other requirements and specifications.

(8) No driveway shall be less than three feet from the center of a fire hydrant, utility pole, or street light standard.

(9) No driveway shall be constructed less than five feet from the center of a traffic signal standard.

(10) Adjustments to utility facilities or other public improvements shall be accomplished without cost to the City.

(11) Any abandoned driveway shall be reconstructed to standard City sidewalk, curb, and gutter requirements, concurrent with the new driveway construction without cost to the City.

(12) Where practical, difficulties, unnecessary hardships and effects inconsistent with the general purpose of these driveway standards may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, variances may be granted by the City Engineer. (Zoning Ord. § 37-5).

18.74.060 Construction permit required.
A construction permit, to be issued by the building inspection division, shall be required to establish, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, remove or convert any off-street parking facility.

Exception: when a building permit is issued for a main building and when construction work on the main building and the parking facility will be finished concurrently, the building permit may be considered to be the construction permit for the parking facility. (Zoning Ord. § 37-6).

18.74.075 Bicycle parking standards.
(a) Class One Bicycle Parking. Class One spaces are spaces in secure, weather-protected facilities intended for use as long-term, overnight, and workday bicycle storage by dwelling unit residents, nonresidential occupants, and employees. Class One bicycle parking includes bicycle lockers, bicycle rooms or cages where each bicycle can be individually locked.

(b) Class Two Bicycle Parking. Class Two spaces are located in a publicly accessible, highly visible location intended for transient or short-term use by visitors, guests, and patrons to the building or use. Bicycle racks that provide two points of contact to prevent bikes from pivoting and falling over are the most common form of Class Two bicycle parking. (Ord. 1961 § 2, 12-13-16).

Parking Regulations

Ch. 18.74
MINIMUM INSIDE DIMENSIONS

Parking Regulations

MINIMUM INSIDE DIMENSIONS

Chapter 18.76
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
Sections:

18.76.010  Intent.

18.76.020  Architectural review process.

18.76.010 Intent.
The City Council of the City of Santa Clara finds, determines and declares that in order to encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures and property; maintain the public health, safety and welfare; maintain the property and improvement values throughout the City and to encourage the physical development of the City as intended by the general plan; there is hereby established the architectural review process. (Zoning Ord. § 38-1).

18.76.020 Architectural review process.
(a) Architectural review shall be the responsibility of the architectural committee composed of a member appointed by the City Council and two members of the Planning Commission appointed by the chairman of said Commission. The appointments shall be made on a rotating basis.

(b) Before action is taken on an application for the issuance of a permit for any sign, building, structure, or alteration of the exterior of a structure in any zone district, plans and drawings of such sign, building or alteration shall be submitted, in such form and detail as the Director of Planning and Inspection may prescribe, to the architectural committee for approval.

(c) In order to grant architectural approval, the findings and determinations of the architectural committee shall be that the proposed development, as set forth in such plans and drawings to be approved, is based on the following standards of architectural design:

(1) That any off-street parking areas, screening strips and other facilities and improvements necessary to secure the purpose and intent of this title and the general plan of the City are a part of the proposed development.

(2) That the design and location of the proposed development and its relation to neighboring developments and traffic is such that it will not impair the desirability of investment or occupation in the neighborhood, will not unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring developments, and will not create traffic congestion or hazard.

(3) That the design and location of the proposed development is such that it is in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and is such as not to be detrimental to the harmonious development contemplated by this title and the general plan of the City.

(4) That the granting of such approval will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of said development, and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood.

(5) That the proposed development, as set forth in the plans and drawings, are consistent with the set of more detailed policies and criteria for architectural review as approved and updated from time to time by the City Council, which set shall be maintained in the planning division office. The policies and criteria so approved shall be fully effective and operative to the same extent as if written into and made a part of this title.

(d) The architectural committee may require the applicant or owner of any such proposed development, as a condition to the approval of any such proposal, to modify buildings, parking areas, landscaping, signs, and other facilities and improvements as the architectural committee deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title and general plan of the City, and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with by the applicant.

(e) If the architectural committee is unable to make the findings and determinations prerequisite to the granting of architectural approval pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the application shall be denied.

(f) The architectural committee shall render a decision on any application for architectural approval within forty (40) days following filing of said application with the planning division office, except where the applicant consents to an extension of time. Failure of the architectural committee to render a decision within said period of forty (40) days and said period of extension consented to by applicant shall be deemed to be a decision of denial.

(g) The granting of any architectural approval, when conforming to the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be an administrative function, the authority and responsibility for performing which is imposed upon the architectural committee, and the action thereon by said architectural committee shall be final and conclusive, except in the event of an appeal and referral as hereinafter provided.

(h) In the event the applicant or others affected are not satisfied with the decision of the architectural committee, he may within seven days after such decision appeal in writing to the Planning Commission. Said appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Planner. The Planning Commission actions are appealable to the City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in SCCC 18.108.060. The architectural committee may refer any application for architectural consideration to the Planning Commission for its decision with the same effect as if an appeal had been taken.

(i) No permit shall be issued, and no structure, building, or sign shall be constructed or used in any case hereinabove mentioned until such plans and drawings have been approved by the architectural committee, Planning Commission when there is no appeal or review of its decision pursuant to SCCC 18.108.060, or the City Council, and no appeal or review is pending and the time to appeal has expired. In the event of an appeal by the applicant or others affected, or action to review is taken by the City Council, no such permit shall be granted until the matter has been finally acted upon and final approval has been received. All signs, buildings, structures, and grounds shall be in accordance with the plans and drawings as finally approved.

(j) Said approvals shall be on file with the City planning division office.

(k) Any architectural review approval granted in accordance with the terms of this title shall be automatically revoked and terminated if not used within two years of original grant or within the period of any architectural committee-authorized extensions thereof. (Zoning Ord. § 38-2).

Chapter 18.78
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
BONUS STANDARDS
Sections:

18.78.010    Purpose and intent.

18.78.020    Definitions.

18.78.030    Density bonus.

18.78.040    Concessions and incentives.

18.78.050    Application requirements and review.

18.78.060    Density bonus housing agreement.

18.78.070    Waiver of development standards.

18.78.080    Maximum parking requirements.

18.78.090    Exclusions.

18.78.010 Purpose and intent.
These residential density bonus standards are intended to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low income, lower income, or senior households in accordance with applicable sections of the California Government Code [Section 65915 et seq.], or successor Code. It is the intent of the City to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s General Plan Housing Element. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1766 § 2, 5-7-02).

18.78.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter or Chapter 18.54 SCCC, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

(a) “Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the City guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(b) “Affordable housing cost” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, as may be amended.

(c) “Affordable rent” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50053, as may be amended.

(d) “Approving body” means the Planning Commission or City Council, approving the housing development of which the density bonus request is included. Where there is an appeal, the “approving body” shall mean the City Council.

(e) “Child care facility” means a center installed, operated and maintained for the nonresidential non-medical care and supervision of children meeting State licensing requirements.

(f) “Common interest development” means a community apartment project, condominium project, planned development, or a stock cooperative as defined by Section 4100 of the Civil Code, as may be amended.

(g) “Concession or incentive” means any of the following:

(1) A modification in site development, Zoning Ordinance requirements or design criteria that exceeds the minimum building standards set forth in SCCC Title 15 (“Buildings and Construction”), including, but not limited to, reduction in setback, square footage, and parking requirements that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; or

(2) Rezoning to MU (mixed use) or TMU (transit-oriented mixed use) in conjunction with the housing development if commercial, office, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, or other land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development would be located; or

(3) Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

(h) “Density bonus” means a density increase, usually not to exceed thirty-five percent (35%) over the otherwise allowed maximum residential density.

(i) “Development standard” includes a site or construction condition including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a minimum lot size, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an on-site open-space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, the Charter, or any other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

(j) “Housing development” means a project for the construction of residential units with a minimum of five dwellings, including a subdivision or common interest development. “Housing development” also includes either (1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of Government Code Section 65863.4, as may be amended, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

(k) “Lower income household” means households whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

(l) “Maximum allowable residential density” means the maximum number of dwelling units per acre that is permitted on the property or properties for the applicable zoning district and the general plan land use designation.

(m) “Persons and families of moderate income” means households whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

(n) “Qualifying resident” means a senior citizen, qualifying resident, or qualified permanent resident authorized to reside in a senior citizen housing development, as provided in Civil Code Section 51.3.

(o) “Senior citizen housing development” means a project as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil Code, or mobile-home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code, as may be amended.

(p) “Very low income households” means households whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1933 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.78.030 Density bonus.
(a) Upon written request by the applicant, the approving body for a housing development shall grant a density bonus and incentives or concessions as provided in this chapter when the applicant for the housing development agrees or proposes to construct at least one of the following:

(1) Five percent of the total units for very low income households; or

(2) Ten percent of the total units for lower income households; or

(3) Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for persons and families of moderate income; or

(4) A senior citizen housing development; or

(5) A conversion of apartments to condominiums, where at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the proposed condominiums will be affordable to persons and families of low or moderate income, or fifteen percent (15%) of the proposed condominiums will be affordable to lower income households; or

(6) A housing development that includes a child care facility that meets the requirements set forth in subsection (l) of this section; or

(7) A housing development that will include a land donation to the City meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (k) of this section.

(b) If an applicant exceeds the percentages set forth in Table I, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus calculated as follows:

(1) For each one percent increase above five percent of the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus will be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%).

(2) For each one percent increase above ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%).

(3) For each one percent increase above ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%).

(4) To the extent a land donation includes sufficient land for a number of very low income housing units that exceeds ten percent of the number of the residential units of the proposed development, for each one percent increase above ten percent, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%).

(c) For the purpose of calculating the density bonus, the percentage of affordable units an applicant must provide in order to receive the bonus shall be the percentage of units provided in addition to any applicable inclusionary housing requirement. By way of example, a condominium development that is already required by a general plan policy to provide ten percent of its units at affordable housing costs would have to provide an additional five percent for very low income families, or an additional ten percent for low or moderate income families, before it would qualify for a density bonus.

(d) Density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

(e) For the purpose of calculating the density bonus, the residential units need not be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels.

(f) The density bonus shall be calculated as indicated in Table I.

Table I

Calculating Density Bonuses 

Affordable Units

Min. Percentage in Category

Bonus Granted

Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in Affordability

Percentage of Affordable Units Required for Max. Density Bonus

Very Low Income

5%

20%

2.5%

11%

Low Income

10%

20%

1.5%

20%

Common Interest Moderate Income

10%

5%

1%

40%

Senior Housing

Any

20%

–

–

Condo Conversion – Moderate Income

33%

25%

 

–

–

Condo Conversion – Lower Income

15%

25%

–

–

Child Care

–

square foot per child care area

–

–

Land Donation – Very Low Housing

10% of market rate units

15%

1%

35%

(1) A density bonus may be selected from only one category, except that density bonuses for land donation may be combined with others, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%), and an additional square foot bonus may be granted for a child care facility.

(g) An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonuses than provided in Table I.

(h) Affordable units developed in conjunction with a market rate development shall be of similar design and quality as the market rate units.

(i) Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development rather than clustered in a single area or a few areas. Location of the affordable units within a housing development shall be approved as part of the entitlement granted by the approving body.

(j) The granting of a density bonus in conformance with the criteria of this chapter shall not, by itself, require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval, and shall be processed in conjunction with a housing development application. Any discretionary approval unrelated to density but necessary for the development shall still apply, such as a conditional use permit, subdivision map, or variance.

(k) Density Bonus with Land Donation. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, or other residential development donates land to the City that meets the requirements of this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent (15%) increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the Zoning Ordinance and general plan for the entire development, if the applicant meets all of the following conditions:

(1) The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, final parcel map, or residential development application.

(2) The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

(3) The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) dwelling units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Government Code Section 65583.2, and is or will be served with adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

(4) The transferred land has all of the permits and approvals, other than architectural review and building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land, not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, final parcel map, or residential development application.

(5) The transferred land and the affordable units are subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with SCCC 18.78.060, which shall be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer.

(6) The land is transferred to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer.

(7) The transferred land is within the boundary of the proposed development. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may submit a written request to the City to allow the transferred land to be located within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

(8) The applicant identifies a proposed source of funding for the very low income units not later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, final parcel map, or residential development application.

(9) Any land that is donated to the City pursuant to Chapter 17.35 SCCC (“Park and Recreational Land”) is ineligible for a density bonus pursuant to this subsection.

(l) Child Care Facilities. When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of this chapter and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the City shall grant either (1) an additional density bonus for an amount of square footage of residential area equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility, or (2) an additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

(1) The City shall require that as a condition of approving the housing development:

(A) The child care facility shall remain in operation as long as or longer than the period of time the density bonus units are required to remain affordable.

(B) The children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or children of families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City reserves the right to deny a requested density bonus concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities.

(m) Continued Affordability. An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure, continued affordable housing costs and affordable rents of all affordable density bonus units for fifty-five (55) years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing, assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1766 § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. 1933 § 2, 1-13-15).

18.78.040 Concessions and incentives.
(a) An applicant for a density bonus pursuant to this chapter may submit to the City a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests pursuant to this section. The City shall grant a concession or incentive requested by the applicant, up to the quantity specified in Table II, unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

(1) The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rents; or

(2) The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5, as may be amended, upon the public health and safety or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or

(3) The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or

(4) The concession or incentive would be contrary to State or Federal law; or

(5) The applicant has already received the maximum quantity of incentives listed in Table II.

(b) The applicant shall be entitled to receive the following number of incentives or concessions set forth in Table II. For the purpose of calculating the number of incentives or concessions, the percentage of affordable units an applicant must provide in order to receive the incentives or concessions shall be the percentage of units provided in addition to any applicable inclusionary housing requirement.

Table II

Density Bonus Concessions and Initiatives

Household Income of Units

Percent of Units

Concessions and Incentives

Very Low Income

5%

1

10%

2

15%

3

Low Income

10%

1

20%

2

30%

3

Moderate Income Units in Common Interest Development

10%

1

20%

2

30%

3

(c) Parking Concessions and Incentives. An applicant may request parking incentives or concessions, to provide parking at a ratio below the ratios specified in SCCC 18.78.080, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.

(d) Incentives for Condominium Conversion. When an applicant for the conversion of apartments to condominiums agrees to provide at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the total units of the proposed condominium to persons and families of low or moderate income, or fifteen percent (15%) of the total units of the proposed condominium to lower income households, and agrees to pay administrative costs incurred by the City pursuant to this section, the approving body shall either (1) grant a density bonus, or (2) provide other incentives or equivalent financial value.

(1) The approving body may place reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value as appropriate, including, but not limited to, continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households.

(2) An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this subsection (d) if the apartments provided for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were previously provided. Nothing in this chapter shall require the City to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.

(e) This section does not require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly-owned land by the City, or the waiver/reduction of fees or dedication requirements.

(f) The granting of an incentive or concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zone change, or other discretionary approval, and shall be processed in conjunction with the housing development application. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1933 § 3, 1-13-15).

18.78.050 Application requirements and review.
An application pursuant to this chapter shall be processed concurrently with a rezoning to planned development pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.54 SCCC.

An applicant/developer proposing a housing development pursuant to this chapter may submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development. Applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to identify application issues. A preliminary application shall include the following information:

(a) A brief description of the proposed development, including the total number of units, target units, and density bonus units proposed.

(b) The zoning and general plan designations and assessors parcel number(s) of the project site.

(c) A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway and parking layout.

(d) If an additional incentive(s) is requested, the application should describe why the additional incentive(s) is necessary to provide the target units, in accordance with SCCC 18.78.030.

(e) Justification for the Granting of the Density Bonus and/or Other Incentives. Within a maximum of ninety (90) days of receipt of the preliminary application, the City shall provide to an applicant/developer a letter which identifies project issues of concern, and the procedures for compliance with this chapter and other applicable chapters, City codes, ordinances, and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) [Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.]. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1933 § 4, 1-13-15).

18.78.060 Density bonus housing agreement.
Applicants requesting a density bonus shall enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the City in a form prepared and approved by the City Attorney. Such density bonus housing agreement shall be subject to the following:

(a) The agreement will confirm continued affordability of all low and very low income units that qualified the applicant for the reward of the density bonus for fifty-five (55) years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

(b) For for-sale units, the density bonus housing agreement shall include an equity sharing provision, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law, as follows:

(1) Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy, as defined in subsection (b)(2) of this section, and its proportionate share of appreciation, as defined in subsection (b)(3) of this section, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote home ownership.

(2) For purposes of this subsection, the City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price, plus the amount of the down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

(3) The City’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the City’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

(4) If there is any direct financial contribution from the City through participation in the cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the City may limit the sale price of the unit upon resale in accordance with the terms and conditions of that direct financial contribution.

(c) The completed density bonus housing agreement, or a memorandum in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, shall be recorded and the conditions filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of the target units. The approval and construction shall take place prior to the final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for the parcels or units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest.

(d) The density bonus housing agreement shall include all of the following provisions:

(1) The total number of units approved for the housing development, including the number of target units.

(2) A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable sales price and affordable housing cost.

(3) The location, unit size(s), and number of bedrooms of target units.

(4) Tenure of use restrictions for target units.

(5) A schedule of completion and occupancy of target units.

(6) A description of the additional incentive(s) or financial incentives equivalent being provided by the City.

(7) A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement).

(e) In the case of for-sale housing developments, the density bonus agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period:

(1) Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible very low or lower, or moderate income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified residents as defined by this chapter, depending on the type of density bonus.

(2) Target units shall be initially owner-occupied by eligible very low, lower, or moderate income households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior citizen housing developments, depending on the type of density bonus.

(3) The initial purchaser of each target unit shall execute an agreement approved by the City restricting the sale of the target unit during the applicable use restriction period. The agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit and shall contain provisions as the City may require ensuring continued compliance with this chapter and the State density bonus law.

(f) In the case of rental housing developments, the density bonus housing agreement shall provide the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:

(1) Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent level.

(2) The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for qualified tenants.

(3) Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

(4) Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying the target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. 1933 § 5, 1-13-15).

18.78.070 Waiver of development standards.
An applicant may submit a written proposal to the Director of Planning and Inspection for the waiver or reduction of development standards. The approving body may grant the request if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving body, based upon substantial evidence, that the proposed waiver or reduction is necessary to make the housing development economically feasible, and that without the waiver the development standards would physically preclude the construction of the development that meets all other legal requirements, subject to the limitations and requirements of this section.

(a) Nothing in this chapter shall require the City to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5, as may be amended, upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

(b) Nothing in this chapter shall require the City to waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources.

(c) Nothing in this chapter shall require the City to waive or reduce the development standards if the waiver or reduction would be contrary to State or Federal law.

(d) Any discretionary action for a reduction or waiver of development standards shall be processed in conjunction with the housing development application, and shall be reviewed before the approving body.

(e) A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled. (Ord. 1933 § 6, 1-13-15).

18.78.080 Maximum parking requirements.
(a) Parking Ratios. Upon request of the applicant, the following maximum parking ratios shall apply, inclusive of ADA and guest parking, to the entire housing development subject to this chapter:

(1) One on-site parking space for zero- or one-bedroom units.

(2) Two on-site parking spaces for two- or three-bedroom units.

(3) Two and one-half on-site parking spaces for units with more than three bedrooms.

(b) Parking Calculations and Types. All parking calculations for the development resulting in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Required parking may be provided by uncovered parking, but may not rely on street parking. (Ord. 1933 § 7, 1-13-15).

18.78.090 Exclusions.
(a) An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions under this chapter if the housing development is proposed on any property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income; subject to any other form of governmental rent or price control; or occupied by lower or very low income households, unless the proposed housing development replaces those units, and either of the following applies:

(1) The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced pursuant to this paragraph, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in SCCC 18.78.030(a).

(2) Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager’s unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household.

(b) An applicant for an incentive or density bonus for a condominium conversion pursuant to SCCC 18.78.040(d) shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions under this chapter if the condominium project is proposed on any property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income; subject to any other form of governmental rent or price control; or occupied by lower or very low income households, unless the proposed condominium project replaces those units, and either of the following applies:

(1) The proposed condominium project, inclusive of the units replaced, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in SCCC 18.78.040(d).

(2) Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager’s unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household.

(c) For the purposes of this section, “replace” shall mean either of the following:

(1) If any dwelling units described in subsections (a) or (b) of this section are occupied on the date an application is deemed complete, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size or type, or both, to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those households in occupancy. For unoccupied dwelling units described in subsection (a) of this section in a development with occupied units, the proposed housing development shall provide units of equivalent size or type, or both, to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category in the same proportion of affordability as the occupied units. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five (55) years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to SCCC 18.78.060(b).

(2) If all dwelling units described in subsection (a) of this section have been vacated or demolished within the five-year period preceding the application, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size or type, or both, as existed at the highpoint of those units in the five-year period preceding the application to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those persons and families in occupancy at that time, if known. If the incomes of the persons and families in occupancy at the highpoint is not known, then one-half of the required units shall be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, very low income persons and families and one-half of the required units shall be made available for rent at affordable housing costs to, and occupied by, low income persons and families. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five (55) years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to SCCC 18.78.060(b). (Ord. 1933 § 8, 1-13-15).

Chapter 18.80
SIGN REGULATIONS
Sections:

Article I. General

18.80.010    Sign regulations established.

18.80.020    Definitions.

18.80.030    Advertising prohibited on public property generally – Exceptions.

18.80.040    Area of signs.

18.80.050    Height limitation.

18.80.060    Location limitation.

18.80.070    Clearance from utility lines, etc.

18.80.080    Identification and information required to be posted on signs.

18.80.090    Design and location generally.

18.80.100    Traffic hazard – Signs constituting same prohibited, enumerated.

18.80.110    Maintenance required – Generally.

18.80.120    Materials required in construction.

18.80.130    Vehicular signs restricted.

18.80.140    Nonconforming signs.

18.80.150    Reserved.

18.80.160    Subdivision signs.

18.80.170    Prohibition of temporary signs on public property and in the public right-of-way.

18.80.180    Political signs.

18.80.190    Agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts.

18.80.200    Residential, professional, office, and public building zoning districts.

18.80.210    Planned unit district.

18.80.220    Outdoor advertising signs (billboards).

18.80.221    Outdoor advertising display relocation agreements.

Article II. Permits

18.80.230    Sign permits required.

18.80.240    Fees – Generally.

18.80.250    Reserved.

18.80.260    Application required.

18.80.270    Issuance.

18.80.280    Temporary sign permits.

18.80.290    Certain signs exempted.

18.80.300    Repealed.

18.80.310    Inspection of premises and signs prior to and during erection.

18.80.320    Violations – Notice – Compliance.

18.80.330    Violations – Removal of signs for certain violations.

18.80.340    Violations – Power of removal of Building Official.

18.80.350    Violations – Costs of removal, alteration, etc., to be paid by owner – Disposition of signs removed by City.

18.80.360    Violations – Conditions or circumstances under which allowed.

18.80.370    Violations – Revocation.

Article III. Outdoor Advertising Structures

18.80.380    Adjacent to landscaped freeways – Definitions.

18.80.390    Outdoor advertising structures prohibited generally.

18.80.400    Removal of illegal advertising structures.

Article I. General

18.80.010 Sign regulations established.
Regulations are hereby established governing the type and location for signs and other advertising media within the various zoning districts of the City.

The objectives of these sign regulations are:

(a) To encourage excellence of design which will enhance the aesthetics of the community and provide signing compatible with the intended character of the zoning district in which the sign is to be located and also compatible with adjacent zoning districts.

(b) To alleviate or prevent visual blight, sign clutter and congestion on City street frontages.

(c) To promote traffic safety and minimize distractions to motorists.

(d) To provide a reasonable amount of sign identification for each business, commercial or industrial enterprise. (Zoning Ord. § 40-1; Ord. 1886 § 1, 5-10-11).

18.80.020 Definitions.
(a) “Billboard” shall mean a sign which directs attention to a commercial enterprise, including, but not limited to, a business, product, or commodity conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere (off-site) than upon the same premises where such sign is displayed.

(b) “Building Official” shall mean the officer or chief building inspector charged with the administration and enforcement of appropriate provisions of this Code, or his/her regularly authorized deputy.

(c) “Display surface” shall mean the area made available by the sign structure or building surface for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.

(d) “Electric sign” shall mean any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.

(e) “Ground sign” shall mean a sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground or partially supported and attached to any building, other structure or foundation on the ground.

(f) “Incombustible material” shall mean any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred (1,200) degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five minutes and which will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. Tests shall be made as specified in the Uniform Building Code Standards.

(g) “Marquee” shall mean a permanent roofed structure, attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property.

(h) “Monument sign” means a freestanding sign supported on the ground essentially along its entire base or width of the sign display face(s).

(i) “Nonstructural trim” shall mean the moulding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, cutouts or letters, and walkways which are attached to the sign structure.

(j) “Plastic materials” shall mean those made wholly or principally from standardized plastics listed and described in the Uniform Building Code Standards.

(k) “Pole sign” shall mean a sign which is supported by one upright or pole in or upon the ground and not supported or attached to any building or structure.

(l) “Projection” shall mean the distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the building line.

(m) “Projecting sign” shall mean a sign other than a wall sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.

(n) “Roof sign” shall mean a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure.

(o) “Sign” shall mean any visual medium (including, when applicable, its structure and component parts) which is used (or intended to be used) (1) to attract attention to a commercial enterprise, activity or product or (2) to announce, declare, demonstrate or attract the attention of the public.

(p) “Sign structure” shall mean the supports, uprights, braces, and framework of the sign.

(q) “Temporary sign” shall mean and include any sign as defined in subsection (o) of this section. Examples of temporary signs include, but are not limited to, any sign, display board, handbill, poster, banner, pennant, streamer, whirligig, valance or advertising display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials (with or without structural frame). A temporary sign is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.

(r) “Wall sign” shall mean any sign painted on, attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of such sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall. (Ord. 1687 §§ 2, 3, 5-7-96; Zoning Ord. § 40-2).

18.80.030 Advertising prohibited on public property generally – Exceptions.
No merchandise shall be displayed and no person shall attach or otherwise affect, mark, post, paste, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten or leave a card, banner, handbill, sign, sticker, poster or advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done on any street, curb, sidewalk, alley, billboard, fence, post, tree, pole, hydrant, bridge, real property or personal property or other structure within the city except as may be required or permitted by this title or ordinances of the City or laws of the State of California. (Zoning Ord. § 40-3).

18.80.040 Area of signs.
The area of a sign shall be calculated to include all lettering, working, and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background material, surface or color.

Wall signs painted or attached to the exposed face of the wall shall include all lettering, working and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background of a different material or color than the remainder of the wall of the building to which it is affixed or upon which it is painted.

Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle, circle, square or triangle which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters or symbols.

For the purpose of this chapter, the advertising surface of both sides of double-faced signs shall be used in determining sign area. (Zoning Ord. § 40-4).

18.80.050 Height limitation.
No portion of any sign shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet above the ground level, except for building signs for buildings which are four stories or greater in height and which are located in other than residential zoning districts. On such taller buildings, not more than one sign may be placed on each side of the building above the ground floor level, and it shall be designed to not extend beyond the edge or the top of that building wall. (Zoning Ord. § 40-5).

18.80.060 Location limitation.
(a) Signs shall not extend over public rights-of-way except in those zoning districts where the building setback line and the property line are the same.

(b) Sign structures, including signs other than monument signs, are prohibited in those areas located between street right-of-way/plan lines and building setback lines; provided, however, that sign structures may be erected on the building side of a setback line and symmetrically mounted pole signs may project equally on both sides of said building setback line. Any such sign shall not project over any street plan line or property line.

(c) Monument signs not exceeding seven feet in height, six feet in width, and sixty (60) square feet in total sign area are allowed, at a minimum setback of four feet behind property line or plan line, when erected in substantial landscape planter areas. The height of such signs shall be measured from the top of the nearest public street curb. Signs located near street corners and driveways may be referred to the City’s traffic engineer for determinations regarding appropriate vehicle sight clearances.

(d) No projecting sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet over public sidewalks or less than fourteen (14) feet where it extends over any vehicular driveway or parking area. Any projecting sign attached and supported under marquees shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet.

(e) A projecting sign shall not extend nearer any curb line than two feet.

(f) No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such a manner as to prevent free passage from one part of such roof to any other part thereof or interfere with openings in such roof.

(g) No wall sign shall project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. No wall sign shall extend more than twelve (12) inches from the wall surface.

(h) Any wall sign erected over any public right-of-way shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet, except as follows:

(1) Any wall sign painted on a window may be located less than eight feet over the sidewalk.

(2) Any wall sign which does not project more than three inches may be located less than eight feet over the sidewalk.

(i) The location of any clock sign on a public right-of-way shall be approved by the City Council prior to installation. (Zoning Ord. § 40-6).

18.80.070 Clearance from utility lines, etc.
No permit for any sign shall be issued and no sign shall be erected which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from overhead utility lines maintained under regulation of General Order 95 of the California Public Utilities Commission, the rules prescribed by California Penal Code Section 385, and the orders of the Division of Industrial Safety of the State. (Zoning Ord. § 40-7).

18.80.080 Identification and information required to be posted on signs.
(a) Every sign hereafter erected shall have painted or labeled in a conspicuous place thereon in letters readily visible and readable from the ground line, the date of erection, the permit number, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith. In addition, any electrical sign or part thereof enclosed with glass, plastic, metal, or similar material shall bear a label of the Underwriters Laboratory or its equivalent.

(b) Sign identification may be placed on the sign structure or supports eight feet to twelve (12) feet above the ground surface, or as otherwise indicated by Building Official in case of impossibility of compliance.

(c) Freestanding signs shall have clearly legible property address numbers, at least six inches in height, permanently affixed and prominently displayed. Any such area used for address numbers shall not be counted within the allowance for sign area. (Zoning Ord. § 40-8).

18.80.090 Design and location generally.
(a) Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.

(b) A comprehensive sign program designed to equitably proportion sign areas in accordance with SCCC 18.80.190 and 18.80.200 shall be required for all developments with a group of five or more occupancies located on a single plot of land.

(c) Subject to the limitations on the total sign area permitted under SCCC 18.80.190 and 18.80.200, hereinafter, each property in separate ownership which has the required minimum street frontage shall be permitted one freestanding pole or ground sign. One additional pole or ground sign shall be permitted for each three hundred (300) feet of street frontage in addition to the required minimum street frontage or for each separate leasehold which meets the minimum street frontage requirements.

(d) Rotating signs, moving signs with flashing lights, running lights, or blinking lights are prohibited in all zoning districts.

(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any sign or lighting which creates a glare nuisance to surrounding or adjacent private and public property.

(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent, or immoral matter.

(g) No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape.

(h) No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or to a fire escape.

(i) No sign shall obstruct any window to such an extent that any light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by any law or ordinance of the City. (Zoning Ord. § 40-9).

18.80.100 Traffic hazard – Signs constituting same prohibited, enumerated.
No sign provided for in this chapter shall be erected, maintained, used, displayed, or permitted when any of the following provisions are applicable thereto:

(a) When the location of any sign is such as to unreasonably interfere with traffic sight distances, or such as to interfere with nearby residences, or traffic flow.

(b) When the illumination thereon is brilliant, scintillating, or flashing, and is visible from any highway and so positioned as to blind or dazzle the vision of travelers on such highways.

(c) If visible from any highway and simulating any directional, warning, danger, or information sign otherwise permitted by law, or if likely to be mistaken for any such permitted sign, or if intended or likely to be construed as giving warning to traffic, such as by the use of the words “stop,” “danger,” or “slow down.”

(d) If visible from any highway and displaying any red, blinking, or intermittent light likely to be mistaken for a warning or danger signal.

(e) If within the right-of-way of any street, alley, or highway.

(f) The exterior use of pennants, streamers, whirligigs and all similar displays is prohibited, unless a temporary sign permit is first obtained therefor in accordance with SCCC 18.80.280 and upon payment of the permit fee prescribed in SCCC 18.80.240. The duration of any such permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days.

(1) Additional applications for any such temporary sign permit for the same property and address shall not be applied for, nor permit granted therefor, within six months from and after the date of expiration of the preceding permit.

(2) Exception: The above provision shall not apply if ownership of said property has changed since issuance of the preceding permit. (Zoning Ord. § 40-10).

18.80.110 Maintenance required – Generally.
All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in proper state of preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. There shall be no nails, tacks, or wires protruding from the sign or other advertising structure.

The surface of the ground under and about every freestanding sign shall be kept clear of weeds, rubbish and flammable waste material. (Zoning Ord. § 40-11).

18.80.120 Materials required in construction.
All signs and sign structures erected in Fire Zone No. 1 within the city shall have structural members of incombustible materials.

Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this Code, except as provided in this section.

Roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs and signs on marquees shall be constructed of incombustible material when mounted on roof or wall surfaces required to be of fire resistive materials by the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Santa Clara. Weatherproof materials are required for all other signs except temporary ones.

No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs.

Nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof. (Zoning Ord. § 40-12).

18.80.130 Vehicular signs restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any vehicle on a street or on private property or public property as a nonmoving sign display, except in conformance with the provisions of this article and only after obtaining a sign permit in accordance with Article II of this chapter.

Commercial vehicles including buses, taxis, trucks, and the like, moving through City streets shall be exempted from this section. (Zoning Ord. § 40-13).

18.80.140 Nonconforming signs.
(a) Any premises, building, or structure with more than one permanent, existing sign such that the combined sign surface area exceeds that specified in SCCC 18.80.170, 18.80.190, 18.80.200 and 18.80.210 shall be deemed to have a nonconforming sign until a portion thereof is removed as designated by the permittees and the remaining sign surface area shall not exceed that specified in SCCC 18.80.170, 18.80.190, 18.80.200 and 18.80.210.

(b) Every sign which is lawfully in existence but which does not meet all the requirements of this chapter shall be considered to be a nonconforming sign. No nonconforming sign may be structurally altered, increased in area, or relocated unless it is made to comply with all the provisions of this chapter. (Zoning Ord. § 40-14).

18.80.150 Reserved.
(Zoning Ord. § 40-15).

18.80.160 Subdivision signs.
On-site signs shall be permitted in subdivisions for the duration of such subdivision development. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion of construction.

Off-site subdivision signs shall be permitted only in agricultural, commercial, or industrial zoning districts after first securing a use permit. (Zoning Ord. § 40-16).

18.80.170 Prohibition of temporary signs on public property and in the public right-of-way.
(a) No person shall paint, mark or write on, post, attach, or otherwise affix, any sign to or upon any public property, including, but not limited to, any public building, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, fence, wall, public playground equipment and/or facilities, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, pole for electric light or power or telephone or telegraph (or other communication service) or trolley wire (or wire appurtenance thereof) or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, street sign or traffic sign.

Additionally, no temporary sign shall be placed, posted or otherwise affixed in the public right-of-way, except as provided in SCCC 18.80.290 or 18.80.300. The public right-of-way generally extends behind the sidewalk, if one is present.

(b) Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of terrazzo sidewalks (or sidewalks of similar construction) or sidewalks permanently colored by an admixture in the material of which the same are constructed and for which the City has granted a written permit.

(c) Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a metal plaque or plate or placement of individual letters or figures in a sidewalk commemorating an historical, cultural, or artistic event, location or personality for which the City has granted a written permit.

(d) Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers upon curbs done under permits issued by the City or painting on curbs by governmental agencies. (Ord. 1687 § 4, 5-7-96; Zoning Ord. § 40-17).

18.80.180 Political signs.
(a) It is the intent of this section to provide minimum regulations regarding the posting, maintenance and removal of political signs. Political signs are typically temporary signs and, subject to the restrictions on their location contained in SCCC 18.80.170 (pertaining to public property and the public right-of-way) and the restrictive provisions of this section, are permitted in all zoning districts. Although political signs are temporary signs, temporary sign permits do not have to be obtained. The provisions of this section do not apply to billboards (which are subject to SCCC 18.80.220) or to political signs inside of a building, even if visible outside the building.

(b) A “political sign” is a sign announcing, supporting or opposing a candidate or issue in connection with any national, State or local election.

(c) Political signs may be placed on private property with the consent of the property owner (or person entitled to possession) or their authorized agent, if any, subject to the following:

(1) They will not be placed in a manner that obstructs either vehicular traffic (either by physical obstruction or obstruction of sight lines) or pedestrian traffic. They shall not present a physical danger to persons or property.

(2) Except for legal billboards, no political sign shall be larger than sixteen (16) square feet.

(3) Political signs shall not be placed more than ninety (90) days prior to the election to which they pertain. They are to be removed within ten days after the election. In the event that the election is a primary election, or similar preliminary election, the successful candidates for the later election may leave their signs in place to be removed within ten days after the general or run-off election. The City may cause removal of said signs remaining after expiration of the appropriate ten-day period. (Ord. 1687 § 4, 5-7-96; Zoning Ord. § 40-17.1).

18.80.190 Agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts.
Any signs advertising the use of the premises upon which it is located or identifying said premises shall be permitted for each establishment in any agricultural, commercial or industrial zoning district when the same complies with the following conditions:

The total area of all signs permitted on any building site, property, or individual establishment shall not exceed the largest of the formulas listed for the appropriate zoning district.

(a) Commercial Districts (CN, CC, CT, CD, and CP).

(1) Two square feet for each one foot of street frontage devoted to a business use. Total sign area shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet by this method.

(2) Three square feet of sign area for each one hundred (100) square feet of building ground floor area. Total sign area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet by this method.

(3) Six square feet of sign area for each one hundred (100) square feet of building ground floor area if the building or parking contiguous to any of such buildings abuts more than one public street; provided, that no more than three square feet of sign area for each one hundred (100) square feet of building ground floor area shall be erected facing any one of such public streets.Total sign area shall not exceed nine hundred (900) square feet by this method.

(4) Three-quarters of a square foot of sign area for each one hundred (100) square feet of lot area devoted exclusively to such commercial or industrial land use. Total sign area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet by this method.

(b) In shopping centers, in addition to the above, one double-faced sign having an area not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet on any one face may be used where such sign is used to identify a group of five or more stores located on a single plot of land containing at least the minimum off-street parking area prescribed by the zoning laws of the City.

(c) Industrial and Agricultural Districts (MP, ML, MH and A). One square foot for each one foot of street frontage devoted to a business use. Total sign area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. No single sign area shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet. (Zoning Ord. § 40-18).

18.80.200 Residential, professional, office, and public building zoning districts.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the maximum permissible total sign area for signs erected in a residential zoning district shall not exceed four square feet per parcel of real property upon which such is located. In residential zoning districts such signs shall pertain only to the sale, lease or rental of the property upon which the sign is located.

(a) Multiple Residential District. One-quarter square foot for each one foot of street frontage devoted to a residential use. Total maximum sign area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Where property is contiguous to and abuts more than one public street the maximum permitted sign area based on the principal street frontage may be increased fifty percent (50%); provided, that not more than one-half the permitted sign area shall be erected facing any one such public street. Total sign area shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet by this method.

(b) Professional Office (OA), Public, Quasi-Public, and Public Park or Recreation (B) Zoning Districts. One-half square foot for each one foot of street frontage devoted to a professional office use. Total maximum sign area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Where property is contiguous to and abuts more than one public street the maximum permitted sign area based on the principal street frontage may be increased fifty percent (50%); provided, that no more than one-half of the permitted sign area shall be erected facing any one such public street. Total sign area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet by this method. Directory panels indicating tenancy are not included in the above totals, provided each name panel does not exceed six inches by thirty-six (36) inches.

(c) General Office District (OG). The total maximum sign area shall not exceed the larger of the formulas listed under subsection (b) of this section. (Zoning Ord. § 40-19).

18.80.210 Planned unit district.
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution approving the particular planned unit development, or a use permit issued in conjunction therewith, signs hereafter erected in planned unit zoning districts shall be governed by the rules applicable to the zoning districts as set forth in SCCC 18.80.200. (Zoning Ord. § 40-20).

18.80.220 Outdoor advertising signs (billboards).
(a) Intent. The City of Santa Clara has had a policy since 1978 (Ordinance No. 1365) to limit the number of outdoor advertising signs (also commonly referred to as “billboards”) to no more than sixty (60) physically in place in order to improve the quality of urban life for its citizens. It had been determined that billboards, by their very nature, wherever located and however constructed, constitute visual clutter and blight to the appearance of the City. It has also been determined that billboards impede traffic safety by unduly distracting motorists and pedestrians, creating traffic hazards, and reducing the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public.

The City reasserts its policy that the obtrusive nature of billboards makes it imperative that the City control the number, size, and location of billboards. It is the continued position of the City Council that billboards are not permitted within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City unless a particular billboard location has been approved. In the absence of a billboard location receiving affirmative approval from the City Council, the application was denied.

It is the City Council’s intent hereby to permit no more billboards within the city, and to thereby restrict the presence of billboards in the City by limiting the number of billboards to those physically in place or for which approvals have been granted as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Additionally, as billboards are physically removed or destroyed, it is the intent of the City Council that the number of billboards will be permanently reduced by that number. As of March 21, 1989, there are forty-eight (48) billboards physically in place. There are two signs which have been treated historically as directional signs, and there is one approval for a directional sign yet to be constructed. It is the intent of the City Council to encompass all signs which conceivably could be construed as billboards within the definition of billboard. Consequently, the total of fifty-one (51) billboards is the starting point and ceiling for billboards at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

It is the express intent of the City Council to permit no further billboards within the city and to reduce their number through attrition rather than pay compensation pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 (commencing with Section 5400) of Chapter 2 of Division III of the California Business and Professions Code, which provisions require compensation for billboards removed at governmental insistence.

(b) General Provisions. Billboards are subject to the following:

(1) Existing billboards shall not be relocated on the property.

(2) There shall be no moving, rotating, or revolving signs or panels.

(3) Signs are to be painted, repaired, backed with lattice when single-faced, and panels aligned as appropriate, and maintained in good condition.

(4) The signs and sites of signs are to be maintained in a clean condition, and landscaping is required where such is practical.

(5) In no event shall the total of billboards in the entire City exceed fifty-one (51).

(6) There are currently fifty-one (51) billboards in place or approved for construction. If and when a billboard, either nonconforming or with a permit, is physically destroyed or in a state of disrepair (fifty percent (50%) or more of its reasonable construction value in either case), dismantled, removed, ceases to be used as a billboard for at least one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar days, or is in any way terminated for any reason, the maximum number of billboards permitted to be in the City shall be reduced by that extent. (Zoning Ord. § 40-21).

18.80.221 Outdoor advertising display relocation agreements.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions in SCCC 18.80.220 and 18.80.390, and pursuant to Section 5412 of the California Business and Professions Code, the City of Santa Clara may enter into agreements with advertising display owners to provide for the relocation of outdoor advertising displays.

(b) The City Council, following the review and recommendation from the Planning Commission, may approve the relocation of advertising displays relocated pursuant to agreements made under this section. (Ord. 1795 § 1, 8-24-04).

Article II. Permits

18.80.230 Sign permits required.
No sign shall be erected, re-erected, constructed, altered or maintained within the city except as provided by this chapter and until a sign permit for the same has been issued by the Building Official. A separate sign permit shall be required for each sign except temporary political signs do not need a permit. An electrical permit shall be required for any connection to an electrical sign. (Zoning Ord. § 40-22).

18.80.240 Fees – Generally.
With the exception of governmental signs, a fee for each sign permit shall be paid to the Building Official according to the sign permit fees established from time to time by City Council resolution. (Zoning Ord. § 40-23).

18.80.250 Reserved.
(Zoning Ord. § 40-24).

18.80.260 Application required.
Any application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the Building Official. (Zoning Ord. § 40-25).

18.80.270 Issuance.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to investigate the same, and if it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and of the Building Code, the Electrical Code, and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the City, he shall then issue the sign permit. If the work authorized has not been started within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance of such permit or a time extension obtained, such permit shall become null and void. (Zoning Ord. § 40-26).

18.80.280 Temporary sign permits.
(a) Subject to all other requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, total allowable sign square footage, height limitations, setback or plan line requirements, fees, aesthetics and traffic safety, permits may be issued for temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be limited to one square foot per parcel per linear foot of frontage on a public street, to a maximum total of six hundred (600) square feet with no one sign exceeding two hundred (200) square feet. These restrictions apply to all temporary signs, including interior and exterior window signs.

(b) If satisfied upon investigation as to the safety, compatibility and aesthetics of a proposed temporary sign, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve and issue the sign permit. Such permit shall be for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.

(c) Upon an application demonstrating a need to display the temporary sign for longer than the original permit duration and payment of a fee in the same amount as for the original permit, the Zoning Administrator may extend the period specified in the preceding section for an additional thirty (30) days after an inspection of the safety and condition of repair of such sign.

(d) All other necessary permits, including but not limited to building permits, must be secured by the applicant. (Zoning Ord. § 40-27; Ord. 1886 § 2, 5-10-11).

18.80.290 Certain signs exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following signs:

(a) Traffic or municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and emergency signs, and, with prior City approval, metal directional signs to locations of historical, cultural or artistic significance.

(b) Temporary signs used exclusively for advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which said signs are located, provided the signs are not located on public property or in a public right-of-way and the area of such signs on said premises does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, where said premises is located in any agricultural, commercial or industrial zoning district or multifamily zoned property with twenty-five (25) or more dwelling units, and four square feet where said premises is located in any other residential, professional or planned unit zoning district.

(c) Maintenance of a legal sign by painting, repainting or cleaning thereof, or the changing of the advertising copy or message thereon shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit unless a structural change is made.

(d) Signs affixed or painted upon public or private vehicles, except as restricted in SCCC 18.80.130.

(e) Memorial signs or tablets, erected by governmental historical agencies, or names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into a masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible letters and affixed flat against the wall of such building.

(f) Signs used exclusively for regulating on-premises traffic and parking when said signs are less than twelve (12) square feet in area.

(g) Political signs which comply with SCCC 18.80.180. (Ord. 1687 § 5, 5-7-96; Zoning Ord. § 40-28; Ord. 1886 § 3, 5-10-11).

18.80.300 Special permits relative to civic, political, charitable, or educational, etc., groups – Conditions of issuance.
Repealed by Ord. 1886. (Zoning Ord. § 40-29).

18.80.310 Inspection of premises and signs prior to and during erection.
All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official. Footing inspections will be required for all ground signs.

Electric signs shall be inspected before or during erection.

All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the Building Official. (Zoning Ord. § 40-30).

18.80.320 Violations – Notice – Compliance.
Whenever a sign is found to be erected or maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other ordinance or law, the Building Official shall order that such sign be altered, repaired, reconstructed, demolished or removed as may be appropriate to abate such condition. Any work required to be done shall, unless a different time is specified, be completed within five days of the date of such order.

Failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order of the Building Official shall constitute a separate offense. (Zoning Ord. § 40-31).

18.80.330 Violations – Removal of signs for certain violations.
Signs or other advertising structures shall be removed for the following reasons:

(a) Any sign or other advertising structure which no longer advertises the subject matter shall be removed by the owner or person having beneficial use of the property upon which such sign may be found and within ten days after written notification from the City Manager, or designee.

(b) Any sign which is an immediate peril or menace to the public or any person may be removed summarily (without notice) by the City Manager, or designee.

(c) Any sign found posted, or otherwise affixed, upon any public property or in any public right-of-way, or in violation of the provisions of this Chapter 18.80 SCCC may be removed summarily by employees of the City. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof and the City Manager, or designee, is authorized to effect the collection of said cost.

(d) Any sign summarily removed shall be stored for at least ten days at the City’s corporation yard. The City Manager, or designee, will attempt to notify the responsible party of said removal and advise them of the location of the removed sign(s). Said responsible party, or authorized representative, will be responsible for the actual cost(s) of sign removal prior to retrieval of the removed signs.

(e) The cost(s) for removal shall be deemed a civil debt due and owing the City which may be collected by the appropriate legal means, including, but not limited to, the provisions or SCCC 1.05.070. (Ord. 1687 § 6, 5-7-96; Zoning Ord. § 40-32).

18.80.340 Violations – Power of removal of Building Official.
(a) In the event of noncompliance with SCCC 18.80.320 or 18.80.330, the Building Official is hereby empowered to remove or cause to be removed any sign or other advertising structure which has been constructed, erected, altered, relocated or maintained in violation of this chapter.

(b) For the purpose of removing or destroying any sign erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official or his/her authorized agent may enter upon private property without incurring any liability therefor. (Zoning Ord. § 40-33).

18.80.350 Violations – Costs of removal, alteration, etc., to be paid by owner – Disposition of signs removed by City.
Any cost incurred by the City in the removal, alteration or relocation of any sign pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid by the person owning such sign prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit to such person. Any sign removed by the Building Official shall be stored in the City corporation yard and shall be claimed within ten days after such sign was removed; provided, that any cost of removal has been paid to the City. (Zoning Ord. § 40-34).

18.80.360 Violations – Conditions or circumstances under which allowed.
The Planning Commission may grant a variance from this chapter if the following criteria are found applicable:

(a) Special conditions and extraordinary circumstances applicable to the property involved or its intended uses and which were not created by the owner or his/her tenant and which do not apply generally to other properties with the same land use.

(b) Literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter.

(c) The variance of the sign use corresponds with the land use as set forth in SCCC 18.80.190, 18.80.200, 18.80.210 and 18.80.220 and will not be contrary to or materially detrimental to public interest and welfare or injurious to conforming signs in the City.

(1) The variance to be granted shall be one that will require the least modification of the prescribed regulation and the minimum variance that will accomplish that purpose. (Zoning Ord. § 40-35).

18.80.370 Violations – Revocation.
In any case where the conditions or limitations to the variance granted have not been complied with, the Building Official or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, shall give notice to the permittee that the variance will be revoked.

In any case where a variance has not been used within six months from the date of issuance, such variance shall be null and void. (Zoning Ord. § 40-36).

Article III. Outdoor Advertising Structures

18.80.380 Adjacent to landscaped freeways – Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(a) “Freeway” shall mean any highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right to easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which such owners have only a limited or restricted right or easement of access and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California.

(b) “Landscaped freeway” shall mean any freeway or section thereof which is now or hereafter may be improved on at least one side of the freeway right-of-way by the planting of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental vegetation requiring reasonable and continuing care, upkeep, and maintenance. (Zoning Ord. § 40-37).

18.80.390 Outdoor advertising structures prohibited generally.
No billboard, advertising sign or display shall be placed, constructed or maintained on property adjacent to any landscaped freeway within the city if the advertising thereon is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling along such landscaped freeway or any section thereof or if such billboard, advertising sign or display, when located within five hundred (500) feet of the outer limits of such landscaped freeway, can be viewed from the main traveled portion of such landscaped freeway or if such billboard, advertising sign or display, because of its location, size, nature or type, constitutes or tends to constitute a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon the landscaped freeway or creates a condition which endangers the safety of persons or property thereon. (Zoning Ord. § 40-38).

18.80.400 Removal of illegal advertising structures.
Any billboard, advertising sign or display which is now or hereafter shall be erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be removed within one year from the effective date hereof or within one year from the date when the project for the landscaping of a freeway or any section thereof shall have been completed or accepted and the character of such section shall have been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway, whichever is later. (Zoning Ord. § 40-39).

Chapter 18.82
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sections:

18.82.010  Activities prohibited.

18.82.020  Storage of commercial vehicles.

18.82.030  Other information applicable to residential zone districts.

18.82.010 Activities prohibited.
Any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section, when performed, maintained, permitted, or allowed in any of the front yard or side yard areas specified in subsection (b) of this section, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and are unlawful. Every person who creates, maintains, permits, or allows such nuisance upon his/her property or the premises of another who creates, maintains, permits, or allows any such nuisance thereon, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished accordingly.

(a) The following acts are prohibited in the areas specified in subsection (b) of this section:

(1) Aircraft. The parking, storing, keeping, wrecking, dismantling, disassembling, manufacturing, fabricating, building, remodeling, assembling, putting together, repairing, painting, washing, cleaning, or servicing, in any such area, of any airplane or other aircraft, or any part or parts thereof.

(2) Household or Construction Property; Wrecked, Disabled, or Inoperative Vehicles. The parking, storing, or keeping in any such area, for a period of time in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, of any household appliance, other household equipment, machinery, or furniture; or of any motor vehicle that is unregistered with the Department of Motor Vehicles, or is wrecked, dismantled, or inoperable, or of any part thereof; or of any construction equipment, machinery, or materials. Construction equipment, machinery, or materials temporarily kept within such area for and during the improvement of the lot within which such area is situated, or the construction or installation of improvements of facilities therein, are exempt from this prohibition.

(b) The following are the front yard and side yard areas within which the acts above specified in subsection (a) are prohibited.

(1) The front building setback area, the street side yard area, and all other open areas that are visible from the public right-of-way of any interior or corner lot that is situated within any residential district established by or pursuant to the provisions of this title. The items specified in subsection (a) of this section shall only be permitted within entirely enclosed structures or behind six-foot-high fencing in interior side yard and rear yard setback areas. In no case shall these described items be visible from the public right-of-way even when placed in permitted areas.

(c) For purposes of determining whether a motor vehicle or airplane or other item of property has been unlawfully parked, stored, or kept in any area for a period of time in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, the hours during which such is done, maintained, permitted, or allowed shall be deemed consecutive notwithstanding the fact that such property may have been removed from the restricted setback area for an intervening period of time if such intervening period of time is less than seventy-two (72) hours or if the property in question is parked, stored, or kept during such intervening period of time within or upon any public street. (Zoning Ord. § 41-1).

18.82.020 Storage of commercial vehicles.
The storage or parking of a commercial vehicle is hereby prohibited in any of the residential zoning districts, except while loading or unloading or providing a commercial service to a residence in any such zoning district.

For the purpose of this section, a "commercial vehicle" is defined as a vehicle with commercial license plates, that is equipped with dual rear wheels, and is not designed and used for recreational housing purposes. (Zoning Ord. § 41-2).

18.82.030 Other information applicable to residential zone districts.
More information on specific standards for residentially zoned districts can be found in Chapter 18.10 SCCC (R1-6L) through Chapter 18.20 SCCC (R3-36D). (Zoning Ord. § 41-3).

Chapter 18.84
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR
CENTRAL BUSINESS AREA –
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

18.84.010  Central business area – Parking requirements.

18.84.020  Construction permit required.

18.84.010 Central business area – Parking requirements.
The parking requirements for any commercial-downtown zoning district land use on any lot or parcel of land within the central business area may be provided on property, in any commercial-downtown zoning district, within five hundred (500) feet distance of the principal entrance of the use, structure or building for which parking is provided as such distance is measured along the shortest sidewalk or walkway permanently available for public use and provided that the parking facility shall be within the central business area or upon any of the lots or parcels of land outside said area but immediately fronting upon and contiguous to the streets bounding said area, subject to the following conditions.

(a) The commercial land use lot or parcel in the central business area and the parking facility property shall be maintained in the same ownership so long as the parking facility property is necessary to provide the lot or parcel in the central business area with parking to comply with the requirements of this title and any regulations made or actions taken pursuant thereto; provided, however, that if parking facility property is provided in a parking assessment district for which the commercial land use lot or parcel is assessed, the owner of said lot or parcel served by said district need not be required to have an ownership interest in the parking facility property.

(b) The parking facility shall be maintained so long as the commercial use it serves exists or until other parking facilities permitted by this title are provided to satisfy the requirements of this title. Such parking facilities shall not be used for the sale or display of merchandise or for any other purpose except parking.

(c) A plot plan showing the detailed layout of the parking facilities shall be presented to, approved by, and retained by the Director of Public Works, or designee. A copy of said plan and the action taken thereon shall be recorded in the City site-clearance files before the herein described noncontiguous parking will be authorized or is allowed as an exception to the requirement that parking requirements be met on the lot with land use served.

(d) That parking spaces, driveways, curb cuts, and parking facility lot layout shall be in accordance with City standards and shall be shown in detail on said plot plan.

(e) The land upon which such parking facilities are provided that abuts upon a public street right-of-way shall be reserved for landscaping and landscaped to a depth of at least ten feet of said street right-of-way and of any plan line, with openings for walkway or drive purposes in accordance with City standards. An additional five percent of the area of the remainder of the parking lot shall be devoted to landscaping. All planted areas shall be maintained in good growing condition by the owner, and adequate water lines to maintain all of the plantings shall be provided and maintained by him. A masonry or concrete wall, at least four feet high, shall be built and maintained by the owner on the land on which such parking facilities are provided and on a line no part of which is less than ten feet from any public street, right-of-way, or plan line with openings for walkway or driveway purposes in accordance with City standards. The land on which such parking facilities are provided that abuts upon land in a residentially zoned district shall be fenced to a height of six feet except that both the fence height and the fence material for that portion of the fence extending from a point at least twenty (20) feet from any public street right-of-way and any plan line to the aforesaid masonry or concrete wall shall be the same as the said wall. Every planted area, water facility, fence and wall shall be shown on said plot plan with any walkway or driveway approach, and every parking facility shall be maintained by the owner thereof in accordance with the approved plot plan.

(f) Adequate lighting facilities shall be established and maintained on the parking facility lot by the owner thereof and shall be shown on the plot plan. Any such lighting shall be directed and maintained so as not to interfere with persons using any public street or improvement or to unnecessarily interfere with the use and enjoyment of property of any person.

(g) The lot on which such parking facilities are provided shall not be used for advertising, except that a sign or signs the combined area of which does not exceed twelve (12) square feet may be installed to indicate the name of the business or businesses that the parking lot serves, and the responsibility which the property owner assumes or does not assume as to any vehicle using such facilities. Necessary traffic-control signs are also permitted. All signs shall be shown on said plot plan. The area of all signs shall be calculated in accordance with City regulations of such, as are from time to time adopted by the City.

(h) The area reserved for parking on said plot plan shall be paved in accordance with standards established by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, and such paving shall be kept and maintained in a good state of repair by the owner of the parking facility until it is no longer used as such. (Zoning Ord. § 42-1; Ord. 1774 § 2, 8-20-02).

18.84.020 Construction permit required.
A construction permit, to be issued by the building inspection division, shall be required to establish, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, remove or convert any off-street parking facility. (Zoning Ord. § 42-2).

Chapter 18.86
OFF-SITE PARKING PROVISIONS
Sections:

18.86.010    Off-site parking provisions.

18.86.020    Intent.

18.86.030    Administrative off-site parking permit required.

18.86.040    Procedure for granting off-site parking permits by the Zoning Administrator.

18.86.050    Appeals.

18.86.060    Off-site parking permit requirements.

18.86.070    Revocation.

18.86.010 Off-site parking provisions.
Parking requirements for uses in all nonresidential and mixed use zoning districts may be satisfied on other parcels or sites through approval of an off-site parking permit in compliance with the provisions in this title. The off-site parking permit shall be obtained by the owner of the property providing the off-site parking, subject to satisfying the specific parking demands on his/her own site. It is a violation of this Code to operate a parking lot for off-site uses without first obtaining an off-site parking permit and violators will be subject to code enforcement. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

18.86.020 Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for conditionally allowing off-site parking as a means to satisfy on-site parking requirements for any use in nonresidential and mixed use zoning districts. Off-site parking facilitates parking consolidation, and thereby may decrease the amount of impervious surfaces, increase space available for landscaping, and optimize land use efficiency. By allowing the flexibility to provide required parking off site, this title enables more efficient use of existing parking spaces, in concert with enabling nonresidential and mixed use land uses to meet required peak parking demands. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

18.86.030 Administrative off-site parking permit required.
All property owners, except the City, Redevelopment Agency, Housing Authority and Stadium Authority, who seek to provide parking on their parcel or site for a project or use elsewhere, shall first obtain an administrative off-site parking permit. Applications for off-site parking permits shall include the following:

(a) Aerial photo(s) illustrating the boundaries of the parcel or site generating the parking demand and the parcel or site providing the off-site parking. Aerial photo(s) shall clearly indicate the distance between the project site and the off-site parking locations. A pedestrian path of travel between the parcels or sites shall also be illustrated on the aerial photo(s).

(b) A site plan for the site or parcel where the off-site parking will be provided. The site plan shall clearly illustrate all parking spaces, the dimensions of parking spaces, a parking space count, any parking spaces reserved for on-site use(s), driveways, curb cuts, drive aisles, landscaping, signage and light standards.

(c) A written description of the off-site parking, which shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) Days/hours of availability for off-site parking;

(2) The term of the off-site parking availability (e.g., annual, until sale of property, etc.);

(3) Responsible party for off-site parking management;

(4) A written statement acknowledging that designated off-site parking spaces are exclusively for the benefit of off-site uses, and are not available for concurrent use to meet on-site parking demand;

(5) Description/count of stalls available under the off-site parking permit; and

(6) Existing uses on the parcels or sites providing the off-site parking, and the associated parking requirement.

(d) Application submittal fees as indicated in the City’s adopted planning application fee schedule for Zoning Administrator actions. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. 1885 § 1, 4-19-11).

18.86.040 Procedure for granting off-site parking permits by the Zoning Administrator.
The procedure for granting off-site parking permits by the Zoning Administrator shall be administrative; provided, that all of the requirements of this title are met, and all of the following findings can be made by the Zoning Administrator:

(a) That the establishment or operation of the off-site parking, under the circumstances of the particular case, is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(b) That the off-site parking will not be detrimental to any of the following:

(1) The health, safety, peace, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed off-site parking;

(2) Property or improvements in the neighborhood of such proposed off-site parking; or

(3) The general welfare of the City;

(c) That the off-site parking will not impair the integrity and character of the zoning district;

(d) That the off-site parking is in keeping with the purposes and intent of this title; and

(e) That those sites providing parking for events at sports or entertainment venues located north of State Highway 101 are in compliance with the requirements of any City-adopted parking program for this area.

The Zoning Administrator may designate such conditions in connection with the off-site parking permit as deemed necessary to secure the purposes of this title, and may require guarantees and evidence of compliance with conditions. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

18.86.050 Appeals.
In the event the applicant or others affected by the decision are not satisfied with the decision of the Zoning Administrator, within seven calendar days following such decision a written appeal may be made to the Planning Commission. In the event that there is any dissatisfaction with the action of the Planning Commission, the applicant, others affected, or the City Council may appeal the action to the City Council, in accordance with the appeal provisions for use permits set forth in SCCC 18.110.070. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

18.86.060 Off-site parking permit requirements.
Off-site parking permits shall be managed by the owner of the property providing the off-site parking. The property owner responsible for the off-site parking permit shall ensure compliance with the following requirements:

(a) Conditions of Approval.

(b) Adopted Parking Program. Off-site parking permits for sites providing parking for events at sports and entertainment venues located north of State Highway 101 shall comply with all requirements of any City Council-adopted parking program for this area, including payment of any fees necessary to mitigate the costs affiliated with the parking program.

(c) Waste and Recycling Receptacles. Waste and recycling receptacles shall be provided for use by individuals utilizing the off-site parking lot. Any waste or recyclables blown or thrown into the public right-of-way or onto adjacent properties by individuals utilizing the off-site parking lot shall be picked up in a timely manner.

(d) Lighting. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided and maintained on the off-site parking lot, consistent with the site plan approved with the off-site parking permit application. Any such lighting shall be directed and maintained so as not to interfere with persons using any public street or improvement, or unnecessarily with the use and enjoyment of any adjacent property.

(e) Signage. The off-site parking lot shall not be used for advertising, unless otherwise permitted in an adopted parking program. A sign or signs may be installed to indicate the name of the business, activity or event that the parking lot serves. Necessary traffic-control and disclaimer signs are also permitted and not included in the maximum permissible sign area. All signs shall be shown on the site plan. The area of all signs shall be calculated in accordance with this title. The maximum permissible signage shall be one sign per each entrance to the parking lot, with the maximum size of each sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet, excluding the temporary and permanent signage otherwise allowed for the primary use on the property and any temporary signage permitted as a component of an adopted parking program.

(f) Security. For special event parking, security may be required for the duration of the event.

(g) Parking Lot Surfacing. The area reserved for parking and all vehicular and pedestrian access ways shall be appropriately surfaced to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.

(h) Landscaping. Existing site landscaping and landscape features, such as water features and sculptures, shall be maintained consistent with the requirements of this title.

(i) Existing Nonconforming Conditions. For purposes of this chapter, physical conditions on the site that are legally nonconforming with respect to current standards of the applicable zoning district shall not be required to be rectified as a condition of permit approval. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

18.86.070 Revocation.
Any off-site parking permit granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if the basis for approval is found to be invalid or if any of the conditions of approval of such permit are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, or if the Zoning Administrator, in concurrence with the Planning Commission and the City Council, finds that the continuance of the off-site parking permit will endanger the public health, safety or welfare.

At the initiation of the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on any proposed revocation after giving written notice to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit its recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall act on the revocation within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1862 § 1, 8-17-10).

Chapter 18.88
LANDSCAPE PERMIT PROVISIONS
Sections:

18.88.010    Intent.

18.88.020    Applicability.

18.88.030    Incorporation of landscape water efficiency regulations.

18.88.040    Landscape permit and fees required.

18.88.050    Procedure for granting landscape permit by Zoning Administrator.

18.88.060    Appeals.

18.88.070    Revocation.

18.88.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a process for implementation of the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act by promoting use of region-appropriate plants that require minimal supplemental irrigation, and by establishing standards for irrigation efficiency. The landscape permit shall be obtained by owner of the particular area of land upon which landscape design and installation is desired. It is a violation of this Code to install landscaping greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet without first obtaining a landscape permit and violators will be subject to code enforcement. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.020 Applicability.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following landscaping projects:

(1) Projects that are subject to architectural and site approval, building site approval, grading permit or use permit, where cumulative landscaping area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet;

(2) New single-family to two-family dwelling for which a building permit is required where cumulative landscaping area exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; and

(3) New and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to the requirements of the water budget calculations, soil analysis, and audit of existing landscapes.

(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following landscaping projects:

(1) Any project with a landscape area less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet;

(2) Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

(3) Mine reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

(4) Any ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system;

(5) Community gardens or plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public;

(6) Any commercial cultivation or agricultural products, including but not limited to products of farms, orchards, production nurseries, and forests; or

(7) Any project that uses, primarily, recycled water for irrigation purposes. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.030 Incorporation of landscape water efficiency regulations.
The water conservation in landscaping requirements contained in the City’s water service and use rules and regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and use insofar as the same rules and regulations are applicable to promote efficient water use in landscaping by promoting use of region-appropriate plants that require minimal supplemental irrigation, and by establishing standards for irrigation efficiency. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.040 Landscape permit and fees required.
All applicants who desire to design or install landscaping that is cumulatively exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet upon a particular area of land, shall first obtain an administrative landscape permit. Applications for landscape permit shall include the following:

(a) Water-Efficient Design Checklist. A water-efficient design checklist shall serve as a preliminary summation of select landscape components to determine whether the proposed landscape is generally consistent with the water efficiency goals of these rules and regulations.

(b) Landscape and Irrigation Design Plans. Landscape and irrigation design plans are required of landscape projects larger than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, except projects listed under SCCC 18.88.020(b). The landscape and irrigation design plans shall be prepared as follows:

(1) The landscape and irrigation design plans shall incorporate all applicable elements of the water-efficient design elements. Water-efficiency design elements include plant material, irrigation system, soil, conditioning, mulching, hydrozones, and water features. Details regarding the water-efficient design elements can be found in the Water Conservation in Landscaping Section 24 of the Water Service and Use Rules and Regulations;

(2) The landscape and design portion shall be prepared by, and bear the signature of, a licensed landscape architect, a licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized by the State of California to design a landscape; and

(3) The irrigation design portion shall be prepared by, and bear the signature of, a licensed landscape architect, a certified irrigation designer, a licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized by the State of California to design an irrigation system.

(c) Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule. A maintenance schedule shall be established and submitted to the City with the application package or with the landscape installation report. The maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; pressure testing; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system; aerating and de-thatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; replanting of failed plants; weeding; pest control; and removing obstructions to emission devices. Failed plants shall be replaced with the same or functionally equivalent plants that may be size-adjusted as appropriate for the stage of growth of the overall installation.

(d) Landscape Installation Report. Landscape installation assessment for new or rehabilitated landscapes shall be conducted by a certified landscape professional after the landscaping and irrigation system have been installed. The findings of the assessment shall be consolidated into a landscape installation report.

(e) Water Budget Calculations. A water budget calculation shall not be required if the applicant chooses the plant type restriction option. If the applicant chooses to do a water budget calculation option, the water budget must be completed by a certified professional who is authorized by the State of California to complete a water budget. Detailed requirements of the water budget calculations can be found in the Water Conservation in Landscaping Section 24 of the Water Service and Use Rules and Regulations.

(f) Soil Analysis Report. The City shall have discretion to require soil analysis as a condition of approval for any proposed landscape project. A soil analysis report shall document the various characteristics of the soil, and provide recommendations for amendments as appropriate to optimize the productivity and water-efficiency of the soil. A copy of the soil analysis report shall be made available to the landscape professional preparing the landscape and irrigation design plans and to the City.

(g) Landscape Permit Fee. Application submittal fees are as indicated in the City’s adopted planning application fee schedule for zoning administrator actions, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.050 Procedure for granting landscape permit by Zoning Administrator.
The procedure for granting landscape permits by the Zoning Administrator shall be ministerial; provided, that all of the requirements of this title are met, and all of the following findings can be made by the Zoning Administrator:

(a) That the establishment or maintenance of the landscaping, under the circumstances of the particular case, is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(b) That the designed or installed landscaping will not be detrimental to any of the following:

(1) The health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed landscaping;

(2) Property or improvements in the neighborhood of such proposed landscaping; or

(3) The general welfare of the City;

(c) That the designed or installed landscaping will not impair the integrity and character of the zoning district;

(d) That the designed or installed landscaping is in keeping with the purposes and intent of this title; and

(e) That conditions designated by the Zoning Administrator in connection with the landscape permit are deemed necessary to secure the purposes of this title, including any requirements for guarantees and evidence of compliance with such conditions. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.060 Appeals.
In the event the applicant or property owner subject to the landscape permit is not satisfied with the decision of the Zoning Administrator, within seven calendar days following such decision, a written appeal may be made to the Director of Planning and Inspection for a final determination within ten business days of receipt of such appeal. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

18.88.070 Revocation.
Any landscape permit granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator if the basis of approval is found to be invalid or if any of the conditions of approval of such permit are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, or if the Zoning Administrator finds that the continuance of the landscape permit will endanger the public health, safety or welfare. The revocation decision by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed by the applicant or property owner subject to the landscape permit, within seven calendar days following such decision, by a written appeal to the Director of Planning and Inspection for a final determination within ten business days of receipt of such appeal. (Ord. 1871 § 1, 1-11-11).

Chapter 18.90
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
Sections:

18.90.010  Generally – Office created.

18.90.020  Zoning Administrator – Powers and duties.

18.90.030  Procedure for granting modification by Zoning Administrator.

18.90.010 Generally – Office created.
(a) There is hereby created in the City of Santa Clara and within this chapter provision for establishment of an office of Zoning Administrator. The position of Zoning Administrator is also hereby created.

The Zoning Administrator shall perform all of the duties and functions, and exercise all of the powers necessary for the operation of this office, as permitted herein.

(b) The City Planner of the City of Santa Clara is hereby designated the Zoning Administrator of the City of Santa Clara. The Zoning Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, except that if at any later time the City Council wishes to designate a person other than the City Planner as Zoning Administrator, which it can do by resolution, such an action will have no effect upon the status, duties, and responsibilities of the City Planner as such.

(c) The Zoning Administrator may adopt such rules, fees and procedures as are required to uniformly and efficiently carry out the duties and functions specified herein, subject to the approval of the City Council. (Zoning Ord. § 45-1).

18.90.020 Zoning Administrator – Powers and duties.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall have authority to grant the following:

(1) Permit minor modifications of the automobile parking space and loading space requirements.

(2) Permit minor modifications of height, area and yard regulations.

(3) Permit minor modifications of fence, wall and hedge regulations.

(4) Permit minor modifications of other requirements of this title not specifically herein required to be referred to the Planning Commission.

(5) A "minor modification" shall in no event be deemed to be greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dimensions of an area, space, height, or other requirement provided for in this title, and where the proposed alteration or variation exceeds such twenty-five percent (25%) of any requirement, the modification shall be deemed to be a "variance."

(b) In the performance of his/her duties, the Zoning Administrator may informally seek the advisory services of the City's joint project clearance committee, any advisory board or commission, or any department head in City government, including the City Manager, the City Attorney, and other elected or appointed officials. (Zoning Ord. § 45-2).

18.90.030 Procedure for granting modification by Zoning Administrator.
The procedure for granting minor modifications by the Zoning Administrator shall be the same as the procedure for the granting of variances by the Planning Commission, except that no notice of a public hearing shall be required for the granting of such minor modification. In the event the applicant or others affected by the decision are not satisfied with the decision of the Zoning Administrator, within seven days after such decision, a written appeal may be made to the Planning Commission. In the event that there is any dissatisfaction with the action of the Planning Commission, the applicant, others affected, or the City Council may appeal in accordance with the variance appeal provisions set forth in Chapter 18.108 SCCC.

Application for a modification shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in writing on a form prescribed by the Zoning Administrator, and the application shall be accompanied by plans and elevations necessary to show the detail of the proposed modification to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. (Zoning Ord. § 45-3).

Chapter 18.92
PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING SETBACK LINES
Sections:

18.92.010  Procedure.

18.92.020  Minimum distance from street line.

18.92.030  Exception.

18.92.040  Resolution of intention.

18.92.050  Void building permit.

18.92.060  Written protest hearing.

18.92.070  Power of Council.

18.92.080  Building prohibition.

18.92.010 Procedure.
Proceedings for the establishment of setback lines along any portion of any street in the City may be initiated as in this title provided. A petition may be filed with the City Council, or the City Council on its own motion may institute proceedings, asking that such setback lines be established, which petition shall designate the street along which such lines are sought to be established, and shall be accompanied by a map or sketch showing the street and lot lines and the proposed setback lines and the distance thereof from the regularly established property line. Said City Council shall thereupon refer said petition to the City Planning Commission for attention and said Commission shall thereafter cause an investigation to be made, after which said petition shall be presented to the City Council, together with the recommendation of said City Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 46-1).

18.92.020 Minimum distance from street line.
Upon consideration of such petition, or upon its own motion, whenever the public peace, health, safety, comfort, convenience, interest or welfare may require, the Council is hereby authorized and empowered to determine the minimum distance back from the street line for the erection of buildings or structures along any portion of any street in the City, and to order the establishment of a line to be known and designated as a setback line between which line and the street line no building or structure shall be erected or constructed, and in considering the location of any such setback line, the City Council may consider the probable and planned future widening or establishment of any street along which any property affected by said setback line is located, and said City Council in any such proceeding may establish a plan line, delineating the probable and planned future boundary lines of said street or streets. (Zoning Ord. § 46-2).

18.92.030 Exception.
The restrictions imposed by this section shall not apply to any open porch, veranda or steps which are not supported on the main foundation wall and which do not protrude more than six feet toward the street in front thereof, or shut off the light, air or vision from adjacent residences now or hereafter constructed or located. (Zoning Ord. § 46-3).

18.92.040 Resolution of intention.
Before ordering the establishment of any setback line or plan line authorized by the provisions of SCCC 18.92.010, the Council shall pass a resolution of intention so to do, designating the setback and/or plan line proposed to be established, which resolution shall be published once in an official newspaper of said City; and one copy of said resolution shall be posted conspicuously upon the street in front of each block or place where such setback and/or plan line is proposed to be established. Said resolution shall contain, also, a notice of the day, hour, and place when and where any and all persons having any objection to the establishment of the proposed setback and/or plan line may appear before said Council and present any objection which they may have to said proposed setback and/or plan line as set forth in said resolution of intention. Said time of hearing shall not be less than fifteen (15) nor more than forty (40) days from the date of the adoption of the resolution of intention; and said publication and posting of said resolution shall be made at least ten days before the time of said hearing. (Zoning Ord. § 46-4).

18.92.050 Void building permit.
After the adoption of the resolution of intention and prior to the time the resolution establishing a setback and/or plan line in such proceedings becomes effective, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or structure between any proposed setback and/or plan line and the said street line, and any permit so issued shall be void. (Zoning Ord. § 46-5).

18.92.060 Written protest hearing.
At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections and protests to the establishment of the proposed setback and/or plan line, any person having any interest in any land upon which said setback and/or plan line is proposed to be established may file with the City Clerk a written protest or objection against the establishment of the same designated in the resolution of intention. Such protest must be delivered to said Clerk not later than the hour set for said hearing, and no other protests or objections shall be considered. All protestants may appear before the Council at said hearing, either in person or by counsel, and be heard in support of their protests or objections. At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which the said hearing may be continued, the Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests or objections so made, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. (Zoning Ord. § 46-6).

18.92.070 Power of Council.
Said Council shall have power and jurisdiction to sustain any protest or objection and abandon said proceeding, or to deny any and all protests or objections, and order by resolution the establishment of said setback and/or plan line or lines described in the resolution of intention, or to order the same established with such changes or modifications as the Council may deem proper. (Zoning Ord. § 46-7).

18.92.080 Building prohibition.
From and after the taking effect of such resolution establishing any setback or plan line, no person shall construct any building, or structures exceeding three feet in height, within the space between the said street line and the plan line so established; and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building and/or structure between any proposed setback or plan line and the said street line, and any permit so issued shall be void. (Zoning Ord. § 46-8).

Chapter 18.94
NONCONFORMING USES
Sections:

18.94.010    Generally.

18.94.020    Nonconforming buildings.

18.94.010 Generally.
(a) The lawful use of land or buildings existing under, and pursuant to, Ordinance Nos. 384, 775, and 918, ordinances of the City of Santa Clara, and existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, although such use does not conform to all regulations specified in this title for the district in which such land is located, may be continued provided no such use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section; nor shall any legal nonconforming use be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such legal nonconforming use. If any such use is abandoned, the subsequent use of such land shall be in conformity to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is located.

(b) The legal nonconforming use of a building may be changed to an alternate nonconforming use of the same or more restricted nature; provided, that in each case a use permit shall first be obtained.

(c) A legal nonconforming use within a building may be expanded or moved within the building only upon issuance of, and in compliance with, a use permit which finds that the expansion or relocation of the use within the building does not significantly increase any identified impacts including, but not limited to, traffic, vehicle parking, or noise impacts.

(d) A new use may be added to a building or site containing a legal nonconforming use provided the new use conforms to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.

(e) If any legal nonconforming use ceases for a continuous period of six months, it shall be considered abandoned and shall thereafter be used only in accordance with the regulations for the district in which it is located.

(f) Any legal nonconforming use of land (where no building is involved), created at the time the ordinance codified in this title becomes effective, shall be discontinued within three years from the effective date of that ordinance, unless the City Council shall extend such time as to a use of a particular parcel of land, but any such extension as to one or more parcels shall not operate to extend the time for other parcels. (Ord. 1891 § 3, 8-30-11; Zoning Ord. § 47-1).

18.94.020 Nonconforming buildings.
(a) Any legal nonconforming building damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, earthquake, or other catastrophic event or sudden cause which is beyond the control of the property owner may be restored; provided, that such a building is restored in conformance with all of the following:

(1) The property owner shall obtain building permits for such restoration or replacement within twelve (12) months of the damage or destruction and shall begin construction within three months of the issuance of building permits;

(2) Such restored or reconstructed building shall not have a greater floor area than the building contained when the damage or destruction occurred; shall not exceed the height or number of stories contained in the building when the damage or destruction occurred; shall not result in a greater number of dwelling units than were existing on the site at the time of damage or destruction; and shall not occupy any portion of the lot or parcel not occupied by the building or structure when such damage or destruction occurred, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section;

(3) Such restoration or reconstruction does not result in fewer vehicle parking spaces than were situated on the site at the time of damage or destruction, unless the resulting parking meets or exceeds the parking required by this chapter for the building and site; and

(4) Such restored or reconstructed building shall be deemed a legal nonconforming building, unless the building conforms to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.

(b) A legal nonconforming building, the use of which is not legal nonconforming, may be expanded; provided, that said expansion is in conformance with all of the applicable provisions of the district in which it is located.

(c) The owner or occupant of any land or building classified as existing nonconforming in accordance with SCCC 18.94.010(a) may make application for a use and occupancy permit as specified in Chapter 18.96 SCCC.

(d) A legal nonconforming use existing in a nonconforming building at the time of damage or destruction may be continued in such building that is restored or reconstructed in conformance with this section. (Ord. 1891 § 4, 8-30-11; Zoning Ord. § 47-2).

Chapter 18.96
CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
Sections:

18.96.010  Generally.

18.96.020  Exception.

18.96.030  Issuance.

18.96.010 Generally.
No vacant land in any zoning district established under the provisions of this title shall hereafter be occupied or used except for agricultural purposes, and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered or moved into or within any such zoning district shall be occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued therefor by the Building Official in the manner provided in the Building Code.

(a) No change shall be made in the character of occupancy or use by any building which would place the building in a different division of the same group of occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of this title and other City ordinances for such division or group of occupancy.

(b) No change in the character of occupancy shall be made without a certificate of use and occupancy.

Note: Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors. (Zoning Ord. § 48-1).

18.96.020 Exception.
No such certificates shall be required for residential uses and buildings permitted in R1-8L and R1-6L zoning districts, except for home occupations. (Zoning Ord. § 48-2).

18.96.030 Issuance.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued after:

(a) Written notice that the premises are ready for occupancy or use;

(b) Inspection indicates that the building or use is in conformity with this title and other regulations; and

(c) The procedures of the Building Code as most recently adopted by the City are followed and consummated. (Zoning Ord. § 48-3).

Chapter 18.98
SPECIAL ZONING EXCEPTIONS
Sections:

18.98.010  Application – Generally.

18.98.010 Application – Generally.
Whenever an application is made for the change, rezoning, amendment or establishment of any district or part of a district in the City, the City Council, in lieu of granting or denying said application, may grant to the applicant a special zoning exception which will permit said applicant or his/her assignee to develop or use said property in accordance with said application. Such development and use shall be substantially in accordance with plans accompanying said application or filed subsequently in support thereof, and approved by the City Council. In the event of such use and development within the time fixed by the City Council in granting said exception, or within one year from the date of the granting of the exception where another time is not fixed by Council in granting said exception, or within any extension of said period, said district or part thereof for which said exception was granted shall be thereupon rezoned, altered, amended and established in accordance with the original application, or as set forth in the order of the City Council made at the time said zoning exception was granted. In the event of the failure of such use and development within said period or extension thereof, then at the expiration thereof, said application shall be deemed to have been denied as of the date of the granting of said exception. The City Council, upon good cause, may extend said period for an additional period, as fixed by the City Council. The additional period shall be one year unless otherwise expressly provided by the City Council. The City Council may also, in granting said exception, specify a period less than one year in which said use and development must be completed; and in the event that the City Council specifies a lesser period than one year and said use and development is completed within said period, then the granting of said application will be deemed to have been made at the end of said lesser period. In the event that a denial of an application is made by failure to develop said district or part thereof, then such denial shall be deemed to have been made as of the date of the granting of said exception. (Zoning Ord. § 49-1).

Chapter 18.100
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Sections:

18.100.010    Intent.

18.100.020    Home occupation standards.

18.100.030    Standards – Determination.

18.100.040    Standards – Appeals.

18.100.050    Business licenses.

18.100.010 Intent.
The City Council of the City of Santa Clara finds, determines, and declares that in order to preserve the intended residential character of a neighborhood and/or dwelling as contemplated in the City’s adopted general plan and in this title the following stringent standards must be maintained subject to herein defined home occupation review process. (Zoning Ord. § 50-1).

18.100.020 Home occupation standards.
To be a home occupation, the accessory use of a dwelling must comply with the following standards, which are established to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood and/or dwelling:

(a) The use is conducted entirely within the living unit in an area that does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling unit’s floor area exclusive of garage floor areas or the floor areas of accessory structures; use of the garage or accessory structures for home occupation activities is not allowed. No outdoor storage may occur;

(b) The entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation shall be from within the main dwelling unit and there shall be no internal or external alternations or construction not customarily found in a dwelling;

(c) The use generates no traffic, parking, refuse, sewage, electrical or water use in excess of what is normal in a similar residential dwelling not having a home occupation;

(d) The use does not create undue (1) noise, (2) vibrations, (3) dust, (4) odors, (5) smoke, (6) television or radio interference, (7) heat, (8) radiation, or other nuisance. The use does not involve the storage of hazardous, flammable, or combustible liquids or materials, other than those customarily found in a dwelling (and of no greater intensity or duration than that customarily associated with a residence);

(e) No article is displayed, sold, or offered for sale on the premises. (Residential garage sales not occurring more often than once in a six-month period are excluded from this restriction);

(f) No mechanical or electrical equipment is installed or maintained other than such as is customarily incidental to domestic use;

(g) Vehicles with commercial signing are prohibited, other than one such vehicle (not a “commercial vehicle”), which is regularly used by the occupant for transportation. If such vehicle is not removed from the residential neighborhood at least once every seventy-two (72) hours, it must be stored within an enclosed structure on the premises. No other commercial equipment may be stored or dispatched from the residence; and for the purpose of this section, a “commercial vehicle” is defined as a vehicle with commercial license plates, which is equipped with dual rear wheels and is not designed and used for recreational housing purposes;

(h) No employee or business associate is engaged for services on the premises or dispatched from the premises;

(i) No signs or symbols identifying the home occupation are allowed, regardless of the zoning district in which the residence is located;

(j) The dwelling is the principal residence of the business license or fire permit applicant and the applicant complies with all City laws and regulations and any other requirements, as determined by the Director of Planning and Inspection or such other person or persons designated by the City Manager (the “Director”). (Zoning Ord. § 50-2).

18.100.030 Standards – Determination.
The Director is responsible to review any use that is claimed to meet the standards set forth in SCCC 18.100.020 and to qualify as a home occupation and to make a determination within twenty-one (21) days, and any extension of that time as consented to by user or proposed user, of receipt of the notice of use and any information and documentation requested by the Director for review in making the determination whether or not the use qualifies as a home occupation. The determination of the Director is final except for an overriding decision of the City Council. The Director may require the user or proposed user to submit to the Director information and documentation from which the determination can be made. If the information or documentation considered by the Director is false or incorrect, the determination at option of the Director is a nullity of no force or effect. The determination of the Director may be conditioned as is deemed necessary to secure the purposes of this title, including receipt of such evidence satisfactory to the Director that such conditions will be complied with so that the use of the dwelling will not expand into other than a home occupation. (Zoning Ord. § 50-3).

18.100.040 Standards – Appeals.
(a) In the event of dissatisfaction with the decision of the Director, the user, or proposed user, within fifteen (15) calendar days after rendition of such decision, may appeal in writing to the City Council. The City Council on its own motion, made within such fifteen (15) days of the decision, may consider the action of the Director the same as if an appeal had been taken.

(b) Said appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk and by the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. At its regular meeting held at least three days after the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date for the hearing of the appeal, and notice shall be given to the user, proposed user, appellant, and to the Director, and by posting as provided in SCCC 18.112.060. The Director shall transmit to the City Council all maps, diagrams, records, papers, and files that constitute the record in the action from which the appeal was taken.

(c) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing of the appeal. The City Council in its decision, may reverse, affirm, or modify the action of the Director or it may remand such matter to the Director for further study or action. Failure of the Council to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be an affirmance of the action of the Director. (Zoning Ord. § 50-4).

18.100.050 Business licenses.
No business license shall be issued for a home occupation and no use shall be made of a dwelling as a home occupation for fifteen (15) days after a determination is rendered or deemed rendered or while an appeal is pending before the City Council. (Zoning Ord. § 50-5).

Chapter 18.102
REGULATION OF MARIJUANA
Sections:

18.102.010    Commercial marijuana activity prohibited.

18.102.020    Cultivation of marijuana for personal use.

18.102.030    Transport and delivery of marijuana.

18.102.040    Restrictions on the use of marijuana.

18.102.045    Violation – Penalty.

18.102.050    Public nuisance.

18.102.010 Commercial marijuana activity prohibited.
In accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 26200, all commercial marijuana activity as defined in SCCC 18.06.010(m)(2)(B) is prohibited, whether temporary or permanent in nature, and whether for medical or nonmedical purposes. This chapter shall become inoperative on June 30, 2020, and shall be considered repealed on that date, unless this section is amended, or a later enacted ordinance becomes effective, on or before June 30, 2020, to delete or extend this date. (Ord. 2000 § 1, 5-21-19

18.102.020 Cultivation of marijuana for personal use.
No more than six living marijuana plants, whether mature or immature, may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed for personal use within the confines of a single private residence. Any such indoor cultivation for personal use must comply with the following requirements:

(a) Marijuana cultivation, including but not limited to any lighting, plumbing, building, or electrical components used for cultivation, must comply with current requirements in SCCC Title 15.

(b) In addition to the requirements set forth in SCCC Title 15, indoor cultivation of marijuana must comply with the following requirements:

(1) Lighting used for marijuana cultivation may not exceed one thousand (1,000) watts per light, unless certified by a licensed electrical contractor. High intensity discharge (HID) lighting – including, but not limited to, mercury-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps, metal-halide (MH) lamps, ceramic MH lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium-vapor lamps, and xenon short-arc lamps – are prohibited in cultivation areas.

(2) The use of gas products including, but not limited to, carbon dioxide and butane, carbon dioxide and ozone generators, or other flammable solvents or chemicals, for marijuana cultivation, processing or manufacturing is prohibited.

(3) Area(s) where marijuana is cultivated, processed, or manufactured must contain adequate ventilation and filtration systems to ensure that odors from such activities are not detectable by a person with reasonable sensitivity from any adjoining lot, parcel, tract, public right-of-way, building unit or residential unit, and designed to prevent mold and moisture and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the residence.

(4) Marijuana cultivation may not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may exist if the cultivation produces light, glare, heat, noise, vibration, odors, smells, or other stimulus that is, or whose effect is, either detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property.

(5) Materials or products used for marijuana cultivation, processing or manufacturing shall not be stored inside habitable areas of the residence or within public view from neighboring properties or public rights-of-way, or in a manner detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare.

(6) The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and fully functional cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for marijuana cultivation. The premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation. The owner of the marijuana plants shall reside full-time in the residence where the cultivation occurs.

(7) The marijuana cultivation area shall be located within a fully enclosed and secured structure, area, or room, inaccessible to minors, and shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. The marijuana plant(s) cannot come within twelve (12) inches of the ceiling or any source of heat or lighting in the enclosed area or room in which it is grown.

(c) Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit property owners from more strictly regulating indoor and outdoor cultivation of marijuana upon their property, including complete prohibition. (Ord. 1973 § 3, 11-21-17).

18.102.030 Transport and delivery of marijuana.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent transportation of marijuana or marijuana products on public roads by a State licensee acting in compliance with all applicable State and local laws and regulations, except that marijuana deliveries originating in or terminating in the City are prohibited. (Ord. 1973 § 3, 11-21-17).

18.102.040 Restrictions on the use of marijuana.
Consumption of marijuana in any form or manner is prohibited in all places where tobacco smoking is prohibited under State and local law. The provisions of Chapter 8.37 SCCC (“Smoking Lounges”) are inapplicable to commercial marijuana activity.

Any conduct otherwise permitted under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 is prohibited within any buildings owned, leased or occupied by the City. (Ord. 1973 § 3, 11-21-17).

18.102.045 Violation – Penalty.*
Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter as a criminal, civil and/or administrative action. In addition, the City may pursue any and all remedies available under any applicable law including, but not limited to, a criminal action pursuant to the Health and Safety Code or the Revenue and Taxation Code, and/or a civil action pursuant to the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1973 § 3, 11-21-17).

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 1973 adds the provisions of this section as Section 18.102.040. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.

18.102.050 Public nuisance.
Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City pursuant to any applicable enforcement procedures set forth in SCCC Titles 1, 8 and/or 18, as determined by the City. (Ord. 1973 § 3, 11-21-17).

Chapter 18.104
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

18.104.010    Definitions.

18.104.020    Location restrictions on massage establishments.

18.104.030    Use permit required.

18.104.040    Violations.

18.104.050    Regulations nonexclusive.

18.104.060    Application to existing businesses.

18.104.010 Definitions.
“Massage establishment” shall have the same definition set forth in SCCC 5.40.020. The exemptions under SCCC 5.40.060 apply to this chapter. (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15).

18.104.020 Location restrictions on massage establishments.
No lot or parcel of property in any zoning district or any building or structure thereon, or any portion thereof, within the city, shall be used to operate as a massage establishment at a location closer than five hundred (500) feet from another massage establishment nor five hundred (500) feet from the property line of any of the below-indicated uses (whether such use is within or outside the City of Santa Clara):

(a) Schools (universities, community colleges, high schools, junior high schools, elementary and nursery schools).

(b) State-licensed child care centers and/or large family day care facilities.

(c) Hotels, motels, or lodging houses.

(d) Bowling alleys, ping-pong centers, electric-game centers, pool and billiard halls.

(e) Any lot or parcel zoned single-family residential. (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15).

18.104.030 Use permit required.
In addition to the permits required by Chapter 5.40 SCCC, massage establishments may be established only by first securing a use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.110 SCCC. (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15).

18.104.040 Violations.
(a) Any person operating or causing the operation of a massage establishment on any parcel in which no application for a massage establishment permit under Chapter 5.40 SCCC has been granted, or any person violating or causing the violation of any of the terms and conditions of the existing use permit, shall be subject to the revocation/suspension of the massage establishment permit issued pursuant to SCCC 5.40.180 and may be subject to penalties pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

(b) In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined pursuant to Chapter 18.114 SCCC.

(c) If a massage establishment permit is revoked, or not renewed as a result of violations of Chapter 5.40 SCCC or of this chapter, no massage establishment use permit may be issued at that location for a period of one year from the date of revocation or nonrenewal. (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15).

18.104.050 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating massage establishments are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other provisions of the City Code and/or any other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15).

18.104.060 Application to existing businesses.
Any massage establishment lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter which becomes a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, not later than December 31, 2019 (the “amortization period”). (Ord. 1945 § 2, 10-13-15; Ord. 1971 § 1, 10-24-17).

Chapter 18.106
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Sections:

18.106.010    Definitions.

18.106.020    Intent.

18.106.030    Identification of HRI properties.

18.106.040    HRI property designation.

18.106.050    Property alteration.

18.106.060    Demolition permits.

18.106.070    HLC referral for projects near HRI properties.

18.106.080    Unsafe or dangerous conditions.

18.106.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context or the provision clearly requires otherwise:

(a) “Alteration” means any change or expansion to an HRI property that involves (1) changes to the exterior of a structure, such as its surface materials or its architectural features, or (2) substantial reconfiguration of the interior space.

(b) “Architectural Committee” means the Architectural Committee of the City of Santa Clara, as established in Chapter 18.76 SCCC.

(c) “Architectural feature” means the architectural elements embodying the historical significance or architectural style, design, general arrangement, and components of all the exterior surfaces of a building or structure, including, but not limited to, the type of building materials, and type and style of windows, doors, design, arrangement, massing, texture, painted and unpainted surfaces and materials.

(d) Building. Refer to SCCC 18.06.010(b)(5).

(e) “California Register of Historical Resources” means the authoritative guide in California to be used by State and local agencies, private groups, and citizens to identify the State’s historical resources and to indicate what properties are to be protected, to the extent prudent and feasible, from substantial adverse change. (Public Resources Code Section 5024.1(a))

(f) “Character-defining feature” means the architectural features of a building, structure, or object that help convey the significance of the HRI property and which were present during the period of significance.

(g) “Demolition” means the destruction, in whole or in part, of the original physical elements or building materials of an HRI property including features that contribute to its historic character, architecture and integrity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, alteration work that qualifies as a small project as defined in this chapter shall not constitute demolition.

(h) “Demolition by neglect” means negligence resulting in the deterioration and irreversible harm to the original features and materials of an HRI property leading to substantial deterioration and/or structural failure constituting a threat to public health, safety and visual impact to a street, neighborhood or defined geographic area.

(i) “Evaluation” means the process by which the significance and integrity of a building, structure, object or site is judged according to the National Park Service Standards set forth in 36 CFR Part 61 and using the designation criteria outlined in SCCC 18.106.040(a) (Designation Criteria).

(j) “Historic fabric” means those architectural form and character-defining features, such as siding, brick, stone, roofing or other materials visible on the structure, that are characteristic of the period of significance and therefore assist in portraying the style and historic significance of the HRI property from its most important time period.

(k) “Historic Resource Inventory” means the City of Santa Clara Historic Resource Inventory, which is incorporated into the 2010-2035 General Plan as Appendix 8.9 (“Historic Resource Inventory” or “HRI”), as may be amended from time to time.

(l) “HRI property” means a building, structure, object, or site currently included in the Historic Resource Inventory (HRI), which was designated as architecturally or historically significant by the City of Santa Clara pursuant to this chapter, or which the City added to the HRI prior to the effective date of this chapter.

(m) “Historic resources survey” means the process of systematically identifying, researching, photographing and documenting HRI properties within a defined geographic area and placed on a State of California DPR 523 series form. All surveys shall be conducted in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historic Preservation: Standards and Guidelines for Identification and Evaluation, as may be amended.

(n) “Historical and Landmarks Commission” or “HLC” means the Historical and Landmarks Commission (HLC) established pursuant to SCCC 2.120.100.

(o) “Integrity” means the authenticity of an HRI property’s historic identity, evidenced by the survival of an HRI property’s visual and physical characteristics that existed during the HRI property’s period of significance. Within the concept of integrity, the National Register criteria recognize seven aspects or qualities that, in various combinations, define integrity. These seven aspects are location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association.

(p) “Major alteration” means any significant change that is subject to Architectural Committee review and approval in accordance with Chapter 18.76 SCCC or pursuant to City policy or procedure.

(q) “National Register of Historic Places” means the National Historic Landmarks Register established pursuant to 54 U.S.C. Section 302101 et seq.

(r) “Period of significance” means the span of time during which relevant events and activities occurred at an HRI property.

(s) “Preventative maintenance” means any work to prevent deterioration or damage to the structural integrity or any exterior feature of an HRI property that does not involve a change in design, material or exterior appearance. Such work includes, but is not limited to, painting, wood trim or siding repair, roof repair, patching, caulking, foundation or chimney repairs, or landscape maintenance.

(t) “Secretary of the Interior’s Treatment Standards” means the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings, published by the National Park Service, as may be amended.

(u) “Site” (as applied in the context of this chapter) means the location of a significant historical event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing buildings, structures or objects. Examples of a site are a battlefield, designed landscape, trail, or industrial site.

(v) “Small projects” means alterations to any historic resource as defined herein, involving negligible visible changes. Alterations shall not qualify as small projects if they involve the removal or destruction of any exterior character-defining feature or historic fabric, including, but not limited to, original windows, or similarly protected interior features, unless an acceptable replacement is made with like materials and finishes, as determined by the Community Development Director.

(w) Structure.  Refer to SCCC 18.06.010(s)(9). (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.020 Intent.
This chapter shall be known as the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Santa Clara. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the identification, protection, enhancement and perpetuation of buildings, structures and properties within the City that reflect special elements of the City’s social, economical, historical, architectural, engineering, archaeological, cultural, natural, or aesthetic heritage. (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.030 Identification of HRI properties.
In order to carry out the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan, and to further the purposes of this chapter, a list of architecturally or historically significant resources shall be maintained as Appendix 8.9 of the General Plan. This list shall be known as the Historic Resource Inventory (HRI).

In order for a property to be placed on the HRI following the adoption of this chapter, an historic resource survey (DPR 523A) shall be prepared by a qualified consultant in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archeology and Historic Preservation: Professional Qualifications Standards. Properties evaluated in an historic resource survey that meet the designation criteria outlined in SCCC 18.106.040(a) (Designation Criteria) may be added to the Historic Resource Inventory by the City Council after consideration and recommendation by the HLC.

The Historic Resource Inventory shall be kept on file in the Community Development Department, subject to review and update by the HLC and the City Council as deemed necessary. Because the HRI is an appendix to the General Plan, the City will amend the General Plan on a regular basis to update the HRI to reflect recent Council decisions on designation. (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.040 HRI property designation.
(a) Designation Criteria. For purposes of this chapter, a building, structure, object or site is eligible for inclusion in the Historic Resource Inventory if it meets all of the following designation criteria:

(1) Age. A building, structure, object, site or district that is fifty (50) years of age or older may qualify as an HRI property if it meets other designation criteria. If a property proposed for inclusion is less than fifty (50) years of age, sufficient time must have passed to obtain a scholarly perspective on the events or individuals associated with the property, and/or the property proposed for inclusion is a distinctive or important example of its type or style; and

(2) Retains Historic Integrity. A building, structure, object, site or district must maintain integrity to be considered eligible for listing on the City’s inventory as an HRI property. Integrity refers to a resource’s ability to convey its significance by the retention of a property’s visual and physical characteristics and its surroundings. If a property proposed for inclusion was moved to prevent demolition at its former location, it may still be considered eligible for listing as an HRI property if the new location is compatible with the original character of the property; and

(3) The property proposed for inclusion falls within one or more of the following categories, as these terms are defined in Section 8.9.2 of Appendix 8.9 of the General Plan, Criteria for Local Significance:

(A) Historical or cultural significance;

(B) Architectural significance;

(C) Geographic significance;

(D) Archaeological significance.

(b) Initiation of Designation.

(1) Designation of a property proposed for inclusion on the City of Santa Clara Historic Resource Inventory may be initiated by any of the following parties:

(A) Owner(s) of the property proposed for inclusion or authorized representative of the owner(s); or

(B) Historical and Landmarks Commission; or

(C) City Council.

(2) If designation is initiated by the owner(s), an application for designation shall be made to the Community Development Department through submittal of the prescribed application form accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the City Council. The Community Development Department shall establish what supporting documentation shall accompany the application, including, but not limited to, State of California DPR 523 series forms or other historic resource inventory forms as may be approved by the State.

(3) At the time of submission of an application for designation, the owner(s) or authorized representative of the owner(s) must provide written consent for the designation process to the City.

(4) The application shall indicate the parameters of the property proposed for inclusion, specifying any related structures or landscape that is to be included for consideration and an evaluation of the property’s conformance with the applicable criteria.

(5) If designation is initiated by the Historical and Landmarks Commission or the City Council, the Community Development Department shall notify the owner(s) of the property by certified mail within ninety (90) days of the initiation and request written consent from the owner. If the owner does not consent to the designation application, the designation procedure shall not proceed.

(6) Applications for designation of a property proposed for inclusion on the Historic Resource Inventory shall be agendized for review by the Historical and Landmarks Commission within sixty (60) days from the date the application is deemed complete.

(c) Approval of Permits when Designation is Pending. Except as provided in SCCC 18.106.080 (Unsafe or dangerous conditions), no building permit, demolition permit or other permit that would result in a major alteration of the property shall be issued for any property when a Historic Resource Inventory designation application has been initiated with the Community Development Department as set forth in subsection (b) of this section (Initiation of Designation) until all hearings on the matter are concluded. Minor alterations and small projects may still be approved.

(d) Historical and Landmarks Commission Public Hearing.

(1) The HLC shall conduct a public hearing on the application for designation in a timely manner.

(2) Notice of the public hearing shall be provided pursuant to SCCC 18.112.060 (Notice of Public Hearing).

(3) A staff report, including the supporting documentation as described in subsection (b) of this section (Initiation of Designation) concerning the property proposed for inclusion shall be provided to the HLC. The report shall address the significance and integrity of the property proposed for inclusion as it relates to the designation criteria, provide other relevant information, and include a recommendation concerning the application and the basis therefor.

(4) The HLC shall consider any evidence or input offered at the hearing. The HLC shall recommend to the City Council approval, modification or denial of the designation proposal.

(e) City Council Action. Following the Historical and Landmarks Commission action, the City Council shall take action on the request by resolution or other means determining whether the subject property is eligible for inclusion on the Historic Resource Inventory.

(f) Notice of Designation. Following action by the City Council, a copy of the findings shall be sent by first class mail to the owner(s) of the newly designated HRI property, and a notice of the designation, along with a legal description of the property, shall be recorded in the records of the County Recorder. Failure to record with the County Recorder shall not invalidate a designation or any of the requirements of this chapter.

(g) Designation Repeal or Amendment.

(1) Designation may be repealed or amended in the same manner and procedure as was followed in subsection (b) of this section (Initiation of Designation) et seq. This action shall result from new information, the discovery of earlier misinformation or change of original circumstances, conditions or factors that justified the designation.

(2) If a repeal is approved by the Council, a notice shall be sent to the same persons and manner set forth in subsection (f) of this section (Notice of Designation). (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.050 Property alteration.
(a) Permit(s) Required for Alterations. No person shall make alterations to any HRI property without first obtaining the required permits or approvals from the Director of Community Development, Architectural Committee or other hearing body as prescribed in this chapter.

(1) A Significant Properties Alteration (SPA) permit shall be required for alterations to an HRI property.

(2) The addition of an accessory dwelling unit to an HRI property requires an SPA permit.

(3) For purposes of compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), an SPA permit for a major alteration shall be considered a discretionary project under Section 15357 of the CEQA Guidelines.

(b) Application for Significant Property Alteration Permit. The owner or authorized representative proposing alterations to an HRI property shall file a planning application with the Community Development Department, with the required supporting information, and any applicable filing fee. As soon thereafter as practicable after the application is deemed complete, the application for the SPA permit shall be forwarded to the Community Development Director or HLC, as appropriate, for its review and recommendation.

(c) Review Required for Alterations.

(1) The Community Development Director shall approve or deny applications for SPA permits for small projects as defined in this chapter. The Director has the discretion to determine that any such application for a small project should instead be construed as a major alteration requiring review by the HLC and approval by the Architectural Committee.

(2) The HLC shall review applications for SPA permits proposed for major alterations, and render a recommendation to the Architectural Committee.

(3) Following review and recommendation by the HLC, applications for SPA permits for major alterations shall be forwarded to the Architectural Committee, which shall approve or deny the application.

(4) The Community Development Director, HLC, or Architectural Committee may require supplemental information or reports as may be necessary for a complete review.

(5) The Community Development Director or Architectural Committee may impose such reasonable conditions or restrictions as they deem necessary or appropriate on a case-by-case basis to promote or achieve the purposes of this Code.

(6) Preventative maintenance, as defined in this chapter, shall be excluded from the review process specified in this section.

(7) The addition of an accessory dwelling unit to an HRI property shall be considered a major alteration if (A) the accessory unit would be attached to the main house and involve alterations to the exterior of the main house; (B) the HRI property is subject to a Mills Act contract; (C) the accessory dwelling unit would convert a garage that may be of a similar age and design to the main dwelling and contribute to the integrity of the HRI property; or (D) the Community Development Director makes a determination that the addition would be a major alteration. All other additions of accessory dwelling units shall be processed as small projects.

(d) Findings Necessary to Approve SPA Permits. A decision to approve, approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application for the SPA permit shall be based upon the following factors:

(1) The alterations shall be designed to retain the essential character, features, and defining elements that make the HRI property significant;

(2) The project proposals shall not have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the HRI property;

(3) The alterations must be compatible with the existing structure or district; and

(4) The alterations must be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Treatment Standards.

(e) Appeal Procedures. In the event the applicant or other interested party is not satisfied with the permit or approval action permitted by this section, the decision may be appealed. Such appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk within seven calendar days after rendition of the decision, along with the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. Appeals of the Community Development Director’s decisions shall be evaluated in the same manner as major alterations and shall be referred to the HLC for recommendation and the Architectural Committee for decision. Appeals of the Architectural Committee’s decisions shall be conducted in accordance with SCCC 18.76.020(h).

(f) Approval Expiration. Any approval granted under this section shall remain valid for a period of two years following the date the action was taken by the Community Development Director, Architectural Committee or other decision-making body. The decision-making body may at any time authorize extensions of time on any approval, without the need for any public hearing, for a total period of twenty-four (24) months following the original date of expiration.

(g) Preventative Maintenance. The owner, lessee or other person(s) in actual charge of an HRI property (“responsible party”) shall maintain and keep such property in a manner that ensures its continued eligibility for listing on the City’s Historic Resource Inventory. Care of the HRI property shall be undertaken so as not to constitute “demolition by neglect” and prevent deterioration, dilapidation and decay of the historic fabric of any portion of the property. The responsible party shall ensure that all HRI properties shall remain free from structural defects through prompt corrections of any of the following defects:

(1) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports.

(2) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

(3) Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken window glass or doors.

(4) Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering.

(5) Any fault or defect in the building which renders it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight.

(6) Minor mechanical systems in need of repair, not involving substantial removal of original interior or exterior building materials or features. (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.060 Demolition permits.
(a) Properties Not Listed on the HRI.

(1) Upon receiving an application for a demolition permit for a property not listed on the HRI, the Community Development Department shall search the City permit system database to ascertain if the property is noted as “potentially historic” next to the assessor’s parcel number. If the property contains this notation, the Community Development Department shall make a determination as to whether an application should be referred to the HLC and City Council for a determination as to whether the property is eligible for listing on the HRI. If no referral is made, the demolition permit may be approved or denied along with replacement plans by the Architectural Committee.

(2) For any such referral, the HLC and City Council shall make an eligibility determination using the same criteria and process as a designation determination pursuant to SCCC 18.106.040, except that properties found to be eligible will not automatically be added to the HRI, unless the property owner requests that the property be listed. The owner shall be responsible for submitting the required documentation needed, including but not limited to a completed DPR 523A form so the City may make a determination on the referral of the property to the HLC or City Council.

(3) For properties the Council determines to be ineligible for listing on the HRI, the Council may approve or deny the demolition permit at the time of the eligibility determination. For properties the Council determines to be eligible for listing on the HRI, the demolition permit application shall follow the process in subsection (b) of this section.

(b) HRI Properties and Eligible Properties.

(1) An environmental impact report shall be required for any application to demolish an HRI property or a property determined to be eligible for listing pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.

(2) The demolition permit application and environmental impact report shall be referred to the HLC for a recommendation on whether to grant, modify or disapprove the demolition permit application. The HLC recommendation shall be forwarded to the Architectural Committee, which shall make a final decision on the application.

(3) The HLC shall recommend approval of a demolition permit, and the Architectural Committee shall approve a demolition permit, only if there are no viable alternatives for saving the property, and such alternatives have been fully addressed in an environmental impact report.

(4) Appeals of the Architectural Committee’s decisions shall be conducted in accordance with SCCC 18.76.020(h). (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.070 HLC referral for projects near HRI properties.
For development projects that require Architectural Committee review but that are not located on HRI properties, if the project is located within 200 feet of an HRI property, then prior to submitting the application to the Architectural Committee, the application shall first be referred to the HLC. The HLC shall review the project for neighborhood compatibility and consistency with the City’s Design Guidelines, and make a recommendation to the Architectural Committee. (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

18.106.080 Unsafe or dangerous conditions.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, stabilization or demolition of an HRI property, or any exterior feature thereof, which the Building Official or designee has declared necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition where there is a threat to public health and safety. Only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this subsection. The California Historical Building Code shall be employed for this purpose at the request of the property owner. (Ord. 1972 § 1, 11-21-17).

Chapter 18.108
VARIANCES
Sections:

18.108.010  Variances.

18.108.020  Application.

18.108.030  Public hearing.

18.108.040  Findings.

18.108.050  Decision.

18.108.060  Appeals.

18.108.070  Building permits.

18.108.080  Time extensions.

18.108.090  Revocation.

18.108.010 Variances.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and effects inconsistent with the general purpose of this title may result from the strict application of certain provisions, variances may be granted in the manner specified herein. No variance may be granted allowing a use in any district where such use is prohibited by the terms of this title. (Zoning Ord. § 54-1).

18.108.020 Application.
Application shall be made to the Planning Commission in writing on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by plans and elevations necessary to show the detail of the proposed variance. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the City Council. (Zoning Ord. § 54-2).

18.108.030 Public hearing.
A public hearing by the Planning Commission shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the project clearance committee's finding that the application is complete. Notice shall be given by posting in the time and manner set forth in SCCC 18.112.060. (Zoning Ord. § 54-3).

18.108.040 Findings.
In order to grant any variance, the findings of the Planning Commission shall be:

(a) That there are unusual conditions applying to the land or building which do not apply generally in the same district.

(b) That the granting of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the petitioner.

(c) That the granting of such variance shall not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the applicant's property, and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood.

(d) That the granting of the variance is in keeping with the purpose and intent of this title. (Zoning Ord. § 54-4).

18.108.050 Decision.
The Planning Commission shall render its decision within thirty-five (35) days following the close of the public hearing. Failure of the Commission to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be a denial of the application. The granting of any variance, when conforming to the provisions of this section, is hereby declared to be an administrative function imposed upon the Planning Commission and the action of the Commission shall be final except in the event of an appeal. (Zoning Ord. § 54-5).

18.108.060 Appeals.
(a) In case the applicant or others affected are not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission, they may, within seven calendar days after rendition of the decision by the Planning Commission, appeal in writing to the City Council. The City Council on its own motion, made within seven days of the Planning Commission decision or at its first regular meeting upon receipt of formal notice of decision and action of the Planning Commission, whichever is later, may consider the action of the Planning Commission the same as if an appeal had been taken.

(b) Said appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk and by the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. At its regular meeting held at least three days after the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date for the hearing of the appeal, and notice shall be given to the applicant and to the Planning Commission, and by posting as provided in SCCC 18.112.060. The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council all maps, records, papers and files which constitute the record in the action from which the appeal was taken.

(c) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing. The City Council in its decision may reverse, affirm, or modify the action of the Planning Commission or it may remand said matter to the Planning Commission for further study or action. Failure of the Council to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be an affirmance of the action of the Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 54-6).

18.108.070 Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued in any case where a variance is required by the terms of this title until after the granting of such variance by the Planning Commission and the period allowed for appeal has elapsed. In the event of an appeal no such permit shall be granted until the matter has been finally acted upon by the City Council and said variance has been finally approved by the City Council. Building permits issued pursuant to this entire section shall conform to the terms and conditions of the variance granted. (Zoning Ord. § 54-7).

18.108.080 Time extensions.
(a) Any variance approval granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be automatically revoked and terminated if not used within two years of original grant, or within the period of any authorized extensions thereof.

(b) The Planning Commission may at any time authorize extensions of time on any variance, without the need for any public hearing thereon, for not to exceed a total period of twenty-four (24) months next succeeding the original two years when the applicant has satisfied the Planning Commission that good cause exists for the extension.

(c) For the purpose of extending the time on any approval, the application shall be deemed timely made if the applicant has filed a request for an extension before the expiration of the particular approval sought to be extended.

(d) The action of the Planning Commission shall be final except in the event of an appeal as provided in SCCC 18.108.060. (Zoning Ord. § 54-8).

18.108.090 Revocation.
Any variance granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if basis for approval is found to be invalid, if any of the conditions of such variance are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, or if the Planning Commission finds, with the concurrence of the City Council, that the continuance of the variance will endanger the public health, safety or welfare.

The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on any proposed revocation after giving written notice to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall submit its recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall act within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 54-9).

Chapter 18.110
USE PERMITS
Sections:

18.110.010  Use permits.

18.110.020  Application.

18.110.030  Public hearing.

18.110.040  Findings of the Planning Commission.

18.110.050  Nonconforming uses.

18.110.060  Decision.

18.110.070  Appeals.

18.110.080  Building permits.

18.110.090  Time extensions.

18.110.100  Revocation.

18.110.010 Use permits.
A use permit is revocable, conditional, or valid for a term period. It may be issued in the manner specified herein for any of the uses for which such use permits are required by the terms of this title; and, unless otherwise provided, the use permit shall be limited to the particular use, building, property and plans submitted for which the permit is granted. The life of a use permit approval, unless otherwise conditioned or revoked, shall continue indefinitely, with the exception that said approval shall expire and become null and void twelve (12) months following the cessation of the conditional use. (Zoning Ord. § 55-1).

18.110.020 Application.
Application shall be made to the Planning Commission in writing on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by plans and elevations necessary to show the detail of the proposed use or building. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the City Council. (Zoning Ord. § 55-2).

18.110.030 Public hearing.
A public hearing by the Planning Commission shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the project clearance committee's finding that the application is complete. Notice shall be given by posting in the time and manner set forth in SCCC 18.112.060. (Zoning Ord. § 55-3).

18.110.040 Findings of the Planning Commission.
In order to grant any use permit, the findings of the Planning Commission shall be:

(a) That the establishment or operation of the use or building applied for, under the circumstances of the particular case, are essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;

(b) That said use will not be detrimental to any of the following:

(1) The health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use;

(2) Property or improvements in the neighborhood of such proposed use; or

(3) The general welfare of the City;

(c) That said use will not impair the integrity and character of the zoning district; and

(d) That said use is in keeping with the purposes and intent of this title.

The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in connection with the use permit as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title, and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with by the applicant. (Zoning Ord. § 55-4).

18.110.050 Nonconforming uses.
Under the same circumstances and subject to the same findings set forth above, a use permit may be granted by the Planning Commission for the maintenance of a nonconforming use in or on a building or premises within a district. Such a use permit may only be granted to obviate or eliminate gross inequities which the Planning Commission finds would exist should the permit be denied. Any such permit shall be revocable by the City Council for good cause, and the City Council shall be the sole judge as to what shall constitute good cause. Such a permit may be limited in duration as to time or ownership of the premises involved; and shall be subject to compliance with such conditions in connection therewith as are deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to secure the purposes of this title. (Zoning Ord. § 55-5).

18.110.060 Decision.
The Planning Commission shall render its decision within thirty-five (35) days following the close of the public hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be a denial of the application. The granting of any use permit, when conforming to the provisions of this section, is hereby declared to be an administrative function imposed upon the Planning Commission and the action of the Planning Commission shall be final except in the event of an appeal. (Zoning Ord. § 55-6).

18.110.070 Appeals.
(a) In case the applicant or others affected are not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission, they may, within seven calendar days after rendition of the decision by the Planning Commission, and pursuant to subsection (b) immediately hereinbelow, appeal to the City Council. In addition, the City Council (on its own motion made within seven days of the Planning Commission decision, or at its first regular meeting upon receipt of formal notice of the decision and action of the Planning Commission, whichever is later) may consider the action of the Planning Commission the same as if an appeal had been taken.

(b) Said appeal shall be taken by the filing of a notice in writing to that effect with the City Clerk and by the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. At its regular meeting held at least three days after the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date for the hearing of the appeal, and notice of said hearing date shall be given to the applicant and to the Planning Commission. Notice shall also be posted as provided in SCCC 18.112.060. The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council all maps, records, papers, and files which constitute the record in the action from which the appeal was taken.

(c) The City Council shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of said hearing. The City Council, in its discretion, may reverse, affirm, or modify the action of the Planning Commission or it may remand said matter to the Planning Commission for further study or action. Failure of the Council to render its decision within said period shall be deemed to be an affirmance of the action of the Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 55-7).

18.110.080 Building permits.
No building permit or business license shall be issued in any case where a use permit is required by the terms of this title until after the granting of such use permit by the Planning Commission and the period allowed for appeal has elapsed. In the event of an appeal, no such permit or license shall be granted until the matter has been finally acted upon by the City Council and said use permit has been finally approved by the City Council. Building permits or business licenses issued pursuant to this entire section shall conform to the terms and conditions of the use permit granted. (Zoning Ord. § 55-8).

18.110.090 Time extensions.
(a) Any use permit approval granted in accordance with the terms of this title shall be automatically revoked and terminated if not used within two years of the original grant, or within the period of any authorized extensions thereof.

(b) The Planning Commission may, at any time within the first twenty-four (24) months following the original approval, authorize extensions of time on any unused use permit without the need for any public hearing thereon, for period(s) not to exceed a total of twenty-four (24) consecutive months next following the original two years, when the applicant has satisfied the Planning Commission that good cause exists for the extension.

(c) For the purpose of extending the time on any approval, the application shall be deemed timely made if the applicant has filed a request for an extension before the expiration of the particular approval sought to be extended.

(d) The action of the Planning Commission shall be final except in the event of an appeal to or by the City Council as provided in SCCC 18.108.060. (Zoning Ord. § 55-9).

18.110.100 Revocation.
Any use permit granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if basis for approval is found to be invalid or if any of the conditions of such permit are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, or if the Planning Commission finds, with the concurrence of the City Council, that the continuance of the use permit will endanger the public health, safety or welfare.

The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on any proposed revocation after giving written notice to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall submit its recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall act within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 55-10).

Chapter 18.112
AMENDMENTS
Sections:

18.112.010  Application.

18.112.020  Initiation procedure.

18.112.030  Public hearings.

18.112.040  Action by Planning Commission.

18.112.050  Action by City Council.

18.112.060  Notice of public hearing.

18.112.070  Changes in all other provisions.

18.112.010 Application.
Any district established by this title, or the boundaries thereof, may be changed, amended or altered, or any provision thereof may be changed, altered or amended; and any property within the city may be zoned, rezoned, reclassified or established whenever the public necessity or convenience of the general welfare require the same by following the procedure set forth in this chapter. (Zoning Ord. § 56-1).

18.112.020 Initiation procedure.
Any change in district boundaries of zoning or rezoning may be initiated by:

(a) The verified petition of one or more owners of the property affected by the proposed amendment, which petition shall be filed with the planning division and shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the City Council; or

(b) A resolution of intention of the City Council; or

(c) A resolution of intention of the Planning Commission. (Zoning Ord. § 56-2).

18.112.030 Public hearings.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment and shall give notice thereof as set forth in SCCC 18.112.060. (Zoning Ord. § 56-3).

18.112.040 Action by Planning Commission.
Following the aforesaid hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a report of its findings and recommendations to the City Council within thirty-five (35) days after the completion of said hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to so report within said period shall deemed to be a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission of the proposed amendment. (Zoning Ord. § 56-4).

18.112.050 Action by City Council.
Upon the filing of such report by the Planning Commission or upon the expiration of said thirty-five (35) days provided for in SCCC 18.112.040, the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting held at least three days thereafter, and at such times as said report may be continued to, publicly hear and consider said report and the proposed amendment. After the conclusion of said hearing the City Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof as set forth in the original petition in such form as the City Council may deem advisable. The City Council may also refer or remand any such proposed amendment back to the Planning Commission for further consideration or recommendation whereupon said Planning Commission shall file its report or reconsideration or referral within thirty (30) days thereafter. The decision of the City Council shall be rendered within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the final report or reconsideration or referral from the Planning Commission. The City Council may adopt any amendment by resolution. (Zoning Ord. § 56-5).

18.112.060 Notice of public hearing.
(a) Notice of any public hearing required under the terms of this title shall be given by posting a public notice in at least three conspicuous places within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property, not less than ten days prior to said hearing. Each such notice shall be headed by the word "Notice," in letters not less than one inch in height. In addition thereto, each notice shall contain the proposed establishment or change of district; or in the case of a use permit, variance or appeal, the use permit, variance or appeal applied for, a brief general description of the property involved, and the time and place at which the public hearing will be held. The Planning Commission shall cause notices to be posted for hearings to be held before it, by a person designated by it; and the City Clerk shall cause notices to be posted for hearings to be held before the City Council. The person posting said notices shall file a certificate of such posting together with a copy of said notice with the City Clerk.

(b) Any defect or error appearing in any such notice shall not divest the Planning Commission or City Council of jurisdiction nor invalidate any proceedings.

(c) In addition to the posting of notices required to be posted under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the Planning Commission, at least five days prior to the hearing to be held before it, shall cause to be mailed, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of such hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the County of Santa Clara, or as known to the City Clerk as owning property within a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet from the exterior boundaries of the area actually occupied or to be occupied by the use which is the subject of the hearing. Unless the context of an applicable State law provides to the contrary, the failure to mail such notice to all of said persons shall not operate to divest the Planning Commission or the City Council of jurisdiction to conduct any hearing required to be held. The City Council hereby declares that the purpose of providing that said notice be mailed is to give said property owners within said three hundred (300) feet information as to any proposed change or modification of the use of said property, and the City Council hereby declares that jurisdiction to conduct said hearing shall be obtained upon the posting of notices required by this section. (Zoning Ord. § 56-6).

18.112.070 Changes in all other provisions.
Changes in all provisions of this title for which a procedure is not otherwise provided herein may be adopted as other ordinances of the City are adopted. (Zoning Ord. § 56-7).

Chapter 18.114
ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
AND LEGAL PROCEDURES
Sections:

18.114.010  Issuance of permits by the City departments – Authority to issue citations.

18.114.020  Violations and penalties.

18.114.030  Authority of enforcement officer.

18.114.040  Abatement of public nuisance.

18.114.050  Limitation of actions attacking certain decisions.

18.114.060  Manner of enforcement discretionary.

18.114.070  Conclusive notice.

18.114.010 Issuance of permits by the City departments – Authority to issue citations.
(a) All departments, officials and public employees of the City of Santa Clara vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, structures or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this chapter; and any such permit or license issued in conflict therewith shall be null and void.

(b) In accordance with the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5(a), employees of the City of Santa Clara Planning and Inspection Department, as directed and designated from time to time by the Director of planning and inspection, are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this title. The procedures to be followed for the issuance of said citations are those that are or may be authorized from time to time by provisions of the California Penal Code. (Zoning Ord. § 57-1).

18.114.020 Violations and penalties.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person whether as principal, agent, employee, trustee or otherwise who occupies, owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises or establishment of property subject to regulation under this Title 18 to fail to comply with any of its provisions or to otherwise violate, maintain or permit a violation or cause a violation of any of the provisions of this title or entitlement conditions obtained under this title.

(b) Except when more specific provisions contained in this Title 18 [entitled "Zoning"] are intended to supersede the provisions of SCCC 1.05.070, the following shall apply:

(1) Pursuant to SCCC 1.05.070, the City, in its prosecutorial discretion, may enforce violation(s) of the provisions of this Title 18 as a criminal, civil, and/or administrative action. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 9-10-96; Zoning Ord. § 57-2).

18.114.030 Authority of enforcement officer.
Enforcement of this title may be accomplished by the individuals identified in SCCC 18.114.010 in any manner authorized by this title or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, civil actions and abatement. Those individuals identified in SCCC 18.114.010 may be referred to in this title as "the enforcement officer." (Ord. 1694 § 1, 9-10-96; Zoning Ord. § 57-3).

18.114.040 Abatement of public nuisance.
(a) Nonexclusive Authority to Abate. The City may choose to abate any public nuisance or violation of this title through any of the abatement methods set forth in this title or in other local, State or Federal law and nothing contained in this title shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing or adversely affecting the City's ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of these proceedings as the City may deem are applicable. Proceeding under this section will not preclude the City from proceeding under other sections of this title. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any condition exists in violation of the provisions of this title, he/she may take enforcement action pursuant to this section.

(b) Right of Entry. The enforcement officer may enter any property or premises at all times to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this title whenever the enforcement officer has cause to believe a violation of provisions of this title is occurring; provided, that:

(1) The enforcement officer shall present proper credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry from the owner or occupant.

(A) If entry is denied, he/she may seek a court-ordered inspection warrant if cause exists pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq.;

(B) If entry is denied, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

(2) The enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of unoccupied property or premises, inform the owner of the reasons for entry and request entry.

(3) The enforcement officer shall not enter any property or premises in the absence of permission to enter unless an inspection warrant has been issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 9-10-96; Zoning Ord. § 57-4).

18.114.050 Limitation of actions attacking certain decisions.
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of matters contained in this title within the authority of jurisdiction of the Zoning Administrator, the architectural control committee, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained in any court by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of such decision. Thereafter all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts, or determinations. (Zoning Ord. § 57-5).

18.114.060 Manner of enforcement discretionary.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as requiring the City to enforce the prohibitions in this title in a particular manner. The City expressly retains all lawful discretion in enforcement decisions, including without limitation, those arising from the police power and the City's constitutional powers as a charter city. Any other provision of the City Code or this title is subordinate to this reservation. In the City's prosecutorial discretion, and as the City's resources permit, this title may be enforced in a manner consistent with the circumstances of each violation, including without limitation, the City's consideration of efforts made in good faith by the violator to remedy violations; the burden of enforcement on City resources; to manner in which the City has historically enforced similar violations; and, the possibility of negotiated resolutions of disputes with the City. Nothing in this section or the absence of any similar provisions from any other City law shall be construed to impose a duty upon the City to enforce such other provision of law. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 9-10-96; Zoning Ord. § 57-6).

18.114.070 Conclusive notice.
Mailing of notice of any hearing or order under this title to the owners of the real property concerned as the owners' names and addresses are shown on the last equalized roll upon which the City taxes are collected shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper persons and addresses for mailing the resolution and the failure of any or all of the addressees to receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. Further, the posting of notice of a hearing or order pursuant to this title shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate notice to any and all occupants, users, or possessors of the property or its contents and the failure of such occupant, user or possessor to see, read, understand or otherwise receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 9-10-96; Zoning Ord. § 57-7).

Chapter 18.116
LEGISLATIVE
Sections:

18.116.010  Separability.

18.116.010 Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this title and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. (Zoning Ord. § 58-2).

Chapter 18.118
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:

18.118.010    Purpose.

18.118.020    Definitions.

18.118.030    Requesting reasonable accommodation.

18.118.040    Review and determination.

18.118.050    Appeals.

18.118.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter, pursuant to Federal and State fair housing laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the City’s rules, policies, practices, and procedures, as necessary, to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. It is a further purpose of this chapter to provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation with respect to development standards, building regulations, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence. (Ord. 1936 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.118.020 Definitions.
“Individual with a disability” means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of that person’s major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having an impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such impairment; but not including an individual’s current, illegal use of a controlled substance, unless an individual has a separate disability.

“Reasonable accommodation” means providing flexibility to an individual with a disability in the application of land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when necessary to eliminate barriers or housing opportunities. It may include such things as yard area modifications for ramps, handrails or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened driveways, parking areas or walkways; building additions for accessibility; tree removal; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable accommodation does not include an accommodation that would (a) impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City or (b) require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s land use policies or zoning regulations. (Ord. 1936 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.118.030 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
(a) In order to make specific housing available to disabled individuals, an individual with a disability or their representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, may request reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City.

(b) Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public information counters in the Planning and Inspection Department advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the Planning and Inspection Department.

(c) If an individual with a disability or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Planning and Inspection Department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning, or building regulation, policy, practice, or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.

(d) A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.

(e) While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect.

(f) A request for reasonable accommodation to allow one or more deviations of laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the City, shall be signed by the owner of the property under penalty of perjury, and shall include the following:

(1) Name and address of individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;

(2) Name and address of property owner(s);

(3) Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;

(4) The current actual use of the property that is the subject of the request;

(5) Description of the requested accommodation and the regulations, policy or procedure for which the accommodation is sought;

(6) Verifiable evidence to support the claim that fair housing laws apply to the individual(s) with a disability, which may include a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed healthcare professional, a handicapped license, or other appropriate evidence that establishes that the individual(s) needing the reasonable accommodation is/are disabled;

(7) The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary for individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling;

(8) Verification by the applicant that the property that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used by the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested and whose disabilities are protected under fair housing laws;

(9) The required filing fee for a reasonable accommodation request, as provided for in the City’s adopted fee schedule; and

(10) Other supportive information deemed necessary by the Planning and Inspection Department to facilitate proper consideration of the request. (Ord. 1936 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.118.040 Review and determination.
(a) The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall review and provide a determination on an application for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall have the ability to request any information necessary to assess an application for reasonable accommodation and provide a determination to an applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal of a completed application. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the thirty (30)-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the submittal of a completed application, and as provided for in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall take one of the following actions regarding a request for reasonable accommodation:

(1) Grant the reasonable accommodation request, based upon the findings set forth in subsection (f) of this section;

(2) Grant the reasonable accommodation request, subject to specified conditions;

(3) Deny the reasonable accommodation request; or

(4) Refer the determination of the reasonable accommodation request to the Architectural Review Committee, who shall render a determination on the application.

(b) Upon submittal of a completed application for reasonable accommodation and subsequent to an application being deemed complete, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a notice of determination regarding the Zoning Administrator’s intent to approve, deny, or refer the reasonable accommodation request pursuant to this chapter. The notice of determination shall be prepared and disseminated as provided below:

(1) Content. The notice of determination shall provide a detailed description of the subject property, the reasonable accommodation request, and findings pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. Additionally, the notice of determination shall include information on the public comment period for the request.

(2) Notice. The notice of determination shall be mailed to the applicant and the property owner of record of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and all neighboring properties abutting the subject property within thirty (30) days from the submittal of a completed application for reasonable accommodation.

(c) Applicability. A reasonable accommodation request that is granted pursuant to this chapter shall not, in and of itself, require the approval of a variance. The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) The reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to a residential structure occupied by one or more individuals with a disability.

(2) The reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which an application is made.

(3) The reasonable accommodation is subject to any and all building code permit and inspection requirements of the City and all other applicable zoning regulations and procedures.

(4) The Zoning Administrator may impose additional conditions on the approval of a reasonable accommodation request that are consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(d) Discontinuation of Reasonable Accommodation.

(1) Any change in use or circumstances that negate the basis for the approval of the reasonable accommodation shall require its termination and removal within sixty (60) days, unless continuance of the reasonable accommodation is approved by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to subsection (f) of this section.

(2) Within sixty (60) days from the date that an individual with a disability vacates the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation, the reasonable accommodation shall be removed in its entirety.

(3) If the Zoning Administrator denies a request to allow a reasonable accommodation to continue without the occupancy of the original individual with a disability, the property owner of record shall have sixty (60) days to remove the reasonable accommodation from the subject property.

(e) Duration of Reasonable Accommodation. If a request for reasonable accommodation is approved, the request shall be granted to an individual with a disability and shall not run with the land. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in limited circumstances, the Zoning Administrator may allow a reasonable accommodation to apply to subsequent occupants, if the Zoning Administrator makes the findings in subsection (f) of this section, in any of the following circumstances:

(1) The reasonable accommodation is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot be easily removed or altered to comply with all applicable laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures; or

(2) Another individual or individuals with a disability use the property and structure that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request; or

(3) The property owner of record provides a written request stating the reason why the reasonable accommodation should be retained without the occupancy of the residential structure by an individual with a disability, as originally permitted.

(f) Findings. A written determination to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following factors:

(1) Whether the parcel and/or housing that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual with a disability;

(2) Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific housing available to an individual with a disability;

(3) Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and

(4) Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies, and/or other procedures of the City. (Ord. 1936 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.118.050 Appeals.
(a) A final written determination made by the Zoning Administrator on a reasonable accommodation request may be appealed to the Architectural Committee, as provided below:

(1) Within seven days of the date of the notice of determination, an appeal may be filed in writing or on a form provided by the City, pursuant to this section. An appeal shall contain a detailed statement of the grounds for the appeal.

(2) An appeal may be filed by those directly aggrieved by the decision and determination of the Zoning Administrator. For the purposes of this section, “directly aggrieved” shall mean the applicant, representative of an individual with a disability, or owner of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and those property owners that directly abut the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation.

(3) The written decision of the director shall become final unless an applicant appeals it to the Architectural Review Committee.

(4) The Architectural Review Committee shall hear the matter and render a written determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the Zoning Administrator. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken.

(5) A notice of public hearing for the appeal shall be mailed to the person filing the appeal at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice of public hearing shall include a description of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation, the reason for which the appeal is filed, the date of the public hearing, and the location of the public hearing.

(6) Within seven days from the decision and determination of the Architectural Review Committee, those directly aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Planning Commission. The procedures that apply for filing an appeal with the Planning Commission are the same procedures that apply for filing an appeal with the Planning Commission pursuant to SCCC 18.108.060. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken.

(7) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the City Council.

(8) The filing fee for an appeal shall be equal to half of the application filing fee for the reasonable accommodation request, as provided for in the City’s adopted fee schedule.

(9) An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. (Ord. 1936 § 1, 1-13-15).

Chapter 18.120
EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Sections:

18.120.010    Purpose.

18.120.020    Definitions.

18.120.030    Provisions.

18.120.010 Purpose.
These regulations are intended to establish procedures and standards for emergency shelters in compliance with State law. (Ord. 1934 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.120.020 Definitions.
“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Ord. 1934 § 1, 1-13-15).

18.120.030 Provisions.
(a) Emergency shelters are a permitted use in the ML (Light Industrial) zone, provided they meet the minimum property development standards in which they are located when, on the date that a complete shelter management plan as required in subsection (d) of this section is submitted to the City, the number of existing shelter beds within the City is fewer than the City’s most recent annual count of homeless persons residing within the City.

(b) If the demonstrated need as defined in subsection (a) of this section has already been met, additional emergency shelters may be conditionally permitted in the ML (Light Industrial) zone, subject to conditions with the issuance of a use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.110 SCCC. The determination required by this subsection shall occur on the date the operator submits the materials required by subsection (c) of this section.

(c) Standards for Emergency Shelters. Emergency shelters shall be subject to the following standards:

(1) The lot coverage per shelter occupant shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet and the maximum number of occupants to be served at any given time shall not exceed fifty (50).

(2) A minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter.

(3) The maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) total days in a three hundred sixty-five (365)-day period.

(4) On-site client waiting and intake areas shall be located inside the building and shall be screened from public and private property where feasible. If not feasible, an exterior waiting area shall be provided which:

(A) Contains a minimum of ten square feet per bed provided at the facility;

(B) Shall be in a location not adjacent to the public right-of-way; and

(C) Shall be visibly separated from public view by a minimum six-foot tall visual screening.

(5) Hours of intake shall be between the hours of 5:00 P.M. to 9:00 P.M. Overnight occupants shall not be permitted to leave the facility on foot before 7:00 A.M. the following morning.

(6) A minimum of one employee per fifteen (15) beds, in addition to security personnel, shall be on duty and remain on site during operational hours whenever occupants are on the site.

(7) Security personnel shall be provided during operational hours whenever clients are on the site or when people are waiting outside the facility.

(8) Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor area of the site. Exterior lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and be of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood.

(9) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space per emergency shelter employee or as set forth in Chapter 18.74 SCCC, whichever is least restrictive.

(10) The shelter may provide the following services and facilities to occupants in a designated area separate from the sleeping areas:

(A) A recreation area either inside or outside the shelter. If located outside, the area shall be screened from public view.

(B) A counseling center for job placement, educational, health care, legal, or mental health services.

(C) Laundry facilities to serve the number of occupants at the shelter.

(D) One or more kitchens for the preparation of meals.

(E) Dining hall.

(F) Client storage areas (i.e., for the overnight storage of bicycles and personal items).

(G) Similar services supporting the needs of homeless occupants.

(11) The operator of the facility shall provide, at the City’s request, an annual report of the use of the facility that demonstrates that the facility is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the development standards for the use.

(12) Deliveries of goods to the shelter shall only be made within hours that are allowed by this Code.

(13) The facility shall not generate lighting at levels adversely affecting surrounding properties.

(14) Professional and on-site management, with experience managing emergency shelters, shall be provided at all times.

(15) The facility shall develop and implement an emergency preparedness plan, including a shelter-in-place plan.

(d) The proposed shelter operator shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) of this section by providing the Director of Planning and Inspection with a shelter management plan. The shelter management plan shall consist of a written description of the characteristics of the planned shelter along with preliminary plans for the existing or proposed shelter facility, including parking. The shelter management plan must address the following:

(1) Hours of operation;

(2) Admission hours and process;

(3) Staff training;

(4) Neighborhood outreach and privacy;

(5) Security; and

(6) Resident counseling and treatment.

The submission shall include sufficient detail for the Director of Planning and Inspection to assess whether the proposed shelter will satisfy the requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application, the Director of Planning and Inspection shall inform the proposed operator whether the submission satisfies subsection (c) of this section. If the Director of Planning and Inspection determines the proposed emergency shelter fails to satisfy the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the proposed operator shall be informed in writing of the conclusion, the reasons for the conclusion, and the facts on which the conclusion was based.

(e) Any emergency shelter must operate in accordance with the terms of the shelter management plan approved by the Director of Planning and Inspection, this Code, and if applicable, the approved use permit.

(f) Nothing in this section, or approval of any use permit or shelter management plan, shall relieve a proposed operator from the obligation to satisfy all applicable building, zoning, environmental and other laws, regulations or ordinances that may otherwise apply to the construction, location, or operation of the emergency shelter. (Ord. 1934 § 1, 1-13-15).