SOLEDAD MUNICIPAL CODE 1986 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
the City of Soledad, California 
____________ 
Republished 2011 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The Soledad Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1986, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of John Hutton, city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 8, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 716, passed April 4, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06 can be added between Chapter 2.04 and Chapter 2.08. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
As of 2009, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of 2009, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning in 2009, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning in 2009, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of 2009, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "Soledad Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 458 § 1, 1987)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Soledad Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "Soledad Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Soledad Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Soledad Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 458 § 2, 1987)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Soledad Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Soledad, California, codified in this code, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 458 § 3, 1987)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section thereof. 
(Ord. 458 § 4, 1987)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 458 § 5, 1987)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 445, passed June 10, 1986. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 445, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 446, 447, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454 and 455. 
(Ord. 458 § 6, 1987)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Soledad shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 458 § 7, 1987)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 458 § 8, 1987)  
1.01.090 - Publication. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in force and effect commencing thirty days after the date of its final passage and shall be published once within fifteen days in the Soledad Bee, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the county of Monterey and circulated in the city of Soledad. 
(Ord. 458 § 9, 1987)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Violation a misdemeanor unless declared an infraction. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the code or other ordinances of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this code may, in the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Those provisions of the code currently designating specific violations as infractions shall remain in full force and effect until amended by ordinance. 
(Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1996: prior code § 1-7 (part))  
1.04.020 - Penalty for misdemeanors. 
Unless a different penalty is provided for by a particular ordinance of the city, a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more that one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1996: prior code § 1-7 (part))  
1.04.030 - Penalty for infractions. 
Unless a different penalty is provided for by a particular ordinance of the city, an infraction shall be punished by (A) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (B) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (C) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1996: amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 1-7 (part))  
1.04.040 - Continuing violations. 
Each person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the ordinances of the city is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by that person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1996: added during 1986 codification)  
1.04.050 - Misdemeanor arrests by certain officers and employees authorized. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code, certain officers and employees of the city, designated in this section, who are not peace officers, are authorized to arrest a person without a warrant whenever such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in the presence of the arresting officer or employee which is a violation of a statute or ordinance which the officer or employee has the duty to enforce. The officers and employees so designated are the following: 
A.  The city manager, his/her assistants and deputies; 
B.  The planning director, his/her assistants and deputies; 
C.  The public works superintendent; 
D.  The building official, his/her assistants and deputies; and 
E.  Community service officers. 
(Ord. 550 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 453 § 2, 1986)  
Chapter 1.08 - DATUM PLANE 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Establishment of datum plane. 
The base or datum of the city for the purpose of providing a uniform system of elevations for streets, sidewalk curbs, sewer grades and public works is established as follows: 
The city base or datum shall be sea level according to the United States Geodetic Survey, especially its "Bench Mark" which consists of an iron post with brass cap stamped "1908-185-B" standing in the northern boundary of the city limits and also in the northern boundary of the Southern Pacific Company's depot grounds and being forty-eight feet easterly from the centerline of the Southern Pacific Company's right-of-way (measured at right angles from such centerline), the top of such metal cap being one hundred eighty-five feet above sea level. 
(Prior code § 1-8)  
Chapter 1.10 - CITATIONS—ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
1.10.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide an alternative method of enforcement for violations of this code. The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or local law. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used are defined as follows: 
"Administrative citation" means the notice of violation issued by an enforcement official that imposes an administrative fine for a violation of this code that, in the opinion of the enforcement official, poses a less a than serious threat to public health, safety, and welfare. 
"Administrative fine" means the amount of a fine imposed by an administrative citation for a violation of the Soledad Municipal Code in an amount determined according to Section 1.10.070 of this chapter. 
"Enforcement official" means any officer, code official, agent or designee of the city manager with the authority to enforce any provision of the Soledad Municipal Code. 
"Municipal code violation" means any violation of the Soledad Municipal Code ("code"). 
"Person" means any natural person, business, company or entity, including the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years old. 
"Stop work order" means a specific order requiring a person, agent, representative, employee or contractor to immediately stop or discontinue some or all work on a specific project or structure due to a violation of the provisions of this code, including but not limited to, safety violations, defective materials, workmanship, or lack of obtaining a building permit to do such work. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.030 - Enforcement authority. 
Any person violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of this code, including the building codes as adopted by the city, California codes and the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, agreement, or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.040 - Scope. 
The procedures established in this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to any criminal, civil or other remedy established by law or under the provisions of this code which may be pursued to address municipal code violations. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.050 - Administrative citation. 
A.  Correction Period. Prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for violations that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety or that are identified in the "stop work" provisions of this chapter, the enforcement official shall provide a reasonable period of time not less than thirty calendar days to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. 
B.  Issuance of Administrative Citation. Whenever an enforcement official discovers that a violation of this code has occurred, the enforcement official shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to the person responsible for the violation in the following manner: 
1.  Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued, the enforcement official shall attempt to locate and personally serve the person responsible for the violation with the administrative citation. If the person served with the administrative citation refuses to sign the administrative citation, such refusal shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
2.  Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement official is unable to personally serve the person responsible for the violation, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Where a code violation concerning real property is involved, an administrative citation and subsequent written notices authorized by this chapter may be served by certified mail at the address as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll. If the certified mail receipt is returned unsigned, then the citation may be sent by first class mail, and service shall be deemed effective at the time of deposit at the U.S Post Office provided that said notice is not returned by the U.S. Post Office as undeliverable. 
3.  Where a code violation of real property is involved and personal service or service by certified mail upon the property owner is unsuccessful, a copy of the administrative citation may be posted on the property that is subject of the violation in addition to or as an alternative to sending by first class mail. 
4.  If the enforcement official does not succeed in serving the responsible party personally, by certified or regular mail, and the city is not aware that the responsible party has a legal interest in any real property within the city, the enforcement official shall cause the administrative citation to be published once a week for four successive weeks in a local newspaper published at least once a week. 
5.  If the party responsible for the violation is a corporation, the enforcement official shall attempt to issue the administrative citation to any head of the corporation, including the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or general manager, or person authorized to receive service of process in any civil action. Absent personal service, service may be sent via certified mail to any of the above-referenced persons at the mailing address for the corporation. Similarly, if the party responsible for the violation is a business other than a corporation, the enforcement official shall attempt to issue the administrative citation to the business owner or manager, and in the absence of such personal service, shall issue the citation via certified mail to the attention of the business owner or manager or other responsible person at the business address. 
6.  Where service of any notice required under this chapter is effected in compliance with the requirements of this section, the asserted failure of the person responsible for the violation to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
C.  Administrative Citation Contents. To the extent the following information is reasonably available to the enforcement official, the administrative citation shall be provided on a form approved by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date and time the administrative citation is issued. 
2.  The name of person responsible for the violation, if available, property address of where violation(s) exist, mailing address and if possible, notation of whether citation is issued to owner, tenant or agent; 
3.  Reference to the code section(s) violated and description of the violation(s); 
4.  Time period after which administrative penalties will start to accrue if compliance with the notice of violation has not been achieved; 
5.  Amount and due date of fine(s) imposed for the violation where the correction period has passed and compliance has not been achieved ("administrative fine"); 
6.  Location and manner for payment of fine, as well as the time period by which the fine must be paid; 
7.  Explanation of the procedure for contesting the citation; 
8.  A warning that a failure to pay the fine or a failure to request and appear at an administrative hearing may result in the penalties described in Section 1.10.110(B). 
9.  Name and signature of the enforcement official, method of delivery and date. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.060 - Stop work order. 
A.  Applicability of Section. Section 1.10.060 shall only apply when the municipal code violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
B.  Stop Work Order. Upon discovery of a condition that meets the criteria established in subsection A of this section, the enforcement official shall issue a written "stop work order" to the project by personal service and by posting a notice at such address. Such notice shall refer to the code section(s) violated and describe how the person responsible for the violation violated the code section(s). The stop work order shall also describe the action necessary to correct, or eliminate the violation and state the date by which the correction must be corrected or otherwise show a good faith effort to resolve the issue(s). A stop work order may be appealed in accordance with the process established for appeals set forth in Section 15.04.040. 
C.  Correction Period. A person responsible for the violation of this section shall have ten calendar days to correct or otherwise make a good faith effort to resolve the issue(s) and continue to progress to avoid the issuance of an administrative citation and the imposition of a fine(s). A correction period longer than ten calendar days may be granted upon request and if deemed necessary by the enforcement official. 
D.  Administrative fines apply if compliance is not achieved prior to the correction period as set forth in subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.070 - Administrative fine. 
A.  The amount of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The schedule of fines shall specify any penalties for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within thirty-six months from the date of an administrative citation. 
C.  The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. 
D.  Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
E.  The person responsible for the violation shall pay the fine within the time and in the amount designated on the administrative citation. 
F.  Any administrative fine which has been paid shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation is not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.080 - Administrative hearing request and notice. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the city to afford due process of law to any person who is issued an administrative citation. 
B.  Any person to whom an administrative citation is issued may contest the citation no later than thirty calendar days from the date of service of the citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city and by either depositing the administrative fine with the city or providing notice that a hardship waiver request has been filed pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. 
C.  At least fifteen calendar days prior to the date of the administrative hearing, the city shall, by certified mail, personal service or mail, give notice to the person requesting the hearing, the time, date and location of the hearing. No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and filed with the city and, the fine has been paid in advance or a hardship waiver granted. 
D.  Hardship Waiver. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the penalty as required in Section 1.10.080 may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to the provisions of this section: 
1.  The request shall be filed with the city, along with the request for hearing form, on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the city, within fifteen calendar days of the date of the administrative citation. 
2.  The requirement for an advance deposit may be waived and the advance deposit hardship waiver may be granted only if the cited party submits to the city a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager the person's actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the penalty in advance of the hearing. 
3.  In the event of denial of the advance deposit hardship waiver, the full amount of the administrative fine as described in this section shall be paid. 
4.  If the city makes a determination to deny the advance deposit hardship waiver application, a written determination listing the reasons for said denial shall be issued and shall be served by mail upon the person requesting the waiver. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.090 - Hearing officer appointment and duties. 
The city manager shall designate an administrative hearing officer for administrative order hearings; the hearing officer may not be the enforcement officer that issued the administrative citation. The hearing officer will have the authority to set, notice and conduct public hearings required or allowed pursuant to this article to contest the grounds for the citation, fees, charges, costs, expenses, penalties or other sums of money owed to the city. The officer shall have the powers, and duties necessary to conduct all administrative hearings and appeals authorized by the chapter. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.100 - Administrative hearing procedures. 
A.  The city manager or designee shall establish a date for all hearings based on activity. A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set not less than fifteen calendar days and not more than sixty calendar days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of his or her case and to cross-examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish a violation of the city code. The administrative citation and any additional reports submitted by the enforcement official shall constitute evidence which would be sufficient enough to prove particular facts contained in those documents. The administrative hearing officer must use preponderance of evidence as the standard in deciding the issues. 
C.  Not less than five calendar days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of any additional reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement official. 
D.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement official or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.110 - Administrative order. 
A.  Within thirty calendar days of the Hearing's conclusion, the hearing officer shall provide the person responsible for the violation with a decision in writing to uphold, cancel, or modify the administrative citation ("administrative order"). The hearing officer shall provide the person responsible for the violation with the administrative order by personal service or by registered or certified mail to the person responsible for the violation last known address. 
B.  The administrative order shall contain the hearing officer's findings of fact and conclusions and the procedure described in Section 1.10.130 for seeking judicial review. If a violation of the code is determined to exist, the administrative order may contain remedies for the violation, including any combination of the following: 
1.  A requirement that the responsible party correct or eliminate the violation, including a proposed schedule for correction or elimination of the violation; 
2.  Authorization for the city to enforce the order by abatement of the violation and allowing the city to recover all costs, expenses (including legal fees) and administrative costs if such work is undertaken; 
3.  Direction to immediately stop any act or conduct that is in violation of the code; and 
4.  Direction to restore any site or location that has been damaged or disturbed as a result of a violation of the code. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
C.  If the hearing officer upholds the administrative citation, the city shall retain the fine deposited by the responsible person. In instances in which the fine has not been deposited pursuant to a deposit hardship waiver, the administrative hearing officer shall specify in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. 
D.  If the administrative hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly refunded. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.120 - Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
A.  Waiver of Right to Hearing. If the person responsible for the violation fails to appear at a hearing, it shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. Failure of the person responsible for the violation to appear at the hearing shall be presumed an admission of guilt to the municipal code violation charges as indicated on the administrative citation except as provided otherwise herein. 
B.  Good Cause. Upon a showing of good cause by the person responsible for the violation, as determined by the hearing officer, the hearing officer may excuse the recipient of the violation for failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one time. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to mean that the person responsible for the violation is excused from the requirement of paying the administrative fine. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.130 - Judicial review. 
A.  Any person or entity aggrieved by an administrative order of the administrative hearing officer imposing a penalty or fine may seek judicial review of the administrative order pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, by filing an appeal in the Monterey County Superior Court, subject to the time limits set forth in Section 53069.4. 
B.  Any person or entity aggrieved by an administrative order imposing the duty to abate a violation, allowing the violation to be abated by the city, or some other specified remedy that exceeds a penalty or fine, may seek judicial review of said order pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 by filing a petition for writ of mandate within ninety days after the administrative order becomes final. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
1.10.150 - Failure to comply. 
A.  Event Defined. As used in this section, the term "event" shall mean any of the following occurrences: 
1.  The person responsible for the violation fails to pay the administrative fine within thirty calendar days from the date the administrative citation is issued, unless a hardship waiver is granted; 
2.  The person responsible for the violation requests a hearing and fails to appear; or 
3.  The person responsible for the violation fails to either comply with the administrative order or seek judicial review of the administrative order within the statutory time period. 
B.  Penalty Fine. The occurrence of an event may result in the city increasing the administrative fine, not to exceed the maximum amounts established pursuant to Section 1.10.080 ("penalty fine"). 
C.  Account Receivable. Upon the occurrence of an event, the city may treat the administrative fine or penalty fine, whichever is applicable, as an account receivable, subject to the city's established policy for delinquent accounts receivable. 
D.  Collection. The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including but not limited to special assessment or lien on the involved property or by referring the matter to small claims court. 
(Ord. 663, 2009)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Time and place of regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall, located at 248 Main Street in the city, at such time as shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 502 §1, 1991: Ord. 491 § 1, 1990: amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 2-1)  
2.04.020 - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called at any time in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created—Appointment by council. 
The office of city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-17)  
2.08.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the city at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment; provided, however, that within twelve months after the appointment of the city manager he shall establish his residence in the city, unless such time is extended by resolution of the city council. In no case may this extension exceed six months. 
(Prior code § 2-18)  
2.08.030 - Eligibility. 
No person elected as a councilman of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until two years has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-19)  
2.08.040 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and which shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter and other sections of the code. Any premium for the bond is a proper charge against the city. 
(Prior code § 2-20)  
2.08.050 - Compensation—Expenses. 
A.  The city manager shall receive the compensation and expense allowances the city council from time to time determines and fixes by resolution, and the compensation and expenses are a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council designates. 
B.  The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for the business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to and approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-21)  
2.08.060 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager is the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He is responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation on those powers, it is his duty and he has the following powers: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances of the city are enforced and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.  To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads; 
C.  To recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city' s business; 
D.  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient; 
E.  To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused from such meetings; 
F.  To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
G.  To prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval; 
H.  To be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council unless accompanied by a report of the city manager; 
I.  To make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city; 
J.  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, and permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed; 
K.  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
L.  To serve ex officio as city clerk, upon being specifically designated to do so by the city council, and upon such designation to faithfully execute the duties and responsibilities of such office; 
M.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 40602, in addition to the powers of execution granted to the city's mayor, the council hereby delegates authority to the city manager to sign all written contracts and conveyances awarded or otherwise approved by the city, and all instruments requiring the city seal. This authority shall also inure to contracts at or below the monetary threshold established from time to time by the city council for which the city manager is authorized to award without council approval. 
N.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 1, 5-4-2016; prior code § 2-22)  
2.08.070 - Entire time to be devoted to office. 
It is the duty of the city manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-23)  
2.08.080 - Council-manager relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-24)  
2.08.090 - Departmental cooperation. 
It is the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer, and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-25)  
2.08.100 - Attendance at city agency meetings. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards, or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the council and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-26)  
2.08.110 - Absence or disability. 
In the event of the absence or disability of the city manager, he shall designate, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as city manager pro tempore during such period. In the event of such absence and disability and in the event of the failure of the city manager to so designate a manager pro tempore, the council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability. 
(Prior code § 2-27)  
2.08.120 - Notice of resignation. 
Prior to terminating his employment for any reason, the city manager shall notify the city council, in writing, at least thirty days prior to the effective date of the termination. 
(Prior code § 2-28)  
2.08.130 - Removal—Council vote—Notice and hearing. 
A.  The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a four-member vote of the whole council; subject, however, to the provisions of subsection B of this section and of Section 2.08.150. 
B.  In case of the intended removal of the city manager by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to do so, and the reason therefor, at least thirty days before the effective date of removal. Within seven days after the delivery of such notice, the city manager may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for the hearing, which shall be held at its usual meeting place prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period, at which the city manager may appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
(Prior code §§ 2-29, 2-30)  
2.08.140 - Removal—Suspension pending hearing. 
After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the hearing provided for in Section 2.08.130. 
(Prior code § 2-31)  
2.08.150 - Removal—Discretionary right of council—Limitation. 
A.  In removing the city manager, the city council shall have full and uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council grounds of opposition to such removal prior to the time action is taken. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office, except for malfeasance or nonfeasance, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the duties of his office. After the expiration of the ninety-day period, the provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply and be effective. 
(Prior code §§ 2-32, 2-33)  
Chapter 2.10 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.10.010 - Authority to establish and maintain fire department. 
The city of Soledad is hereby authorized to establish and maintain a fire department comprised of volunteers, paid employees, or any combination thereof. The number of members of the department may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council in response to the changing needs of the city and/or any other entity to which service is provided. 
(Ord. 558 § 1 (part), 1999)  
2.10.020 - Authority to create and fill the position of fire chief. 
The city council shall be empowered to create the position of fire chief. The fire chief shall be selected by the city manager on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and ability and shall serve at the pleasure of the city. 
(Ord. 558 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 2.12 - PLANNING AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Planning agency established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 65100 of the Government Code of California, a planning agency is established for the city, consisting of a planning commission and a planning department. 
(Prior code § 2-15 (part))  
2.12.020 - Planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall consist of five members. At least four of the commission's members shall be residents of the city, and the office shall become vacant when he or she ceases to be a resident of the city. The fifth "at-large" commissioner may be appointed from those individuals residing within the city's sphere of influence, as designated in the most current version of the Soledad general plan. The office of the at-large commissioner shall become vacant when she or he ceases to reside within the city's sphere of influence. Notwithstanding this provision, nothing shall prevent the council from filling the at-large commission seat with a resident from the city if no at-large applicant is available or deemed acceptable. Members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
B.  Commissioners shall serve terms of four years and may be reappointed pursuant to subsection A of this section. This section shall be implemented through attrition, but no later than April, 1994. 
(Ord. 528 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993: Ord. 488 § 1, 1990: prior code § 2-15 (a))  
2.12.021 - Planning commission eligibility requirements. 
The minimum requirements for appointment to the Soledad planning commission shall be as follows: 
A.  Be a resident of the city of Soledad except as provided in Section 2.12.020A; 
B.  Be a minimum of eighteen years of age; 
C.  Be a registered voter. 
(Ord. 528 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993)  
2.12.025 - Removal of member for failure to attend. 
If a planning commission member absents himself or herself from more than three regular meetings of the commission during any calendar year, then regardless of any excuse for such absences, the city council may by resolution remove such member from office. The vacancy created by such removal shall be filled by appointment as provided in Section 2.12.020, and the person appointed shall serve for the remainder of the term of the removed member. 
(Ord. 470 § 1, 1988)  
2.12.030 - Planning department. 
The planning department shall consist of a planning director and such other employees as the city council from time to time deems necessary. The planning director shall also serve as zoning administrator, and as such has all of the powers and duties set forth in Section 65091 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 2-15(b))  
2.12.040 - Functions, powers and duties. 
The functions, powers and duties of the planning agency shall be as set forth in Sections 65101, 65102 and 65103 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 2-16)  
Chapter 2.16 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Declaration of desire to receive aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 18-1)  
2.16.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of the Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to Chapter 1 of the Penal Code will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the State Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Prior code § 18-2)  
Chapter 2.20 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Civil defense" means the preparation of and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disaster. It does not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy. 
B.  "Disaster" means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity. 
(Prior code § 6-1)  
2.20.020 - Purpose. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the civil defense of persons and property within this city in the event of a disaster and to provide for the coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. 
(Prior code § 6-2)  
2.20.030 - Expenditures deemed for protection of inhabitants and property. 
Any expenditures made in connection with civil defense and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Prior code § 6-3)  
2.20.040 - Civil defense and disaster council—Created—Composition—Officers. 
The city civil defense and disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of civil defense and disaster, who shall be vice-chairman; 
C.  The assistant director, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Under the supervision of the director, the assistant director shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the civil defense and disaster program of this city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director; 
D.  Such deputy directors and chiefs of operation of civil defense and disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official group or organization civil defense and disaster responsibility as may be required by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 6-4)  
2.20.050 - Powers and duties of council. 
It is the duty of the city civil defense and disaster council, and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the city council, civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. 
(Prior code § 6-5)  
2.20.060 - Meetings. 
The civil defense and disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call a meeting, upon the call of the vice chairman. 
(Prior code § 6-6)  
2.20.070 - Director of civil defense and disaster—Office created—Appointment. 
There is created the office of director of civil defense and disaster. The director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 6-7)  
2.20.080 - General powers and duties of director. 
The director of civil defense and disaster is empowered: 
A.  To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest practicable time; provided, that a proclamation issued by the director shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days unless it has been ratified by the city council; 
B.  To request the Governor to proclaim a state of extreme emergency when in the opinion of the director the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster; 
C.  To control and direct the effort of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purpose of this chapter; 
D.  To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.  To represent the civil defense and disaster organization of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster. 
(Prior code § 6-8)  
2.20.090 - Powers of director upon proclamation of disaster. 
In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as provided by this chapter, or the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor or the State Director of Civil Defense, the director is empowered: 
A.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
B.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
C.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and disaster worker volunteers; 
D.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
E.  To have and exercise, during a declared emergency, all of the powers of the mayor and the city manager if those officials, for any reason, are unable to act; 
F.  To execute all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 6-9)  
2.20.100 - Civil defense and disaster organization—Composition. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of subsection C of Section 2.20.090, who may by agreement or operation of law be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during a disaster, constitute the civil defense and disaster organization of the city. 
(Prior code § 6-10)  
2.20.110 - Resolution prescribing duties of organization. 
A.  The functions and duties of the city civil defense and disaster organization shall be distributed among the divisions, services and staff the city council prescribes by resolution. 
B.  The city council shall, concurrently with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, adopt a resolution setting forth the form of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of functions, duties and powers, and the designation of officers and employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the civil defense agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 6-11)  
2.20.120 - Unlawful acts. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person during a disaster to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense and disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 6-12)  
Chapter 2.24 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Administrative employees" means those employees who, by resolution of the city council, are specifically designated as such and are given specific job titles. 
B.  "Classified employees" means those employees who, by resolution of the city council, are specifically designated as such and are given specific job titles. The term does not include administrative employees or police employees. 
C.  "Date of hiring" means the date on which an employee commenced his or her current term of continuous employment by the city. A promotion, demotion, reassignment, or a return from leave of absence without pay, shall not alter the date of hiring. 
D.  "Permanent, full-time employee" means an employee who has completed his probationary period of employment and who has been hired on a permanent basis for full-time work. 
E.  "Police employees" means those employees who, by resolution of the city council, are specifically designated as such; however, the term does not include clerical employees of the police department who, by resolution of the city council, have been specifically designated as classified employees. 
F.  "Probationary employee" means an employee who has not completed the probationary period for new employees and who has not achieved the status of a permanent, full-time employee. 
G.  "Temporary assignment" means the assignment of a permanent, full-time employee to a position having a job title different from the position occupied by him prior to such assignment. 
H.  "Unclassified employees" means those persons who hold the following positions: 
1.  Elected officials; 
2.  Ambulance standby serviceperson; 
3.  Ambulance driver; 
4.  Ambulance steward; 
5.  Fire chief; 
6.  Fire engineer; and 
7.  Reserve police officer. 
(Prior code §§ 17-1—17-8)  
2.24.020 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a basic compensation policy and plan for municipal employment by the city which will recognize efficient service and will aid in establishing the principle of equal pay for equal work for municipal employment. 
(Prior code § 17-9)  
2.24.030 - Compensation plans. 
Compensation plans for classified employees, police employees, and administrative employees of the city shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. Each compensation plan shall consist of a job title and a normal hiring wage rate; it may include a plan for the awarding of merit increases based upon job performance; it may also contain such other relevant provisions as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Prior code § 17-10)  
2.24.040 - Conversion table. 
Where any monthly salary established for a particular job title is converted to an hourly basis, the hourly salary shall be twelve times the monthly salary, divided by two thousand eighty. 
(Prior code § 17-11)  
2.24.060 - Authority of city manager. 
The city manager has the sole and exclusive right to hire and discharge all employees of the city. He may recommend job titles and normal hiring wages rates for all city employees and, subject to the provisions of compensation plans established by the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.24.030, he may grant merit increases in salary in cases where, in his judgment, after consideration of evaluation reports of department heads and supervisors, an increase in salary is deserved. 
(Prior code § 17-13)  
2.24.070 - Probationary period for new employees. 
Each new employee shall serve a probationary period. In the case of police employees, the probationary period shall be twelve months; in the case of all other employees, the probationary period shall be six months. When the duties of a job, as set forth in the job description, require licensing or certification by any public or private agency, or the completion of a course of training given by any such agency, the employee shall be on probation from the date of hiring until the date on which such licensing or certification is obtained, or course of training is satisfactorily completed, and thereafter for the full probationary period specified in the second sentence of this section. 
(Ord. 450 § 1, 1986: prior code § 17-14)  
2.24.080 - Evaluation during probation. 
Prior to the expiration of the probationary period, each new employee shall be evaluated by his or her department head or supervisor, who shall thereupon present a written evaluation report to the city manager containing one of the following recommendations: 
A.  That the employment be continued with a salary increase of four and one-half percent; 
B.  That the employee be promoted to a higher job classification; 
C.  That the employment be continued without any change in salary; or 
D.  That the employment be terminated. 
(Prior code § 17-15)  
2.24.090 - Annual evaluation, report and recommendation by department head or supervisor. 
Annually, on the anniversary date of hiring, each employee shall be evaluated by his or her department head or supervisor, who then shall present a written evaluation report to the city manager. The first such evaluation shall take place on the second anniversary of the date of hiring. 
(Prior code § 17-16)  
2.24.100 - Temporary assignments. 
An employee may be assigned by the city manager to a position having a different job title, on a temporary basis. While acting in such temporary capacity, the employee shall receive compensation at the normal hiring step rate for the position to which he or she has been assigned; provided, that in no event shall the employee's compensation be reduced. The temporary assignment shall be on an interim basis only, until the person regularly holding the position returns to duty or until his or her successor is hired. Temporary assignment shall be for a period not exceeding six months; an employee temporarily assigned to a position for longer than six months shall automatically be entitled to that position on a permanent basis. 
(Prior code § 17-17)  
2.24.110 - Negotiated labor agreement. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to limit or restrict in any way the right of the city, acting through the city council and its authorized representatives, to meet and confer, or to enter into a written memorandum of understanding, with a recognized employee organization (as that term is defined in Section 3501 of the Government Code) concerning matters relating to the employment of members of that organization by the city. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of any such memorandum of understanding and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the memorandum of understanding shall be controlling. 
(Prior code § 17-23)  
Chapter 2.28 - COMPENSATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Compensation for elected officials. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516 of the Government Code, members of the city council shall receive salaries in the amount of six hundred twelve dollars per month, to take effect as provided in Section 36516.5 of the Government Code. Until such effective date, councilmembers shall receive salaries in the amount of five hundred ten dollars per month. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516.1 of the Government Code, the elected mayor shall receive one hundred dollars per month in addition to his or her salary as a councilmember. 
(Ord. 654 § 2, 2007; Ord. 615 § 2, 2005: Ord. 605 § 2, 2003: Ord. 471 § 2 (part), 1988)  
2.28.020 - Health plan coverage for councilmembers. 
A councilmember may elect to be included, and to have his or her dependents included, in the roll of employees covered by the city's health, accident and dental plan, at the councilmember's expense. In such case the cost of coverage shall either be paid directly to the city as premiums become due, or the councilmember may authorize payment by deduction from amounts due as salary under the provisions of Section 2.28.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 471 § 2 (part), 1988)  
2.28.030 - Compensation of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall receive a salary of ten dollars per month. 
(Ord. 471 § 2 (part), 1988)  
2.28.040 - Compensation of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall receive a salary of twenty-five dollars per month. 
(Ord. 471 § 2 (part), 1988)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to county. 
The city council elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector. 
(Prior code § 21-1)  
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 21-2.010)  
3.08.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 21-2.020)  
3.08.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1984. 
(Prior code § 21-2.030)  
3.08.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-2.040)  
3.08.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-2.050)  
3.08.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Prior code § 21-2.060)  
3.08.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 21-2.070)  
3.08.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price includes delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 21-2.080)  
3.08.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section. 
(Prior code § 21-2.090)  
3.08.100 - Limitation on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 21-2.100)  
3.08.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit is not required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-2.110)  
3.08.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 21-2.120)  
3.08.130 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 21-2.130)  
3.08.140 - Operative date of Section 3.08.120. 
Section 3.08.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
(Prior code § 21-2.140)  
3.08.150 - Operative date of Section 3.08.130. 
Section 3.08.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Prior code § 21-2.150)  
3.08.160 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-2.160)  
3.08.170 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 21-2.170)  
3.08.180 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.04.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 21-2.180)  
Chapter 3.09 - TEMPORARY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
3.09.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Save Our Soledad Temporary Emergency Tax Measure Ordinance." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.030 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.040 - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California. 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Ordinance. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject etc to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part I of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this ordinance, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this ordinance. The foregoing amendments shall not require voter approval. 
The following amendments to this chapter must be approved by the voters of the City of Soledad: increasing the tax rate or revising the methodology for calculating the tax such that a tax increase would result; or imposing the tax on transactions and uses not previously subject to the tax (unless such amendment occurs automatically by operation of the preceding paragraph). The city council may otherwise amend this ordinance without submitting the amendment to voters for approval. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.140 - Annual audits, expenditure report and oversight committee. 
Annually, the city retains an independent auditor to conduct an audit of and provide audited financial statements for all of the city's financial activities. The auditor shall include an accounting of the revenue received from the tax and expenditures thereof in the audited financial statements. The auditor's report shall be presented to the council at a public meeting and made available to the public. The city manager and city finance director shall annually prepare and present to the council and the public a report in conjunction with the budget that reviews the status and performance of the programs and services funded wholly or partially with proceeds of the tax. Additionally, the mayor and city council shall each annually appoint one member of the public to serve as an oversight committee for the revenue that the city receives from the tax enacted by this article and to recommend the use thereof. The city manager shall provide staff for the committee, and the finance director shall provide all relevant data regarding revenue from the tax and expenditure thereof. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.150 - Refunds and credits; suits and legal proceedings. 
A.  Refunds of and credits for any tax paid pursuant to this article may be made only as provided for in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  Suits and proceedings for the recovery of any amount alleged to have been erroneously or illegally determined or collected pursuant to this article may be maintained in any court only as provided for in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. A judgment shall not be rendered in favor of the plaintiff in any action brought against the State Board of Equalization to recover any amount paid when the action is brought by or in the name of an assignee of the person paying the amount or by any person other than the person who paid the amount. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.160 - Termination date. 
This chapter is meant to establish a transactions and use tax for a limited period of time. The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the last day of the calendar quarter preceding the operative date. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
3.09.170 - Effect of tax. 
The tax established herein is meant to be imposed and collected in addition to any existing tax established by the city, and is not meant to supersede or otherwise impact the tax established in Chapter 3.08 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 2, 7-11-2012)  
Chapter 3.12 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Tax imposed—Amount. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city is granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or any other person, by his direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 21-9)  
3.12.020 - Parties liable for tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.010 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 21-10)  
3.12.030 - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.12.010, no tax shall be imposed: 
A.  Upon any instrument in writing given to secure a debt; 
B.  Upon any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that the tax does apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure; 
C.  Upon any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, is a party when any such exempt agency is acquiring title; 
D.  Upon the making, deliverying or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment, as set forth in Section 11923 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; 
E.  Upon the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as provided in Section 11924 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; 
F.  Upon any transfer of partnership property which qualifies for an exemption from tax under the provisions of Section 11925 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; 
G.  Upon any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders; provided, that in order to qualify for this exemption, the deed, instrument or writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code §§ 21-11—21-15)  
3.12.040 - Administration of chapter. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 21-16)  
3.12.050 - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Prior code § 21-17)  
3.12.060 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of Monterey pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or upon December 20, 1967, whichever is the later. 
(Prior code § 21-18)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the City of Soledad." 
(Prior code § 21-19)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure or facility, or any portion of a structure or facility, which is used or occupied, or which is intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, camping or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, tourist campground, motel, studio, hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the city clerk. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel is a "transient" unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a period of occupancy longer than thirty consecutive calendar days. In determining whether a person is a "transient," uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 21-20)  
3.16.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 514 §1, 1992: prior code § 21-21) 
(Ord. No. 701, § 3, 12-7-2016)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided for in this chapter; 
2.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 21-22)  
3.16.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-23)  
3.16.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  The following: 
 This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local and applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Prior code § 21-24)  
3.16.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods of any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 21-25)  
3.16.080 - Penalties—Interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section becomes a part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid. 
(Prior code § 21-26)  
3.16.090 - Failure to collect—Investigation and report—Determination of tax. 
A.  If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in the manner he deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. 
B.  As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case a determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. The operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If the application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.16.100. 
(Prior code § 21-27)  
3.16.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 21-28)  
3.16.110 - Records. 
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records necessary to determine the amount of the tax he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator has the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 21-29)  
3.16.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 21-30)  
3.16.130 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city is a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of that amount. 
(Prior code § 21-31)  
3.16.140 - Violations—Misdemeanors. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Section 1.04.020 of this code. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as set out in subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim, who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as set out in subsection A of this section. 
(Prior code § 21-32)  
Chapter 3.20 - FEES AND CHARGES FOR CITY SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Fees and charges deemed debt to city—Action to collect. 
The amount of any fee or charge fixed and made payable to the city under any provision of this code is a debt to the city and the person, firm or corporation upon whom any fee or charge is imposed is liable in an action brought in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 2-40)  
3.20.020 - General fee schedule established. 
The city council shall by resolution adopt, and may by resolution from time to time amend, a schedule of fees and charges applicable to city services and functions not otherwise specifically provided for in this code. The schedule shall be known and designated as the general fee schedule of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-41)  
Chapter 3.24 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Purchasing system adopted—Purposes. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. 
(Prior code § 2-9)  
3.24.020 - Powers and duties of purchasing officer. 
The purchasing officer has authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer adopts and such other rules and regulations as are prescribed by the city council; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment; 
C.  Act to procure for the city needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city; 
D.  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
E.  Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city; 
F.  Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules; 
G.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
H.  Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchases to ensure conformance with specifications; 
I.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use; 
J.  Maintain a bidders' list, vendors' catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. 
(Prior code § 2-10)  
3.24.030 - Requisitions. 
Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. 
(Prior code § 2-11)  
3.24.040 - Bidding required—Exceptions. 
A.  Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be bid by procedures as prescribed by this chapter; provided, that bidding shall be dispensed with (1) when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, or (2) when the amount involved is less than twenty-five thousand dollars; or (3) when the commodity, product or equipment can be obtained from only one vendor; or (4) when the city council determines, by a resolution passed by four-fifths of its members, that because of differences in the kinds or types of the particular commodity, product or equipment available on the market, it would be to the city's advantage to make a selection on the basis of suitability to the city's needs, rather than on the basis of price; or (5) when the city council determines, by a resolution passed by a majority of its members, that cost and time savings can be realized by using the purchasing procedures and bid results of another public entity in lieu of the bidding policies prescribed by this statute, in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection C below. 
B.  An "emergency" exists if: 
1.  There is a great public calamity; 
2.  There is immediate need to prepare for national or local defense; 
3.  There is a breakdown in machinery or an essential service which requires the immediate purchase of supplies or services to protect the public health, welfare or safety; 
4.  An essential operation affecting the public health, welfare or safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed purchasing procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the needed item or service. 
C.  The following rules must be met in every instance in which the city desires to use the in lieu exception set forth in subsection (A)(5) above: 
1.  The city manager must approve of the use of the exception for a given purchase; 
2.  The purchasing officer must determine that the bid to be relied upon was made within the preceding twelve months in accordance with applicable law; 
3.  The purchasing officer must determine that there has been no significant change to the price of the item to be purchased since the time that the relied-upon bid was awarded; 
4.  If the bid to be relied upon was made by an entity located outside of Monterey County, the purchasing officer must confirm that there is no reason to believe that there would be a significant price difference in the item to be purchased based on the location of available vendors; 
5.  The city may only purchase the desired supplies or equipment from the vendor identified as the lowest responsible bidder in the relied-upon bid. The purchase officer should also look to the factors set forth in Section 3.24.060(D) for determining the lowest responsible bidder prior to recommending a given purchase; 
6.  This exception may not be used for any purchase for which bidder's security is required by law; 
7.  Staff must prepare a report to the city council setting forth compliance with the aforementioned rules, and the city council must approve the proposed purchase at a regular meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. 592 § 1, 2002: Ord. 462 § 1 (Exbt. A), 1987: prior code § 2-12) 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 10-4-2017)  
3.24.050 - Purchases by purchase orders. 
Except in those cases in which the bidding procedures set forth in this chapter are to be followed, all purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made by purchase order. Except in cases of emergency, and except in cases where a purchase has been specifically authorized by the city council, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unexpended balance in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Prior code § 2-13)  
3.24.060 - Bidding procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value of fifteen thousand dollars or more shall be made from the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section as follows: 
A.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the article to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city. 
B.  Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, or when required by law, bidder's security shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the purchase contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the differences between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
C.  Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. 
D.  Lowest Responsible Bidder. In addition to price, the "lowest responsible bidder" will be determined by the city council, in its discretion, after the following factors have been considered: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder has the facilities to perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The bidders' record of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, equipment or services to the particular uses required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
E.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any or all bids presented, waive any informalities or make award on any alternative that may be in the best interest of the city. 
F.  Performance Bonds. The city council may require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
G.  Identical Bids—None Received. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city council may accept the one it chooses. If no bid is received, the city council, in its discretion, may either: 
1.  Readvertise; or 
2.  Direct that the required item or items be purchased without further complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 597 § 2, 2002; Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 2-14)  
Chapter 3.28 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Inapplicability to certain claims. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to those claims where the time, manner and conditions of presentation are otherwise provided for by the Tort Claims Act (as set forth in Chapter 2, Division 3.6, Title 1 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 910), or by any other applicable state law. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
3.28.020 - Form of claim. 
A claim against the city must be in writing and must contain a general description of the transaction giving rise thereto, the date of the transaction, and an itemized statement of the amount claimed to be due. It must be dated and signed by the claimant, and the post office address of the claimant must be shown on the statement. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
3.28.030 - Presentation. 
Claims shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be presented to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
3.28.040 - Approval or rejection of claim. 
If the city council finds that a claim is a proper charge against the city, it shall approve the claim for payment. If it finds that the claim is not a proper charge, it shall reject the claim and the claimant shall be given written notification of the rejection. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
3.28.050 - Payment. 
Upon the approval of a claim by the city council, a warrant for the amount allowed shall be issued and delivered to the claimant in return for a receipt from the claimant acknowledging full payment of the account. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
Chapter 3.32 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - "Unclaimed property" defined. 
All personal property in the possession of the police department of the city which is not claimed by the lawful owner thereof shall be held by the department for a period of at least three months from the date possession is acquired. If any such property is not claimed within that period of time, it constitutes "unclaimed property" within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 18-3)  
3.32.020 - Sale at public auction—Notice of sale. 
At any time after any item of unclaimed property has been held for three months, as provided by Section 3.32.010 and before the property is claimed by the lawful owner thereof, the chief of police, or his duly designated representative, may sell unclaimed property at public auction to the highest bidder, after not less than five days' notice thereof published in a newspaper of general circulation printed, published and circulated in the county. The notice shall contain a general description of the item or items of property to be sold, and shall state the time and place of sale. The proceeds derived from such sale shall first be applied to the expenses of the sale, and the balance of the proceeds shall forthwith be deposited in the city treasury. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 18-4)  
3.32.030 - Disposal of unsold or valueless unclaimed property. 
If any unclaimed property which has been held for three months has no monetary value, or if in the judgment of the chief of police the value of the property is not sufficient to defray the expenses of sale, or if no bid is received for any such property at the time of sale, the chief of police or his duly designated representative may, in any such event, destroy or otherwise dispose of the unclaimed property. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 18-5)  
3.32.040 - Report on sale or destruction of property. 
Within ten days after any sale of unclaimed property, the chief of police shall file with the city clerk a report specifying the item or items of property sold, the amount received from each item, the expenses of sale, and the net amount deposited in the city treasury. If any item of unclaimed property has been destroyed or otherwise disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.32.030, the chief of police shall likewise file a full report thereof with the city clerk within ten days after the destruction or disposal. 
(Prior code § 18-6)  
Chapter 3.36 - FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Capital outlay fund. 
A fund to be designated the "capital outlay fund" is established pursuant to the provisions of Article 4, Chapter 4, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the California Government Code, for the purpose of accumulating a reserve for capital outlays which hereafter from time to time may be required. "Capital outlays" as used in this section does not include the construction, acquisition, extensions of, or additions to utilities other than utilities for the furnishing of water supply. "Utilities" does not include sewage or sanitation facilities or airports. 
(Prior code § 8-5)  
3.36.020 - Special gas tax street improvement fund. 
A.  Fund Created. To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the California Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
B.  Payments into Fund. All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of, streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund. 
C.  Expenditures from Fund. All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of, Chapter 3, Division 3, of the Streets and Highways Code, and of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1, of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 8-6)  
Chapter 3.40 - CARDTABLE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Tax rate. 
A.  The cardtable tax is an annual tax due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year. 
B.  The annual tax is five hundred dollars per table. 
(Ord. 518 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
3.40.030 - Late penalty. 
Penalty for failure to pay tax when due is twenty-five percent of the tax on the last day of each month after the due date. 
(Ord. 518 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
3.40.050 - Enforcement of chapter. 
It is the duty of the chief of police and he is directed, to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter, and it is his duty to cause a complaint to be filed against all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 518 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
3.40.070 - Tax constitutes debt to city. 
The amount of any license tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any business, without first having procured a license from the city to do so, shall be liable in an action in the name of the city, brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of the license tax imposed upon such business. 
(Ord. 518 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
3.40.090 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly, or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 518 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 3.44 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Authority and purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 37100.5 for the purpose of raising revenue to be used for general municipal purposes. 
(Ord. 521 § 1, 1993)  
3.44.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed an annual utility users tax in the amount set forth in Sections 3.44.060, 3.44.070, 3.44.090 and 3.44.100 hereof to raise revenues for the general governmental purposes of the city. Such general tax shall be levied for each fiscal year by the city. 
(Ord. 521 § 2, 1993)  
3.44.030 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
A.  "City" means the city of Soledad, California, including all the territory and jurisdiction thereof as presently constituted, and any and all of the same which shall later come into existence by any manner or means whatsoever. 
B.  "Collector" means the city manager of the city. 
C.  "Electrical corporation," "gas corporation," "telephone corporation" and "cable television corporation" shall have the same meanings, except as hereafter provided, as defined in Sections 218, 222, 234 and 215-5, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the state, except, "electrical corporation" and "gas corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas to a service user. 
D.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
E.  "Person" means any domestic and foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individual or municipal corporation. 
F.  "Service supplier" means a person required to collect and remit a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  "Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
H.  "Utility tax year" means the fiscal year of the city, provided that the initial utility tax year shall be the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, through June 30, 1994, inclusive. 
(Ord. 521 § 4, 1993)  
3.44.040 - Conflicts. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to conflict with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any conflict, the provision of such rules, regulations and tariffs shall control. 
(Ord. 521 § 4, 1993)  
3.44.050 - Effective date of tax. 
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be imposed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or at the beginning of the first regular billing period thereafter which includes service only from the effective date of said ordinance, and thereafter. 
(Ord. 521 § 5, 1993)  
3.44.060 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  Tax Imposed. 
1.  There is imposed upon every person in the city using electrical energy for any purpose, other than an electrical corporation or a gas corporation, a tax at the rate of five percent of the charges of the service. 
2.  As used in this section, "charges" shall include charges made for: 
a.  Metered energy; and 
b.  Minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and annual monthly charges. 
B.  Exclusions. As used in this section, the phrase "using electrical energy" shall not be construed as to mean: 
1.  The storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by such person for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; or 
2.  The mere receiving of such energy by an electrical corporation or a government agency at a point within the city for resale. 
C.  Tax Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling such electrical energy. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the collector on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 521 § 6, 1993)  
3.44.070 - Gas users tax. 
A.  Tax Imposed. 
1.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the city, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation has been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the city. 
2.  "Charges" as used in this section shall include: 
a.  That billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; 
b.  Gas transportation charges; and 
c.  Demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulation Commission. 
B.  Exclusions. The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: 
1.  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; 
2.  Charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business or; 
3.  Charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and 
4.  Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
C.  Tax Collection. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the collector stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the collector in accordance with schedules established or approved by the collector. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the collector in the manner set forth in Section 13.44.080. 
(Ord. 521 § 7, 1993)  
3.44.080 - Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report the fact to the collector within thirty days of the use and shall directly remit to the city the amount of tax due. 
B.  The collector may require the service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. 
(Ord. 521 § 8, 1993)  
3.44.090 - Telephone users tax. 
A.  Tax Imposed. There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate, interstate or international telephone services by every person in the city, other than a telephone corporation, using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such services for residential users and five percent of the charges made for such services for nonresidential users and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  Exclusions. 
1.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term charges include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the section existed on January 1, 1970. The term telephone communication services refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city. 
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate, interstate or international telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
3.  Tax Collection. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the collector on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the collector on or before the last day of each month. 
(Ord. 521 § 9, 1993)  
3.44.100 - Cable television users tax. 
A.  Tax Imposed. There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such television service. 
B.  Tax Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the collector on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 521 § 10, 1993)  
3.44.110 - Collection of tax—General. 
A.  Action by the City. Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the collector shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
B.  Duty to Collect—Procedures. The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
1.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with regular billing practice of the service supplier. Except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but does not pay any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, or where a service user has notified a service supplier that he is refusing to pay a tax imposed by this chapter which such tax the service supplier is required to collect, if the amount paid by the service user is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. 
2.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person where all charges normally included in such billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
C.  Powers and Duties of Collector. The collector shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. The collector shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed; and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for the public examination in the collector's office. 
D.  Administrative Agreements. The collector may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that the collection and remittance on any tax imposed herein may be made in compliance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as the overall result of such agreements results in collection of the tax in compliance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each agreement shall be on file and available for public examination in the collector's office. 
(Ord. 521 § 11, 1993)  
3.44.120 - Delinquent taxes—Service supplier. 
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the collector on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. 
A.  General Penalty. In addition to remitting the amount of the tax, any service supplier who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required and upon ten days written notice to the service supplier of its failure to remit, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax which shall be added on the last day of each month following the date on which remittance was due until the tax and penalties are remitted. 
B.  Penalty for Fraud. If the collector determines that the nonpayment by any service supplier of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added to the penalty imposed by subsection A of this section. 
C.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed by subsections A and B of this section, any service supplier who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
D.  Penalty and Interest Part of Tax. Every penalty imposed upon a service supplier and such interest as accrues under the provisions of subsections A to C of this section, inclusive, shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. 
E.  Collection of Penalty and Interest. Every penalty imposed upon a service user and such interest as accrues under the provisions of subsections A to C of this section, inclusive, shall become a part of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 521 § 12, 1993)  
3.44.130 - Failure to collect and report on tax. 
A.  Collector to Estimate Tax Due. If any service supplier shall fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter the collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the collector shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any service supplier who has failed or refused to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such service supplier the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the collector shall give a notice of the amount to be assessed by servicing it personally or depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service supplier so assessed at his last known place of address. 
B.  Hearing on Determination of Tax. The service supplier may within twenty days after the serving or mailing of the notice referred to in subsection A of this section make application in writing to the collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the service supplier for hearing is not made within the time prescribed by the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the collector shall give not less than ten days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the service supplier to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the service supplier may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. 
C.  Determination of Tax Following Hearing—Notice When Due. After a hearing on the amount of tax assessed, the collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted, and shall thereafter give written notice to the service supplier in the manner prescribed above of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in this chapter. 
D.  Collection of Taxes from Service User. Whenever the collector determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of any tax imposed on him by the provisions of this chapter from the amounts remitted to a service supplier required to collect the tax, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax to such service supplier for a period of four or more billing periods, or whenever the collector deems it in the best interest of the city, he may relieve such service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The collector shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, plus any penalty imposed and such interest as may be due pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.44.120. The notice shall be served on the service user by sending to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the service supplier required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. 
(Ord. 521 § 13, 1993)  
3.44.140 - Appeals. 
A.  Who May Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the collector within fifteen days of the serving, by mail, of the decision. 
B.  Hearing Notice. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The collector shall give notice thereof in writing to such person by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known place of address. 
C.  Hearing—Determination. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal at the time of the hearing. No determinations made by the council shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 521 § 14, 1993)  
3.44.150 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every service supplier required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter, to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax that such service supplier may have been requested to collect and remit to the city, which records the collector shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 521 § 15, 1993)  
3.44.160 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  No refund may be made except upon a written claim verified by the person who paid the tax or by his or her guardian or conservator or the executor or administrator of his or her will or estate and stating the grounds upon which the claim is made. A service supplier may claim a refund or claim a credit against taxes collected but not yet remitted to the city of the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received, however, in the case of a tax erroneously or illegally collected by the service supplier, no refund shall be allowed unless the service user or other person from whom the amount was collected has submitted a written claim to the service supplier in the form prescribed above and the amount thereof has either been refunded by the service supplier to the service user or other person from whom the amount was collected, or credited against charges subsequently payable by such service user or other person. All claims filed pursuant to this subsection must be presented within one year after payment of the amount sought to be refunded. 
C.  No order of a refund may be made until a written claim therefor has been presented in accordance with this section. No suit for money, damages or a refund may be brought against the city until a written claim therefor has been presented to the city and has been acted upon or has been deemed rejected by the city, in accordance with this section. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a suit and if another person should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this article on the amount of such refunded service charges may also be refunded to service users by the service supplier and the service supplier can claim credit for such refunded taxes against the amount which is due upon any monthly returns. In the event this chapter has been repealed as of the time such refund is to be made, the amount of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city. 
(Ord. 583 § 2, 2002)  
3.44.170 - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person if the imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California. 
(Ord. 521 § 17, 1993)  
Chapter 3.48 - NEW DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.48.010 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city of Soledad general plan and to mitigate the public service impacts caused by new development, certain public facilities must be purchased and/or constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to pay for such facilities, and to pay for the new development's fair share of the construction and/or acquisition costs of these improvements. In establishing the fees described in the following sections, the city council finds that the fees are consistent with the city's general plan. 
(Ord. 527 § 1, 1993)  
3.48.020 - Establishment of development impact fees. 
A public facilities development impact fee is established as a condition of any new development for which discretionary approval is required from the city of Soledad, including issuance of building permits and/or certificates of occupancy. Said fees are established to pay for public facilities as identified in the city of Soledad public facilities financing plan. The city council shall, from time to time, by resolution, set forth the amount of the fee, list the specific public improvements to be financed with said fees, describe the estimated cost of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the type of development on which the fee is being levied, and set forth the time of payment of the fee. Said resolution shall provide for a method of adjusting the amount of the fees to account for changes in construction costs or other considerations affecting the reasonable relationship between the fees and the cost of the identified public facilities. 
(Ord. 527 § 2, 1993)  
3.48.030 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by the imposition of fees pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in special accounts and such revenues, along with any interest earnings derived from such revenues, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the construction of facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.48.020 or to reimburse the city for such facilities that the city may have constructed with funds advanced from other sources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.48.040 to install such facilities which are oversized with supplemental length, size or capacity. 
(Ord. 527 § 3, 1993)  
3.48.040 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in the resolution pursuant to Section 3.48.020, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental length, size or capacity beyond that needed to serve that specific development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure timely and efficient construction of the facilities, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter shall be offered. The reimbursement offer shall not include that portion of the cost needed to provide services to or mitigate the impacts of the development. 
(Ord. 527 § 4, 1993)  
3.48.050 - Fee adjustments. 
The city council may, at its discretion, waive or adjust said fees for any purpose deemed by the city council to be in the best public interest of the city of Soledad. A developer of any project subject to the fee established in Section 3.48.020 may appeal to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of the fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the public service impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing to the city clerk, along with any required application fee, not later than (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of the waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing to be held within sixty days after the filing of the appeal. The hearing of the appeal may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. If a fee reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in the permitted type or intensity of land use within the approved development project shall invalidate the reduction, adjustment or waiver. 
(Ord. 527 § 5, 1993)  
3.48.060 - Unexpended funds. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 66001(d), whenever fees collected pursuant to this chapter remain unexpended or uncommitted for five or more years after deposit of the fee, the city council shall make findings each year with respect to the unexpended amount. The city council shall identify the purpose for which the fee is to be used, and demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. The findings required by this section need only be made for moneys in possession of the city, and need not be made with respect to any letter of credit, bonds or other items given to secure payment of the fee at a future date. 
B.  The city shall refund to the then-current owner or owners of the new development project or projects, on a prorated basis, the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fees for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to this section. The city may refund the unexpended or uncommitted revenue by direct payment, by providing a temporary suspension of public facility impact fees, or by any other means consistent with this section. The determination of the means by which those fees are to be refunded is a legislative act. 
C.  If the city council determines that the administrative costs of refunding the unexpended or uncommitted fees collected pursuant to this chapter exceed the amount to be refunded, the city council, after a public hearing, notice of which has been published pursuant to Section 6061 of the California Government Code and posted in three prominent places within the area of the new development project, may determine that the unexpended or uncommitted fees shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fees are collected and which serves the new development project on which the fees were originally imposed. 
(Ord. 527 § 6, 1993)  
Chapter 3.52 - FIRST RESPONDER ENHANCED EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SPECIAL TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.52.010 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the city of Soledad to supplement the Monterey County emergency medical services system, which provides paramedic, ambulance and related services, through the imposition of a first responder enhanced emergency medical services special tax to fund supplemental or enhanced medical and related services. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.52.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
An "Emergency medical services" (EMS) means and includes the Monterey County emergency medical services system pursuant to Division 2.5 of the California Health and Safety Code and any services provided by or within that system. 
"First responder" means the city of Soledad, with equipment and personnel capable of responding immediately to emergency medical calls, arriving promptly thereafter at the scene of the medical emergency, and providing first aid, CPR, rescue or all other appropriate pre-hospital emergency medical care, including management of such services, before the arrival of an ambulance. 
"Supplemental emergency medical services" means enhanced first responder services provided within a city, operating as a duly authorized part of the Monterey County emergency medical services system. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.52.030 - Authority for special tax. 
The special tax authorized in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the California Constitution, Article XIIIA, Section 4, Article XIIIC, Section 2, and Article XIIID, Section 3, California Government Code Sections 53720 et seq.; California Government Codes 50075 et seq.; and California Government Code Sections 25210.1 et seq. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.52.040 - First responder enhanced emergency medical services special tax imposed. 
A special tax for first responder enhanced emergency medical services to be provided by the city shall be levied upon all parcels of real property as designated in Section 3.52.050 and located within the city. This tax shall be known as the "first responder enhanced emergency medical services special tax." Such tax shall be levied commencing with fiscal year 2000/01 and thereafter for each succeeding fiscal year following voter approval. This tax shall be solely for the purpose of raising revenue for the provision of first responder enhanced emergency medical services and related services. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.52.050 - Maximum special tax rate and method of assessment. 
A.  The rate of the special tax imposed in the city shall not exceed five dollars per service unit per year and shall be assessed against each parcel of real property located within the city. 
B.  The number of service units assigned to each parcel shall be based on the system used by the county of Monterey for collection of its paramedic emergency medical services special tax, which apportions service units on the basis of the use of real property as follows: 
Use Code 	Description 	Service Unit 
		
1A 	Vacant land, 1 	.5 
1B 	Vacant land, 2 or more 	.5 
1C 	One SFD, 1 	1 
1D 	One SFD, 2 or more sites 	1 
1E 	Two SFD, 1 site 	2 
1G 	Miscellaneous improvement 	.5 
1H 	Two SFD, 2 or more sites 	1 per unit 
		
2A 	Vacant 	.5 
2B 	Two units 	1 per unit 
2C 	Three to four units 	1 per unit 
2D 	Five to fifteen units 	1 per unit 
2E 	Sixteen/thirty units or more 	1 per unit 
2F 	Thirty-one units or more 	1 per unit 
2G 	Condominiums 	1 
2H 	Mobile home parks 	1 per space 
2J 	One SFD, multi-zone 	1 
2K 	One SFD, multi-zone/surplus 	1 
2L 	Residential timeshares 	1 
		
3A 	Vacant rural, 1-10 acre 	.5 
3B 	Vacant rural, 11-40 acre 	.5 
3C 	Undeveloped, 41-300 acre 	.5 
3D 	Undeveloped, 301 acre or more 	.5 
3E 	Residential use, up to 10 acres 	1 
3F 	Residential use, 11-40 acres 	1 
3G 	Rural mobile homes 	1 
3H 	Nurseries 	2 
3M 	Mobile home 	1 
		
4A 	Grazing with improvements 	1 
4B 	Dry farm with improvements 	1 
4C 	Row crops 	.5 
4D 	Field crops 	.5 
4E 	Feed lots 	1 
4F 	Vineyards 	1 
4G 	Orchards 	1 
4H 	Agricultural preserves 	.5 
4K 	Agricultural preserves 	.5 
4L 	Open space 	.5 
		
5A 	Vacant 	.5 
5B 	Comm, shell type 	2 
5C 	Sub stores 	2 
5D 	Comb. store/office/residence 	4 
5E 	Office building-1 	4 
5F 	Office building-multiple 	4 
5G 	Medical/dental office 	4 
5H 	Bank 	4 
5J 	Comm/single family dwelling 	1 
5K 	Office condo 	1 
5N 	Hotel/motel 	.2 per room 
5P 	Market 	4 
5Q 	Shopping center 	7 
5R 	Service station 	2 
5S 	Restaurant 	4 
5T 	Theater 	4 
5U 	Auto sales 	2 
5V 	Miscellaneous buildings 	2 
5W 	Recreation 	2 
5Z 	Vacant 	.5 
		
6A 	Vacant 	.5 
6B 	Light manufacturing 	4 
6D 	Industrial part 	4 
6E 	Warehouse 	2 
6F 	Auto wreckers 	2 
6G 	Produce shed 	2 
6M 	Vacant 	.5 
		
7C 	Fraternity organization 	4 
7F 	Hospital/convalescent 	5 
		
8F 	Dev. gas/oil 	6 
8H 	Quarries 	6 
8J 	Labor camps 	7 
8K 	Improvements 	1 
8M 	Mobile home 	1 
 
C.  Assessor's parcels that are exempt from real property taxation are not listed above. 
D.  All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to any tax imposed by this chapter. Any tax levied under this chapter shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as county ad valorem property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties, fees and accrual of interest and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.52.060 - Duration, amendment or repeal. 
The authorization to levy the first responder enhanced emergency medical services special tax imposed under this chapter shall continue from year to year. The Soledad city council may amend or repeal this chapter or any provision thereof. Any amendment increasing the tax rate above the limits established by this chapter shall first be approved by at least two-thirds of the voters voting on the increase before it shall become effective. 
(Ord. 566 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 3.56 - REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
Sections: 
 
3.56.010 - Findings. 
A.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds that future development within the city of Soledad to the year 2033 will result in degradation of traffic levels of service on the regional transportation system of streets, arterials, and highways. 
B.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds that failure to expand the capacity of the existing circulation system as new development is approved will increase congestion on the regional system, as documented in the Regional Development Impact Fee—Nexus Study Update (the "study") approved by the board of the transportation agency of Monterey County ("TAMC") on January 16, 2008. TAMC commissioned the study which looks at, among other matters, future development and the planned future road improvements needed to serve the new development. 
C.  The city council of the city of Soledad also finds and declares that the fair-share traffic impact fee to be levied upon new development pursuant to this chapter provides a mechanism to fund new developments' share of regional transportation system improvements that are needed to mitigate congestion and related adverse impacts caused by the new development. 
D.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds that exactions from new development are necessary to provide a portion of the funding for the construction of the regional transportation improvements needed to accommodate traffic that will be generated by new development of land within the county. 
E.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds that the study has determined the extent to which the new development of land will generate traffic volumes impacting the regional transportation system and that this chapter establishes a fair and equitable method for distributing the unfunded costs of transportation improvements necessary to accommodate the traffic volumes generated by such development. 
F.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds there is a reasonable relationship between the use of the regional development impact fee to pay for the construction of the regional transportation improvement projects and the type of development for which the regional development impact fee is charged in that all new development in the city, both residential and nonresidential, will generate or contribute to the need for the regional transportation improvement projects in different degrees as further described in the study. 
G.  The city council of the city of Soledad finds that the cost estimates set forth in the TAMC 2007 Regional Development Impact Nexus Fee Study Update are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the transportation improvement projects, and the regional development impact fees expected to be generated by future development will not exceed the projected costs of constructing the transportation improvement projects. 
H.  The city council of the city of Soledad also finds that the fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall only be used to finance the regional transportation improvement projects. The city of Soledad adopts this chapter with the expectation that a required minimum number of TAMC member governing bodies will also adopt the RDIF on a uniform basis and that the city of Soledad and these other TAMC members will use the fees collected in a coordinated manner to provide for financing and construction of the regional transportation improvement projects. 
I.  The city council of the city of Soledad has reviewed and considered the certified Environmental Impact Report for the 2005 Monterey Bay Area Metropolitan Transportation Plan and Addendum thereto prepared by TAMC, the lead agency for the regional transportation impact fee for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq. 
J.  The city council of the city of Soledad has authorized the execution and delivery of a joint powers agreement ("JPA") establishing a regional development impact fee agency ("RDIF agency") to coordinate the activities of the parties to the JPA in connection with the collection, transmittal and expenditure of regional development impact fees (as defined herein as Exhibit "A" of the JPA). 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.020 - Terms and definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Applicant" means the person or entity applying for a tract map, parcel map, tentative subdivision map, conditional use permit, land use permit, building permit or other land use entitlement for a new development project and their successors and assigns. 
"RDIF agency" refers to the Monterey County regional development impact fee joint powers agency. 
"Regional development impact fee," or "the fee," or "RDIF" refers to the fees approved by the governing boards of the county and other TAMC members on new development within their respective jurisdictions and transmitted to the RDIF agency as provided in the JPA. The project list for the regional development impact fee is in Exhibit "B" of the JPA. 
"Regional transportation improvement projects," or "projects" refers to those public improvements required to mitigate the regional impacts of new development on the roads, highways and arterials within the county as specified in Section 3.56.070. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.030 - Establishment of a regional development impact fee. 
A.  The regional development impact fee is established in the amounts specified in a resolution to be adopted by the city council of the city of Soledad for the purpose of paying for regional transportation improvement projects identified in Exhibit "B" of the JPA needed to meet increased demand created by traffic resulting from new development. The revenues raised from the impact fee shall be remitted to the RDIF agency to be held, maintained, used and accounted for as required in Government Code Section 66006 of the Mitigation Fee Act in a coordinated fashion, as provided in the JPA. 
B.  The regional development impact fee shall be automatically adjusted as of July 1 of each year following the first year after the effective date of this chapter. The adjustment shall be calculated by TAMC as administrator of the RDIF agency, based on the increase or decrease in the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the San Francisco Bay Area for the period ending December 31 of the preceding calendar year. 
C.  In addition to the automatic adjustment set forth above, TAMC may recommend to the city of Soledad and other TAMC members that the regional development impact fee be increased to reflect revisions to the project list in the Monterey County regional transportation plan, program revenue, increases in land values over the inflationary increase, or other factors. 
D.  Except as provided in Government Code Sections 65961, 66474.2 and 66498.1 or as otherwise provided by state or federal law or the exemptions set forth in Section 3.56.040 below, no tract map, parcel map, tentative subdivision map, conditional use permit, land use permit, building permit or other land use entitlement for a new development project shall be approved or issued unless payment of the fee is a condition of approval for any such entitlement. Prior to issuance of a building permit or at such other time as required by law, the city shall require the applicant to pay the fee. 
E.  Impact fees shall be imposed and collected by the city and, along with any interest earned on the fees while in the possession of the city, shall be transmitted by the city to the RDIF agency on the first day of each month for all fees collected during the prior month. The fees shall be placed by the RDIF agency in the regional transportation impact fee trust fund. All interest or other earnings of the fund shall be credited to the fund. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.040 - Exemptions. 
In addition to any exemptions from the levy of development impact fees provided by law, including, as applicable, the levy of development impact fees which are the subject of a vested subdivision map, the following development projects are exempt from payment of the fee required by this chapter: 
A.  The reconstruction of any building so long as the reconstructed building both continues a use of the same category as the prior use and generates the same or fewer trips as the original building and reconstruction commences and so long as the permit for reconstruction is issued within one year from destruction of the building. 
B.  Development within the Fort Ord reuse agency ("FORA") area that is subject to transportation improvement fees for transportation projects within the FORA plan area. 
C.  Development pursuant to a development agreement that was entered prior to the effective date of the joint powers agreement in accordance with the terms of the development agreement in effect prior to the effective date of the joint powers agreement. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.050 - Credits or reimbursements. 
An applicant who constructs all or part of one of the transportation improvement projects may be eligible for a credit or reimbursement, as provided herein. 
A.  Credit or Reimbursement for Regional Transportation Impact Projects Funded by the RDIF. An applicant may be eligible for a credit to be applied against payment of the regional transportation impact fee if the applicant dedicates right-of-way for and/or constructs all or a part of one of the transportation improvement projects that is, at the time the applicant enters into an agreement with the city for construction of such project, included in the strategic expenditure plan of the projects to be funded. 
An applicant may be eligible for a reimbursement if the cost of constructing such a transportation improvement project, or a part of such project, exceeds the amount of the regional transportation impact fee to be paid by the applicant. The amount of reimbursement shall equal the difference between the cost of constructing all or a part of the regional transportation improvement project and the regional development impact fee for the development project. 
Reimbursement shall be from regional development impact fee revenues only, and the right to reimbursement shall be terminated ten years from the date the applicant entered into the agreement for construction of the project. 
The amount of credit, or the credit and reimbursement together, shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the regional transportation improvement project or portion thereof, as calculated by the RDIF agency. The credit, or the credit and reimbursement together, shall be calculated at the time the applicant enters into an agreement for construction of the regional transportation improvement project. The credit shall be granted at the same time. Once calculated, the amount of reimbursement shall not increase for inflation nor shall it accrue interest. 
B.  Reimbursement for Projects Not Funded for Construction at the Time of Project Construction. If an applicant constructs all or a part of a transportation improvement project that is not, at the time the applicant enters into an agreement for construction of such project, included in the strategic expenditure plan as a project to be funded, the developer may be eligible for reimbursement from the RDIF, provided that the strategic expenditure plan is subsequently revised to include the improvement as a project to be funded. 
In such event, the amount of reimbursement shall be calculated by the city public works director and approved by the RDIF agency for development located in the city and shall be equal to the cost of the project or portion thereof, as set forth in the strategic expenditure plan. The amount of the reimbursement shall be calculated when the applicant enters into an agreement for construction of the transportation improvement project. Once calculated, the amount of reimbursement shall not increase for inflation nor shall it accrue interest. Reimbursement shall be from regional development impact fee revenues only, and the right to reimbursement shall be terminated ten years from the date the developer entered into the agreement for construction of the project. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.060 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the portions of this chapter not held to be unconstitutional or invalid. The city council of the city of Soledad declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, clauses or phrases thereof be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.070 - List of projects on the regional transportation system. 
The regional development impact fee shall be used to fund all or a portion of the list of transportation improvement projects described in Exhibit "B" of the JPA. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.56.080 - Administrative costs. 
The RDIF agency may establish a processing fee or administrative surcharge to defray the reasonable cost of administration of the RDIF program by the RDIF agency in an amount not to exceed one percent of the fees collected by the city of Soledad in accordance with Government Code Section 66014 and as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Business" means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood. 
B.  "Gross receipts" means the total amount of the sale price of all sales, and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act, service or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, and any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" are cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit. 
C.  "Person" means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city. 
D.  "Wrecking" means the business of buying or trading in secondhand, used or wrecked motor vehicles, and selling the parts thereof or building motor vehicles from the salvaged parts of such motor vehicles and selling the same, or the "wrecking" or "salvaging" of motor vehicles on a contract basis. 
(Prior code § 12-1)  
5.04.020 - Revenue measure. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation; nor is the licensing of any business, trade or calling under this chapter to be construed as authorizing or sanctioning any departure or failure to comply with licensing provisions of this state or the United States of America. 
(Prior code § 12-2)  
5.04.030 - Substitute for other revenue provisions. 
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter is relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other provision of this code or any other ordinance of the city, but remains subject to the regulatory provisions of such other provisions or ordinances. This section does not apply to inspection fees. 
(Prior code § 12-3)  
5.04.040 - Effect of chapter on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and any and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 12-4)  
5.04.050 - License required. 
No person shall engage in any of the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations set out in this chapter in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so and without complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-5)  
5.04.060 - Licensing of branch establishments. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license authorizes the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in the license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter are not separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Prior code § 12-6)  
5.04.070 - Application—License issuance. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the tax collector of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed tax, the tax collector shall issue to the person a license which contains: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The business licensed; 
C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The date of the expiration of the license; and 
E.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-7)  
5.04.080 - Application—First license. 
A.  Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued under this chapter or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of the license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, the person shall furnish to the tax collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form provided by the city clerk, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to properly determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. 
B.  If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. The estimate, if accepted by the tax collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, that the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and the person shall, within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which the license was issued, furnish the tax collector with a sworn statement upon a form furnished by the city clerk, showing the gross receipts during the period of the license, and the license tax for the period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. 
C.  The tax collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished him the written statement and paid the license tax as required in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-8)  
5.04.090 - License renewal. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the tax collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the city clerk, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding calendar year as may be required by the tax collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-9)  
5.04.100 - Statements not conclusive—Examination of books and records. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. The statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the tax collector, his deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. All licensees, applicants for license and persons engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of the books and records for the purposes described in this chapter. The information furnished or procured pursuant to Sections 5.04.080 and 5.04.090 shall be confidential. Any unwarranted disclosure or use of the information by any officer or employee of the city is a misdemeanor and the officer or employee is subject to the penal provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-10)  
5.04.110 - Failure to file required statement. 
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand is made therefor by the tax collector he fails to file a correct statement, the tax collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. In case such a determination is made, the tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office of the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. The person may, within ten days of the mailing or service of the notice, make application in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, or if application is not made within the time prescribed, the tax collector must cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen days before the city council. The city clerk shall give at least ten days' notice to the person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of assessment. The city council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for services of notice of assessment. 
(Prior code § 12-11)  
5.04.120 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency in respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to the person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office of the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address. 
(Prior code § 12-12)  
5.04.130 - Deadline extension—Claim compromise. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the tax collector may, for good cause shown, extend the time required for any sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and may, with the consent of the city council, compromise any claim as to the amount of license tax due. 
(Prior code § 12-13)  
5.04.140 - Transfer of license. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter is transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, the licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee of one dollar, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of the business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(Prior code § 12-14)  
5.04.150 - Unexpired licenses previously issued. 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance enacted before the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed by this chapter for the business is not payable until the expiration of the term of the unexpired license. 
(Prior code § 12-15)  
5.04.160 - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the tax collector to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to that fact, and at the time of filing the affidavit paying to the tax collector the sum of one dollar. 
(Prior code § 12-16)  
5.04.170 - Posting of licenses. 
All licensees must post and keep their licenses in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business. 
(Prior code § 12-17)  
5.04.180 - Payment of license tax. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of July, may be prorated for the balance of the license period. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, license taxes, other than annual, required under this chapter, shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  Semiannual license taxes, on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year; 
B.  Quarterly license taxes, on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year; 
C.  Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each month; 
D.  Weekly license taxes, on Monday of each week in advance; 
E.  Daily license taxes, each day in advance. 
(Prior code § 12-18)  
5.04.190 - Penalty for failure to pay license tax when due. 
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the tax collector shall add a penalty of twenty-five percent of the license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
(Prior code § 12-19)  
5.04.200 - Schedule of rates—Gross receipts basis generally. 
A.  Unspecified Businesses. Every person transacting or carrying on any business other than those businesses enumerated below in this section shall pay an annual license tax based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation of the business in accordance with the following scale. If the annual gross receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $    1.00 	$ 45,000.00 	$ 40.00 
  45,000.00 	 65,000.00 	 55.00 
  65,000.00 	 85,000.00 	 75.00 
  85,000.00 	105,000.00 	 95.00 
 105,000.00 	125,000.00 	115.00 
 125,000.00 	150,000.00 	137.50 
 150,000.00 	175,000.00 	162.50 
 175,000.00 	200,000.00 	187.50 
 200,000.00 	230,000.00 	215.00 
 230,000.00 	260,000.00 	245.00 
 260,000.00 	300,000.00 	280.00 
 300,000.00 	350,000.00 	325.00 
 350,000.00 	400,000.00 	375.00 
 400,000.00 	450,000.00 	425.00 
 450,000.00 	500,000.00 	475.00 
 500,000.00 	550,000.00 	525.00 
 550,000.00 	600,000.00 	575.00 
 600,000.00 	700,000.00 	650.00 
 700,000.00 	800,000.00 	750.00 
 800,000.00 	900,000.00 	850.00 
 900,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	950.00 
 1,000,000.00 		1,000.00 
 
B.  Specified Businesses. Every person transacting or carrying on any of the following businesses or occupations: 
Abstractor 
Accountant 
Architect 
Advertising agent 
Appraiser 
Assayer 
Attorney 
Auditor 
Bacteriologist 
Baths, public and steam 
Brokers 
Business school 
Chemists 
Chiropodists 
Chiropractor 
Civil engineer 
Cleaning buildings, windows 
Collection agent 
Credit bureau 
Crematorium 
Dancing school 
Dancing teacher 
Designer 
Dental laboratory 
Dental technician 
Dentist 
Dermatologist 
Detective 
Doctor 
Employment agent 
Electrical engineer 
Engineer 
Finance company 
Funeral director 
Geologist 
Gunsmith 
Grinder 
Income tax expert 
Insurance adjuster 
Interior decorator 
Interpreter 
Janitor 
Laboratory technician 
Landscape architect 
Lapidary 
Livery stable 
Locksmith 
Masseur 
Mechanical engineer 
Medical laboratory 
Messenger service 
Mineral bath 
Music school 
Music teacher 
Naturopathist 
Oculist 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Osteopath 
Orthopedist 
Parking lot 
Pathologist 
Patrol service 
Physician 
Physiotherapist 
Piano tuner 
Plunge 
Posture correction 
Public stenographer 
Radiographer 
Sign painter 
Storage warehouse 
Structural engineer 
Surgeon 
Surveyor 
Taxidermist 
Title insurance 
Turkish baths 
Urologist 
Veterinarian 
Watch repairing 
Weighing machine 
X-Ray technician 
shall pay a license tax annually based upon gross receipts resulting from operations of such businesses, occupations or professions in accordance with the following scale. If annual receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $     1.00 	$ 20,000.00 	$ 40.00 
  20,000.00 	 30,000.00 	 62.50 
  30,000.00 	 40,000.00 	 87.50 
  40,000.00 	 50,000.00 	112.50 
  50,000.00 	 70,000.00 	150.00 
  70,000.00 	 90,000.00 	200.00 
  90,000.00 	110,000.00 	250.00 
 110,000.00 	140,000.00 	312.50 
 140,000.00 	170,000.00 	387.50 
 170,000.00 	200,000.00 	462.50 
 200,000.00 	300,000.00 	625.00 
 300,000.00 	400,000.00 	875.00 
 400,000.00 or over 		1,000.00 
 
C.  Retail Business Generally. Any person who transacts one or more of the businesses, occupations or professions enumerated in subsection A of this section, at one location, is required to obtain only one license and shall pay the license tax specified in this section, based upon the aggregate of his gross receipts realized from the operation of all such businesses, professions or occupations. 
D.  Retail Business Generally. Every person transacting or carrying on a retail business, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter, shall pay a annual license tax based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation of the business, in accordance with the following scale. If annual receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $     1.00 	$ 45,000.00 	$ 40.00 
  45,000.00 	 65,000.00 	55.00 
  65,000.00 	 85,000.00 	75.00 
  85,000.00 	105,000.00 	95.00 
 105,000.00 	125,000.00 	115.00 
 125,000.00 	150,000.00 	137.50 
 150,000.00 	175,000.00 	162.50 
 175,000.00 	200,000.00 	187.50 
 200,000.00 	230,000.00 	215.00 
 230,000.00 	260,000.00 	245.00 
 260,000.00 	300,000.00 	280.00 
 300,000.00 	350,000.00 	325.00 
 350,000.00 	400,000.00 	375.00 
 400,000.00 	450,000.00 	425.00 
 450,000.00 	500,000.00 	475.00 
 500,000.00 	550,000.00 	525.00 
 550,000.00 	600,000.00 	575.00 
 600,000.00 	700,000.00 	650.00 
 700,000.00 	800,000.00 	750.00 
 800,000.00 	900,000.00 	850.00 
 900,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	950.00 
 1,000,000.00 or over 		1,000.00 
 
E.  Wholesale and Jobbing Business. Every person transacting and carrying on a wholesale or jobbing business shall pay an annual license tax, based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation of the business, in accordance with the following scale. If annual gross receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $     1.00 	$ 200,000.00 	$ 40.00 
 200,000.00 	300,000.00 	62.50 
 300,000.00 	400,000.00 	87.50 
 400,000.00 	500,000.00 	112.50 
 500,000.00 	600,000.00 	137.50 
 600,000.00 	800,000.00 	175.00 
 800,000.00 	1,000,000.0 	225.00 
 1,000,000.00 or over 		250.00 
 
F.  Every person transacting or carrying on the business of general engineering or building contractor, plumbing, electrical or roofing contractor or other specialty contractor, shall pay a license tax based upon annual gross receipts resulting from the operation of the business in accordance with the following scale. If annual gross receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $      1.00 	$100,000.00 	$ 40.00 
 100,000.00 	150,000.00 	62.50 
 150,000.00 	200,000.00 	87.50 
 200,000.00 	250,000.00 	112.50 
 250,000.00 	300,000.00 	137.50 
 300,000.00 	350,000.00 	162.50 
 350,000.00 	400,000.00 	187.50 
 400,000.00 	450,000.00 	212.50 
 450,000.00 	500,000,00 	237.50 
 500,000.00 	600,000.00 	275.00 
 600,000.00 	700,000.00 	325.00 
 700,000.00 	800,000.00 	375.00 
 800,000.00 	900,000.00 	425.00 
 900,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	475.00 
 1,000,000.00 		500.00 
 
G.  Twenty-dollar Quarterly Tax. Quarterly licenses will be issued for twenty dollars in the case of businesses having gross receipts of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars during any quarter. 
H.  Additional Business. If any person transacting any business enumerated in this section carries on a retail, wholesale or jobbing business or any other business, he is required to obtain a license and pay the tax specified for the other business, in addition to the license specified in this section. 
I.  Contractors Working Outside City. The receipts of the contractors enumerated in this section from contracts performed wholly outside of the city shall not be included in their gross receipts for the purpose of computing the license tax. Any such contractor who does not maintain a fixed place of business within the city is required to obtain a license and pay the tax specified in this section, with respect to any contract performed by him within the city. 
J.  Manufacturing. Every person carrying on the business of manufacturing shall pay an annual license tax, based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation of the business, in accordance with the following scale. If annual gross receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $      1.00 	$100,000.00 	$ 40.00 
 100,000.00 	200,000.00 	50.00 
 200,000.00 	300,000.00 	62.50 
 300,000.00 	400,000.00 	87.50 
 400,000.00 	500,000.00 	112.50 
 500,000.00 	600,000.00 	137.50 
 600,000.00 	800,000.00 	175.00 
 800,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	225.00 
 1,000.000.00 and over 		250.00 
 
K.  Manufacturing and Retail Business. If any person carrying on the business of manufacturing shall also engage in a retail business, whether selling products manufactured by him or not, he shall be required to obtain a license and pay the tax specified for the retail business in addition to the license specified in this section; provided, that any person engaged in the business of manufacturing is not required to obtain a license in addition to his manufacturer's license to engage in the wholesale or jobbing business with respect to products manufactured by him. 
(Prior code § 12-20)  
5.04.210 - Schedule of rates—Public utilities. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of a public utility shall pay an annual license tax based upon annual gross receipts resulting from the operation of such business, in accordance with the following scale. If the annual gross receipts are: 
 At Least 	But Less Than 	The License Tax is 
 $ 1.00 	$ 100,000.00 	$ 40.00 
 100,000.00 	 200,000.00 	65.00 
 200,000.00 	 300,000.00 	90.00 
 300,000.00 	 400,000.00 	115.00 
 400,000.00 	 500,000.00 	140.00 
 500,000.00 	 600,000.00 	165.00 
 600,000.00 	 700,000.00 	190.00 
 700,000.00 	 800,000.00 	215.00 
 800,000.00 	 900,000.00 	240.00 
 900,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	265.00 
 1,000,000.00 and over 		290.00 
 
(Prior code § 12-21)  
5.04.220 - Schedule of rates—Flat-rate basis. 
Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses enumerated in this section shall pay a license tax as follows: 
A.  Advertising. 
1.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of erecting, installing, maintaining or operating outdoor advertising, advertising structures, billboards, signboards or similar devices shall pay a license tax of forty dollars per annum. 
2.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of operating, and who operates upon the streets, any vehicle equipped with music or musical device, loudspeaker or other device for attracting attention, shall pay a license tax of five dollars per day or forty dollars per year. 
B.  Auction Sale, Auctioneer, Auction House, Farmer's Auction Yard. 
1.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of auctioneer shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars per day, except while operating in a licensed auction house having a fixed place of business as defined in this chapter. 
2.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of an auction house other than as provided in subdivision 3 of this subsection, having a fixed place of business, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars annually. 
3.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of a farmer's auction yard for animals or implements of husbandry shall pay an annual license tax of fifty dollars. The license provided in this subsection shall permit only the auctioning of animals and implements of husbandry. 
C.  Automobile, Truck, Trailer Rentals. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, every person conducting or carrying on the business of renting automobiles or trucks for a period of two months or less shall pay an annual license tax based on fifteen dollars per truck exceeding a manufacturer's rated capacity of one ton, ten dollars per truck with a manufacturer's rated capacity of one ton or less and ten dollars per automobile. 
2.  Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of renting trailers for the period of two months or less shall pay an annual license tax based on five dollars per trailer. 
D.  Bankrupt Sales, Etc. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of owning, operating, opening, establishing, managing or having charge of any temporary location or place of business of any kind for the sale of any insolvent, bankrupt, fire-damaged or other similar goods, wares or merchandise and every itinerant or transient merchant having a temporary place of business but not having any continuous or permanent place of business in the city, who sells or offers for sale any insolvent, bankrupt, fire-damaged or other goods, wares or merchandise, shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars per day. 
E.  Barbershops and Beauty Shops. Every person engaging in the business of conducting, maintaining or carrying on a barber or beauty shop shall pay a license tax of forty dollars per year, plus ten dollars for every chair in excess of three. 
F.  Billiard and Pool Tables. Every person engaged in the business of conducting any billiard or pool table shall pay an annual license tax of sixteen dollars for each table located at such business establishment. 
G.  Bowling Alleys. Every person engaged in the business of conducting, maintaining or carrying on any bowling alley shall pay a license tax of ten dollars per year for each alley. 
H.  Brokers, Agents and Labor Contractors. Every person transacting or carrying on the business of broker or agent or labor contractor, who does not maintain a fixed place of business in the city shall pay an annual license tax of forty dollars per year. 
I.  Card Tables. Every person operating or maintaining any table, in the city, wherein cards or any legal game of chance is played, shall pay a license tax of forty dollars annually for each table. 
J.  Christmas Tree, Greens or Card Sales—Fireworks. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of selling Christmas trees, holly, berries, cards, fireworks or other seasonal items shall pay an annual license tax of twenty-five dollars, except where such business is conducted in connection with another regularly established place of business for which a license has been issued, or is conducted by and solely for the benefit of a charitable or nonprofit organization. 
K.  Circuses and Carnivals. Every person holding, promoting, managing or giving any concert, traveling show or exhibition for commercial purposes, whether in a tent or otherwise, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars for the first day or any part thereof, and twenty-five dollars per day thereafter; provided, however, that no license shall be required for any exhibition, show or concert actually given and participated in by any local school, patriotic or civic organization. 
L.  Dances. Every person carrying on the business of conducting public dances at which an admission fee is charged, collected or received, shall pay a license tax of five dollars for each dance with a maximum of twenty-five dollars per quarter. 
M.  Hospital, Sanitarium, Rest Home, Nursing Home, Asylum. Every person engaged in the business of conducting, carrying on or operating a hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home or asylum shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars per year plus one dollar per bed. This subsection shall not apply to nonprofit institutions exempted by the state. 
N.  Hotels, Roominghouses and Motel Rooms. Every person carrying on the business of conducting, operating or managing a hotel, roominghouse or motel, shall pay a yearly license according to the following scale: 
 1 to 15 units 	$ 40.00 
 16 to 25 units 	50.00 
 26 to 70 units 	75.00 
 Over 70 units 	150.00 
 
O.  House Trailer and Mobile Home Parks. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of operating a trailer park, mobile home park or other similar business, where the owners of house trailers or mobile homes are allowed to use space within the house trailer park or mobile home park through a lease, rental or other similar arrangement, shall pay an annual license tax as follows for rental spaces over four: 
  5 to 19 spaces 	$ 40.00 
 20 to 29 spaces 	50.00 
 30 to 39 spaces 	60.00 
 40 to 49 spaces 	70.00 
 50 to 75 spaces 	90.00 
 Over 75 spaces 	110.00 
 
P.  Junk Dealers or Dealers in Old or Used Articles. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale, or otherwise dealing in junk, rubbish, waste material, refuse, old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, jewelry, precious metals, rubber, bric-a-brac, cordage, truck or automobile parts and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form, shall pay an annual license tax of forty dollars per year. 
Q.  Movie Theaters and Concert Halls. Every person carrying on the business of conducting a concert hall, or a theater containing a permanent stage upon which moveable scenery and theatrical appliances are used, where regular theatrical or vaudeville performances are given and to which an admission is charged, collected or received, or conducting a moving picture theater where moving or motion pictures are exhibited and an admission fee is charged, collected or received, shall pay an annual license tax of seventy dollars per year. 
R.  Pawnbrokers. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of pawnbroker shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars per year. 
S.  Peddlers and Itinerant Vendors. Every person carrying on the business of peddling or selling services or goods, not having a regular established place of business in the city, shall pay a license tax of three dollars per day, with a maximum of twelve dollars per month. 
T.  Coin-operated Vending Machines. 
1.  Definition. The term "coin-operated vending machine," as used in this subsection, includes both game and other machines operated solely for amusement or convenience (e.g., mechanical games, pinball machines, video games, music or jukeboxes, weighing machines, laundry equipment, car wash equipment, etc.) and machines dispensing tangible personal property (e.g., tobacco, food, drink, confections or other merchandise). 
2.  Game and Convenience Machines. Section 5.04.060 notwithstanding, every person possessing or maintaining, on premises owned or leased by such person, any coin-operated vending machine operated solely for amusement or convenience shall pay an annual license tax of forty dollars per year per machine. 
3.  Machines Dispensing Tangible Personal Property. Section 5.04.060 notwithstanding, every person possessing or maintaining, on premises owned or leased by such person, any coin-operated vending machine dispensing tangible personal property shall pay an annual license tax in accordance with the following scale: 
 Unit Sale Price 	Annual Tax 
 1¢ to 5¢, inclusive 	$ 2.00 
 5¢ to 10¢, inclusive 	4.00 
 10¢ to 50¢, inclusive 	12.00 
 Over 50¢ 	40.00 
 
The term "unit sale price," as used in this subsection, means the maximum price charged for any single item dispensed from the machine to which it applies. The tax shall apply to each machine on the premises, if there be more than one. 
4.  Vending Machines—Exclusive Business. Section 5.04.060 and subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection notwithstanding, any individual or firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines, as provided in Section 16002.5 of the Business and Professions Code, shall pay a license tax based on gross receipts in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.200(A). Any license to conduct a business issued under this chapter in connection with which the city imposes a license tax upon coin-operated vending machines within the city may be revoked for failure of the licensee to report to the city the receipts from such machines. 
U.  Taxicabs. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of operating a taxicab company shall pay a license tax in accordance with Section 5.04.100. 
V.  Transportation and Trucking Service. 
1.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of transporting goods, wares, merchandise or other materials for hire and providing for transportation and deliveries of goods or other materials either within the city limits or deliveries of goods or other materials from outside the city limits to places within the city limits, or both, shall pay an annual license tax of seventy dollars. 
2.  Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who makes wholesale or retail deliveries of goods or services by motor vehicles within the city or who maintains, installs or repairs goods, wares, merchandise or equipment inside the city, or who provides a service not otherwise covered in this section, shall pay an annual license tax of forty dollars. 
(Prior code § 12-22)  
5.04.240 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  Exemptions. The following are exempted from the payment of a license tax under this chapter: 
1.  Any charitable institution, organization or association organized and conducted for charitable purposes only. This exemption shall not apply to promoters employed by charitable organizations; 
2.  Any person conducting, carrying or staging any concert, exhibition, lecture, dance, amusement or entertainment where the receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes and not for private gain or for the private gain of any person in whole or in part; 
3.  Any religious, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association conducting, carrying on or staging any amusement or entertainment concert, exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event, when the receipts derived are to be wholly for the benefit of the organization and not in the whole or any part for private gain of any person; 
4.  Any public utility which pays to the city a tax under a franchise or similar agreement; 
5.  Any honorably discharged or honorably relieved soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state, distributing circulars, or hawking, peddling or vending any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor. 
B.  Exclusions. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the terms of this chapter do not apply to any of the following persons: 
1.  Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article 13, Section 16 of the State Constitution; 
2.  Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article 13, Section 28 of the State Constitution; 
3.  Any person whom the city is not authorized to license under any law or Constitution of the United States or this state. Specifically excluded from "gross receipts," as that term is used in Section 5.04.200 of this chapter, are receipts from the manufacture, importation or sale of alcoholic beverages exempt from local taxation under the provisions of Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution; 
4.  Commercial travelers may be required by the tax collector to file a verified statement claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, which shall set forth all facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. 
C.  Claims for Exemption. Any person desiring to claim exemption from the payment of a license tax and to have a free license issued to him shall make application therefor upon forms prescribed by the tax collector and shall furnish such information and make such affidavits as may be required. Upon the determination being made that the applicant is entitled to exemption from the payment of license taxes for any reason set forth in this chapter, the tax collector, upon the applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city which may require a permit for the doing of the particular act proposed to be done, shall issue a free license to such person which shall show upon its face that the license tax is exempt. 
(Prior code § 12-23)  
5.04.250 - Enforcement of chapter. 
It is the duty of the chief of police, and he is directed, to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter, and it is his duty to cause a complaint to be filed against all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-24)  
5.04.260 - Tax constitutes debt to city. 
The amount of any license tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business, without first having procured a license from the city to do so, shall be liable in an action in the name of the city, brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of the license tax imposed upon such business. 
(Prior code § 12-25)  
5.04.270 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 12-26)  
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Permitted. 
Bingo games are allowed in the city pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4A-1)  
5.08.020 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random; provided, that it does not include any game not legally prohibited prior to the adoption of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 4A-2)  
5.08.030 - Games to benefit charitable organizations. 
Bingo games shall be conducted only by organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporations franchise tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, and by mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations; and provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 4A-3)  
5.08.040 - Minors prohibited. 
No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Prior code § 4A-5)  
5.08.050 - Location of game. 
A nonprofit charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Prior code § 4A-6)  
5.08.060 - Open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of a nonprofit charitable organization. 
(Prior code § 4A-7)  
5.08.070 - Operation by staff members. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(Prior code § 4A-8)  
5.08.080 - Outside financial interests prohibited. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized by license to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Prior code § 4A-9)  
5.08.090 - Special fund or account. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
(Prior code § 4A-10)  
5.08.100 - Participants to be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Prior code § 4A-11)  
5.08.110 - Limitation on prize value. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Prior code § 4A-12)  
5.08.120 - License—Fee. 
No bingo game shall be conducted except pursuant to a license issued by the city council. Applications for the license shall be made upon forms supplied by the city clerk, and shall be filed with the clerk, accompanied by a license fee of fifty dollars. The license, if issued, shall be for the period of twelve months. If the city council finds that the applicant does not qualify under the terms of this chapter, or that the conducting of bingo games at the particular location stated in the application will violate some other ordinance of the city, the city council shall deny the application. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 4A-13)  
5.08.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 4A-15)  
5.08.140 - Nuisance declared. 
Any bingo game conducted or operated contrary to the terms and provisions of this chapter and/or any participation therein contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence an action or proceeding for the abatement and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. 
(Prior code § 4A-16)  
Chapter 5.12 - PUBLIC DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Person" includes every person, club, firm, association or corporation conducting a public dance, or series thereof, or permitting public dances to be conducted under their auspices, and includes the principals, agents, officers and employees thereof. 
B.  "Public dance" includes every dance to which the public is admitted; provided, "public dance" does not apply to any dance given in a public school by any of the classes thereof. 
(Prior code § 7-1)  
5.12.020 - Permit—Required—Contents. 
It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any public dance or series of such dances to be held in any hall, room or place in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city council. The permit, when granted, shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and residence of the person to whom the permit is issued; 
B.  The description of the particular place for which the permit is granted; 
C.  The place where the dances are to be held under the permit. 
(Prior code § 7-2)  
5.12.030 - Permit—Expiration. 
Every permit to conduct a public dance under the provisions of this chapter shall expire upon the lapse of six months from the date of its issuance, unless the permit specifies an earlier date for its expiration, or unless the permit be sooner revoked as provided by Section 5.12.040. 
(Prior code § 7-3)  
5.12.035 - Permits—Regulations and guidelines. 
The city council may, by resolution, adopt and from time to time amend regulations and guidelines, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, governing the issuance of public dance permits, specifying the days and hours during which public dances may be conducted pursuant to such permits, imposing requirements to protect the public peace, health and safety and requirements relating to the maintenance and supervision of the premises and exterior areas where public dances are conducted, providing for the temporary suspension of permits for violations of permit conditions or of the regulations and guidelines, and providing for the appeal to the city council of any action taken pursuant to the regulations and guidelines denying the issuance of a permit, suspending a permit, or citing a permittee for a violation of the regulations and guidelines. 
(Ord. 493 § 1, 1990)  
5.12.040 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  The city council may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter upon proof to its satisfaction that: 
1.  The holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter, or of the regulations and guidelines adopted pursuant to Section 5.12.035 of this chapter; or 
2.  The holder thereof has violated any other provision of federal, state or local law, or regulations issued pursuant to any such law, pertaining to activities regulated by this chapter or other activities conducted by the permittee on the premises to which the permit applies; or 
3.  The permit was procured through fraudulent representations; or 
4.  The continued holding of public dances under such permit would constitute a public nuisance or would be contrary to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare; or 
5.  The permittee has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions attached to the approval and issuance of the permit; 
B.  Prior to taking any action to revoke, the city clerk shall give written notice to the permittee of the proposed revocation and shall set a date for a public hearing thereon. The notice shall be served personally on the permittee, or by mail addressed to the permittee, at the address of the premises to which it applies or such other address as the permittee may have designated in writing for service of notice. Following the public hearing, if the city council finds that there is good cause therefor, the city council may revoke the permit. 
(Ord. 493 § 2, 1990: prior code § 7-4)  
5.12.050 - Permit—Transfer or assignment. 
No permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Prior code § 7-5)  
5.12.060 - Permit—License fees to be paid. 
Upon the granting of any permit provided for by this chapter, no public dance shall be conducted until any and all license fees required by the license provisions of this code have been paid in full. 
(Prior code § 7-6)  
5.12.070 - Police supervision. 
The place where public dancing is to be conducted under this chapter shall at all times while dancing is being conducted therein be under the supervision and control of the police department of the city. The city council may require, as a condition to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, that a specially appointed police officer of the city be present at all times while dancing is being conducted. The compensation of the police officer shall be paid to the city by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Prior code § 7-7)  
5.12.080 - Hours dancing is prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a public dance between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. It is unlawful for any person to participate in or be present at a public dance between such hours. 
(Prior code § 7-8)  
5.12.090 - Lighting. 
All places for which the permit has been granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be brightly lighted during the hours a public dance is being conducted therein. 
(Prior code § 7-9)  
5.12.100 - Disorderly persons prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting a public dance to admit or permit to remain in or about the place where a public dance is being conducted any lewd, dissolute or boisterous or intoxicated person of either sex. 
(Prior code § 7-11)  
5.12.110 - Age limitations. 
It is unlawful to admit or permit to remain in or about the place where a public dance is being conducted after the hour of eleven p.m. any person under eighteen years of age unless the person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, or by some adult person bearing written consent of his parent or legal guardian, and it is unlawful for any such person to attend a public dance unless so accompanied. It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement as to his or her age or the age of any other person for the purpose of obtaining admission to a public dance. 
(Prior code § 7-12)  
5.12.120 - Paid performers prohibited. 
It is unlawful to conduct a public dance at which any person is to, or does receive, directly or indirectly, compensation in any form for participating in any type of dancing. 
(Prior code § 7-13)  
5.12.130 - Unlawful acts. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any public dance on any premises used in whole or in part for the conducting of any business, or the performances of any acts, declared unlawful by the laws of the United States of America, or of the state. 
(Prior code § 7-14)  
5.12.140 - Refuse—Cleanup. 
The public streets, sidewalks and gutters in and about the place where dancing is being conducted under this chapter shall at all times during such dancing be kept free of dirt, refuse, rubbish and garbage and shall be swept clean immediately following the dance. 
(Prior code § 7-15)  
5.12.150 - Enforcement of chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting a public dance to allow any violation of any one or more of the provisions of this chapter and failure to strictly enforce such provisions shall be cause for the revocation by the city council of the permit to conduct a public dance. 
(Prior code § 7-16)  
Chapter 5.16 - GAME MACHINES AND GAME ARCADES 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Arcade" means any business establishment in which there are more than three game machines as defined in this section which are available for use by the public or by business invitees, or both. 
B.  "Arcade mixed use" means any business establishment, such as a restaurant, pizza parlor, bowling alley or gaming facility, that includes an arcade as a secondary use. For purposes of this chapter, "secondary use" shall be defined as arcade use which comprises not more than forty percent of the floor space of said establishment. 
C.  "Game machine" means any device, game or contrivance, including but not limited to pinball machines, video games, computer games, electronic games, slot machines, and similar machines and devices for which a charge or payment is received for the privilege of playing, using or operating the same and which, as the result of such use, operation or playing, does not entitle the person using, operating or playing the same to receive equivalent value in the form of tangible merchandise; excepting, however, pool tables and shuffleboard games. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, club or organization. 
E.  "Planning director" means the planning director of the city. 
F.  "Proprietor" means the person in whose place of business any game machine is placed for operation and use by the public or by business invitees. 
G.  "School" means any educational institution, whether public or private, secular or parochial, which offers instruction of high school grade or below. 
(Ord. 610 § 1, 2004: prior code § 13.1)  
5.16.020 - Arcades or arcade mixed use—Zoning and use permit requirements. 
A.  Arcades and arcade mixed uses shall be permitted only in locations within a commercial ("C") zoning district, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in subsection B of this section. 
B.  It is unlawful to establish or operate an arcade or arcade mixed use within the city without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
C.  No use permit shall be granted for an arcade or arcade mixed use which is located closer than one hundred fifty feet from any stand-alone bar, tavern or cocktail lounge holding an on-sale alcoholic beverage license and which is engaged principally in the business of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages on the premises. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the location of an arcade within an arcade mixed use where alcohol is sold or dispensed, as long as said arcade mixed use complies with the requirement and conditions established by this chapter. 
D.  All such conditional use permits shall be valid for the period of two years. Any such permit may be renewed annually by the planning commission after the commission has reviewed the operation of the arcade or arcade mixed use and has made the following findings: 
1.  That all of the conditions of approval of the use permit have been met during the period for which it was issued; 
2.  That in the operation of the arcade or arcade mixed use during the period the permittee has not violated any provision of this chapter, or any provision of this code; 
3.  That the operation of the arcade or arcade mixed use during the period has caused no significant adverse effect on the surrounding neighborhood or on the community as a whole. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any mechanical or electronic amusement device in any place wherein the principal business being conducted is the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. 
(Ord. 610 § 2, 2004: prior code § 13.2)  
5.16.030 - Location license for game machines. 
A.  No person shall install, operate or maintain any game machine on premises owned or under the control of that person without first having obtained a location license in the manner required by this section. The license shall be in addition to the business license issued to the premises, and in addition to any license or permit required under other provisions of this code. 
B.  Application for a license shall be made to the city council in writing on a form provided by the planning director. It shall be filed with the planning director, together with a filing fee established by resolution of the city council, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the establishment; 
2.  The name and address of each proprietor, owner, partner or corporate officer of the establishment; also the name and address of the person who will have direct control and management of the establishment; 
3.  The number of game machines to be placed at the establishment; 
4.  The name and address of the distributor or supplier of the game machines; 
5.  The arcades, a sketch showing the dimensions and floor plan of the establishment and the location of each machine proposed to be installed, and a plot plan showing parking areas, storage facilities, exterior lighting and other pertinent details; 
6.  For arcades, a statement setting forth the manner and method of providing adult supervision at the establishment; 
7.  For arcades, a statement setting forth the number of off-street parking spaces provided for automobiles and other motor vehicles, and the number and type of parking or storage facilities provided for bicycles, skateboards and other modes of transportation; 
8.  If a proprietor, owner, partner, corporate officer or manager of the establishment has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor (minor traffic violations excepted) within the past ten years, then a statement by such person giving the time, place and pertinent details of such offense; 
9.  A statement that the game machine or machines for which a license is being sought is not intended to be, and will not be permitted to be, used for any gambling purpose whatsoever; 
10.  Such other information as may be required by the planning director or other city officials for the purpose of determining the applicant's qualifications for a license, or determining whether or not a license should be issued to the premises. 
C.  Upon the filing of the application, the planning director shall refer the same to the chief of police for investigation, and the chief of police shall be allowed ten days to investigate and report upon the application. Upon receipt of the report, the application shall be referred to the planning commission, which shall set the matter for hearing at its next regular meeting. At the conclusion of such hearing the planning commission shall make its recommendation to the city council as to the action to be taken on the application. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the city council shall set the matter for hearing and give written notice thereof by mail to the applicant, to each person who has filed with the planning director a request for such notice, and to each owner or occupant of property within three hundred feet of the premises described in the application. Following the hearing, the council shall render its decision on the application. 
D.  An application for a license may be denied, or any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the city council where it is found that the applicant has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or where the operation of game machines has become a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the adjacent neighborhood. Any applicant who has had a license revoked may not reapply for the license for a period of six months following denial or revocation. 
(Prior code § 13.3)  
5.16.040 - Existing arcades—Amortization period. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any person lawfully operating a game machine or machines, or an arcade, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to continue such operation for a period of two years from such date without obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 5.16.020, or a location license pursuant to Section 5.16.030; provided, however, that no game machine or arcade, whether lawfully in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or not, shall be exempted from any of the provisions of Section 5.16.050. 
(Prior code § 13.4)  
5.16.050 - Arcade operational requirements. 
No game machine or arcade shall be operated within the city unless all of the following conditions and requirements applicable to the same are complied with: 
A.  Machine Location. Where machines are located along one side of an aisle, the aisle shall be a minimum of sixty-six inches in width and shall be unobstructed. When machines are located on both sides of any aisle, the aisle shall be not less than ninety inches in width and shall be unobstructed. The maximum number of machines in any site shall not exceed one machine for every forty square feet of gross floor area allotted to game machine operations. 
B.  Visibility and Lighting. All windows and glass doors of an arcade which provide a view of the interior of the premises shall remain unobstructed at all times. All exterior parking areas, entrances and interior areas shall be adequately lighted, as determined by the chief of police. 
C.  Parking Requirements. Each arcade must have one parking space for motor vehicles for each three game machines, and one parking space for bicycles for each machine. Adequate storage facilities for skateboards and other modes of transportation must be provided. 
D.  Toilet Facilities. Each arcade shall provide adequate toilet and lavatory facilities accessible to customers, employees and business invitees. 
E.  Supervision. Each arcade shall provide sufficient security measures to effectively regulate parking congestion, disturbing noise and light, loud conversations and criminal activities. During hours of operation, arcades shall have on duty at all times at least one adult attendant who shall be responsible for and shall supervise all activities on the premises to insure that the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws are complied with and that there is no conduct on the part of customers, employees or other persons on the premises that is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. As a condition of issuing or continuing in effect any license issued under this chapter, the city council may require additional attendants if it finds that adequate supervision cannot be maintained by one person. 
F.  Hours of Operation. No arcade shall be open for business except between the hours of nine a.m. and ten p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays, and between the hours of nine a.m. and twelve midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. During the school year, persons under the age of eighteen shall not be allowed to operate game machines at any location Monday through Friday, except legal school holidays, between the hours of nine a.m. and three p.m., unless accompanied by such person's parent or guardian. 
G.  Noise Control. In an arcade, all necessary steps shall be taken to reduce noise caused by the operation of game machines and by persons in and around the premises. Complaints of excessive noise shall be investigated by the planning director, and the results of such investigation shall be reported in writing to the city council. If the council finds in a particular case that the complaint is valid, it shall order the licensee to take immediate action to correct the condition; the failure of a licensee to do so within a reasonable time after notice of the order constitutes a violation of this section. 
H.  Arcade—Alcohol and Drugs Prohibited. No person shall enter, or be allowed to remain, in any part of an arcade while in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug. The licensee and every supervisory employee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this subsection, and shall not permit any person to remain on the premises who is in violation of this subsection. 
I.  Fire Safety. Within an arcade, all fire regulations shall be observed, and reasonable ingress and egress to and from the premises shall be maintained. 
J.  Signs. The licensee of an arcade shall post at each entrance to the premises, plainly visible to persons entering therein, a sign advising such persons of the provisions of subsections F and H of this section. The text of the signs shall be in letters at least one inch high and shall be in both English and Spanish. 
K.  Compliance With Other Laws. In all operations governed by the provisions of this chapter, a licensee shall comply with all other laws, rules and regulations of governmental authorities having jurisdiction thereof, including those of the city. 
(Ord. 610 § 3, 2004; prior code § 13.5)  
5.16.055 - Arcade mixed use operational requirements. 
A.  Any "arcade" located within another business establishment shall be physically separated from all other uses within said establishment, by walls, dividers or other suitable means, as determined by the planning commission. Game machines may not be dispersed throughout an arcade mixed use. 
B.  No arcade mixed use may be operated within the city unless in compliance with subsections A, B, E, H, I and K of Section 5.16.050 of this chapter. 
C.  In considering a conditional use permit for an arcade mixed use, the planning commission shall ensure that the permit includes conditions requiring the adequate provision of parking (vehicle and bicycle), restrooms and signage to accommodate arcade users. 
(Ord. 610 § 4, 2004)  
5.16.060 - Suspension or revocation of permits and licenses. 
The city council may suspend or revoke any conditional use permit or license issued pursuant to this chapter upon proof to its satisfaction that: 
A.  The holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or of any other law or ordinance of the city or state pertaining to activities regulated by this chapter; 
B.  The continuance of the business by the holder thereof at the permitted location constitutes a nuisance or is contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare; or 
C.  The permit or license was procured by fraudulent representations. 
(Prior code § 13.6)  
5.16.070 - Appeals. 
Appeals from decisions of the planning commission denying a conditional use permit, or denying the renewal of such permit, shall be taken as provided in the zoning ordinance. All other appeals from decisions made or actions taken under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the city council by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five days after the date of the decision or action being appealed. The city clerk shall thereupon set the matter for hearing by the city council, and shall cause written notice of hearing to be mailed to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal, and to the applicant (if the applicant is not the appellant) at the address stated in the application, not less than five days prior to the date of hearing. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 13.7)  
5.16.080 - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 13.8)  
5.16.090 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the criminal penalties provided for in this code, a violation of any provision of this chapter, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as such. 
(Prior code § 13.9)  
5.16.100 - Application of chapter to arcade mixed uses. 
A.  Unless otherwise noted, all of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to arcade mixed uses. 
B.  Section 5.16.040 "Existing arcades—Amortization period," shall not apply to arcade mixed uses. 
(Ord. 610 § 5, 2004)  
Chapter 5.20 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Owner" means every person, firm or corporation owning or controlling any taxicab. 
B.  "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel. 
C.  "Taxicab" means every motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and not over a defined route and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the city, such vehicle being routed under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such person or persons hiring the same. 
D.  "Taxicab stand" means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the city council for the use of taxicabs while waiting for employment. 
E.  "Taximeter" means an instrument or device attached to a taxicab by which the fare authorized for the hire of such taxicab is mechanically calculated either on a basis of distance traveled or for waiting time, or a combination of both, which fare shall be indicated upon such taximeter by means of legible figures, in dollars and cents. 
(Prior code § 22-1)  
5.20.020 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the city any taxicab owned or controlled by that person, without first having obtained a permit as provided by this chapter and the permit being in full force and effect. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-2)  
5.20.030 - Permit—Application. 
Any owner desiring to obtain the permit required by Section 5.20.020 shall make application therefor to the city council. Each such application shall be accompanied by a bond or policy of insurance required by this chapter and shall be in writing and set forth the following information: 
A.  The name, age and business address and residence of the applicant, if a natural person, or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, and the names of its principal officers, or if a partnership, association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or of the persons comprising the association or company with the place of business and residence of each such partner or person; 
B.  A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving the name of the manufacturer thereof, the motor number, serial number and state license number of each vehicle; 
C.  The street number and exact location of the place or places where the applicant proposes to stand each taxicab; 
D.  A schedule of rates or fares to be charged for carrying passengers in taxicabs; 
E.  The color scheme, name, monogram or insignia on such taxicab or taxicabs; 
F.  Such further information as the city council or the city clerk require. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-3)  
5.20.040 - Permit—Publication of notice of application. 
Immediately upon the filing of an application as provided by Section 5.20.030, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which notice shall set forth the fact that application has been filed for a permit to operate taxicabs, the name of the applicant, the number of vehicles proposed to be operated, and the time and place at which the city council will hold a hearing on the application as provided by the Section 5.20.050. The notice shall be published once at least ten days prior to the hearing. On filing the application the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the sum of ten dollars to cover the cost of advertising. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-4)  
5.20.050 - Permit—Hearing on application—Grounds for granting. 
Any interested person may file written objections or protests to the granting of a permit at any time before the hearing required by Section 5.20.040. The council shall consider all of the objections or protests and in conducting its hearings shall have the right to call such witnesses as it may see fit. In such hearings the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear and convincing evidence which satisfies the council that public convenience and necessity require such operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which the application has been made and that the application in all respects should be granted. The city council, in determining whether or not public convenience and necessity exist, shall take into consideration all facts which it deems pertinent and proper. No application shall be granted unless the council first makes its specific findings that each of the following conditions exists: 
A.  That the applicant is financially responsible; 
B.  That the applicant is of good moral character or that the officers of the applicant are of good moral character; 
C.  That the persons holding permits for the operation of motor vehicles for hire are under efficient management, earning a fair and reasonable return on their capital devoted to such service; 
D.  That persons holding permits for the operation of vehicles for which application is being made are, under normal conditions, inadequately serving the public; 
E.  That the applicant has complied with the provisions of all city ordinances and all state and federal ordinances and all state and federal laws applicable to the proposed operation; 
F.  That such additional service will not result in a greater hazard to the public and will not create traffic congestion in parking; 
G.  That each vehicle described therein is adequate and safe for the purpose for which it is to be used, and is equipped as required in this chapter. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-5)  
5.20.060 - Permit—Additional permits. 
Any existing holder of a taxicab permit and license may make application to the city clerk for such additional taxicab permits and licenses as he may desire. The city clerk shall notify the other holders of taxicab permits and licenses of such application by registered mail and if no objections are filed within ten days after such mailing of notices, the applicant shall be granted such permit and license as requested without the necessity of a hearing or investigation as provided in Section 5.20.050. If, however, protests are filed, then the taxicab permit, or permits, shall be granted or denied only in accordance with the provisions and procedures outlined in Sections 5.20.030, 5.20.040 and 5.20.050. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-6)  
5.20.070 - Permit—Existing businesses. 
Every owner operating a licensed taxicab or taxicabs prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be presumed, in the absence of any contrary evidence and finding of the city council, to have provided prima facie evidence of public convenience and necessity for the issuance of a permit to operate the taxicab or taxicabs actually in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the city council, upon application received by it not later than fifteen days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall grant a permit to such owner to operate the taxicab or taxicabs which were in actual operation on such effective date. 
(Prior code § 22-7)  
5.20.080 - Permit—Transfer. 
No permit for the operation of a taxicab may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city council. Application for consent to transfer shall be made in writing to the city council in the same manner as an original application for a permit, but consent to transfer shall be given by the city council as a matter of right unless the council finds that the proposed transferee is not a person of good moral character or that the transferee does not possess sufficient financial responsibility. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-8)  
5.20.090 - Permit—Suspension or revocation. 
A.  Any taxicab permit may be suspended or revoked by the city council upon the following grounds: 
1.  The permit holder knowingly and after notice from the city clerk fails to operate the vehicles under permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any and all state and federal laws applicable to the operation of such vehicles; 
2.  The taxicab or taxicabs are operated at a rate of fare other than that approved by the council; 
3.  The permit holder abandons the operation of all vehicles for a period of thirty days. Abandonment or limitation of service caused by acts of God, labor disputes and other acts beyond the control of the certificate holder is not "abandonment" within the meaning of this section. 
4.  The permit holder has committed acts or carried on a course of conduct which the council finds, after hearing, establishes a lack of good moral character in the permit holder. 
B.  No suspension shall be made effective until a hearing has been held before the city council, at which time the permit holder may be present and represented by counsel. The permit holder shall be given not less than ten days' notice by registered mail of the hearing. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-9)  
5.20.100 - Permit—Fee. 
Each holder of a taxicab permit shall pay to the city as a license fee, the sum of twenty dollars semiannually in advance, for each taxicab operated by the holder in the city. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-10)  
5.20.110 - Taxicab stands. 
In each permit the city council shall designate the exact location of each stand and the amount of curb space to be occupied thereunder. Every taxicab stand so designated shall be marked with white paint or other white material upon the entire curb surface, with the words "taxicab only," in black letters thereon. It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to park the same at any location in the city other than at the stand designated in the permit for the operation of the taxicab; provided, that where a permit for more than one taxicab stand has been granted to the same person, such stands may be used interchangeably by any of the taxicabs owned by the person. Any one taxicab stand that is granted to any person may be used jointly by any two or more persons holding a permit under this chapter; provided, that the consent of the city council is first obtained. No taxicab stand shall be changed from the location designated in the permit, except by permission granted by the city council upon written application of the holder of the permit. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-11)  
5.20.120 - Taxicabs to be operated on regular basis. 
All persons holding permits shall regularly operate their taxicabs during each day of the year for which the permit was issued to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand for such taxicabs. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-12)  
5.20.130 - Replacement of taxicabs. 
Whenever the holder of a permit replaces a taxicab for which a permit has been issued, he shall file with the city clerk the name, type, year of manufacture, serial number, motor number and state license number of the vehicle abandoned and the vehicle to be placed in use. The city clerk shall thereupon, as a matter of right, authorize the replacement of the vehicle under the existing permit. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-13)  
5.20.140 - Rates of fare. 
A.  Every taxicab shall also have displayed in a conspicuous place therein or thereon at all times a sign stating in clear and legible characters the rates of fare charged for carrying passengers therein, the owner's name or the fictitious name under which he operates, and the business address and telephone number of the owner. Each owner holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab under this chapter shall at all times keep on file with the city clerk an up-to-date schedule of rates of fares charged for carrying passengers therein. It is unlawful for any owner or driver of any taxicab to charge or collect, or cause to be charged or collected, any greater rate of fare for carrying any passenger therein than is stated in the schedule of rates. 
B.  The city council, upon its own motion or upon application of a permit holder, may set, establish, change, modify or amend the schedule of rates to be charged by all vehicles operated by each holder of a permit under the provisions of this chapter. No rates shall be set, established, changed, modified or amended without a hearing before the city council. Notice of such hearing shall be given to each permit holder by registered mail at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-14)  
5.20.150 - Taxicab equipment. 
Every taxicab shall at all times while in operation be equipped with the following: 
A.  Taximeters: a taximeter of standard design and construction, fastened in front of the passengers and visible to such passengers at all times, day and night and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Each taximeter shall have a flag thereon to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. Taximeters shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police, or his authorized representative, upon proper identification, at all times. Any taximeter which is found after such inspection to be inaccurate to the prejudice of any passenger shall be immediately ordered out of service until approved by the chief of police or his authorized representative; 
B.  Interior light: a light of not less than two candlepower within such vehicle so arranged as to illuminate the whole interior thereof back of the driver's seat, which light shall be kept constantly lighted at all times while any passenger is in such vehicle from one-half hour after sunset of any day until one-half hour before sunrise the next day; 
C.  Name, insignia: the name, monogram or insignia designated and approved for use by the permit holder, to be painted or otherwise affixed in a clearly legible manner on the outside of each rear door. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to imitate any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any other permit holder and approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 22-15)  
5.20.160 - Inspection of taxicabs—Maintenance and sanitary standards. 
Every vehicle operating under this chapter is subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or his authorized representative, upon proper identification. Any taxicab which is found, after such inspection, to be unsafe or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service, shall be immediately ordered out of service and shall not again be placed in service until it has been put in safe and proper condition. The interior of every taxicab shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned thoroughly at least once in every twenty-four hours. 
(Prior code § 22-16)  
5.20.170 - Regulations for operation. 
All taxicabs operated in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Direct Route. Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously. 
B.  Refusal of Service. No driver of any taxicab shall refuse any person prompt taxi service in the city at any time while such taxicab is on the public streets ready for service, unless such taxicab is already engaged in the carrying of one or more passengers or is enroute to answer a call for taxicab service; provided further, that nothing in this subsection requires any owner or driver to furnish taxicab service to any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics, or to any person who is insane or who is a criminal. 
C.  Receipts. Every driver, upon request, shall give a correct receipt for the amount of payment received. 
D.  Number of Passengers. No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seated capacity of his vehicle. 
E.  Only Paying Passengers to be Carried. No driver shall carry any passenger other than paying passengers or persons authorized by or on company business. 
F.  Display of Permit Number and Name of Driver on Duty. At all times while in service, each taxicab shall display in a conspicuous place clearly visible to passengers a legible sign stating the number of the permit under which it is operated and the name of the driver on duty. 
G.  Violation of Section. Any violation of the provisions of this section is cause for the revocation of the permit of the driver guilty of the violation. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-17)  
5.20.180 - Insurance required. 
It is unlawful for any owner or driver to drive or operate any taxicab, or cause the same to be driven or operated, and no permit for the operation thereof shall be granted, unless there is on file with the city clerk at all times while the taxicab is being operated a certificate of insurance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, certifying that there is in full force and effect a policy of insurance issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the state, insuring the owner of the taxicab (giving the manufacturer's number and state license number) against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of the taxicab, or from violation of this chapter or of the laws of the state. The policy shall be in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars for the injury or death of one person, and subject to the limit of fifteen thousand dollars for each person injured or killed, in the amount of at least thirty thousand dollars for the injury or death of two or more persons in the same accident and five thousand dollars for injury or destruction of property. The policy of insurance shall run to the city and shall inure by its terms to benefit any and all persons suffering injury or damage to person or property covered thereby, and shall provide that suit be brought thereon in any court of competent jurisdiction by any such person. The policy of insurance shall provide that there shall be a continuing liability thereon, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. If, at any time, such policy of insurance shall be cancelled by the company issuing the same, or the authority of such company to do business in the state shall be revoked, the owner shall forthwith replace such policy with another policy as above provided, satisfactory to the city council, and in default thereof may revoke such owner's permit. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 22-19)  
5.20.190 - Failure to pay fare. 
Except where credit is intended, it is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay, at the end of the trip or the termination or discharge of service, the regular fare for the taxicab that he has hired. 
(Prior code § 22-20)  
Chapter 5.28 - CABLE COMMUNICATION FRANCHISE PROCEDURES, TERMS AND ENFORCEMENT MEASURES 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Intent. 
A.  General Findings. The city of Soledad finds that cable communication systems have the potential of benefiting its residents if properly regulated. The city further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare are served through a franchising process that specifies certain conditions for review but allows for future flexibility to meet cable-related needs and interests. 
B.  Purpose. It is the city's purpose to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by granting one or more franchises for the construction, upgrade, operation and repair of cable communication systems within the city; to regulate (to the extent not expressly prohibited by law) each cable communication system within the city; to require each grantee to pay a franchise fee to the city for the use of streets and public rights-of-way; to promote availability of quality cable service to city residents, businesses, the city and other public institutions; to encourage the development of and to improve local programming including public, educational and governmental access programming; to promote competitive cable rates and services; to provide safe and efficient use of streets and rights-of-way; to optimize the use of public property; to provide a diversity of information to the community; to provide a wide range of programming services which individually may not be desired by all subscribers, but collectively improve the overall value of a cable communication system; to maximize channel capacity, facilities and programming access for governmental and educational agencies, as well as other groups and individual members of the general public, so as to promote open government, educational opportunity and a diversity of community information and opinion; and to allow flexibility to respond to changes in technology, subscriber interests and competitive factors within the cable communication service market and the larger market for entertainment and information. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.020 - Definitions. 
A.  List of Defined Terms. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. 
"Access" means the availability of the cable system(s) (as it relates to PEG access) for use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals in the community, including the city and its designees, to acquire, create and distribute programming not under a grantee's editorial control, including, but not limited to: 
1.  "Educational access" means access where schools are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their programming; 
2.  "Governmental access" means access where governmental institutions or their designees are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their programming; 
3.  "PEG access" means public access, educational access and governmental access, collectively; 
4.  "Public access" means access where organizations, groups or individual members of the general public, on a non-discriminatory basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their programming. 
"Access channel" means any channel or portion thereof, designated for access purposes or otherwise made available to facilitate or transmit access programming. 
"Affiliate" when used in relation to any entity means another person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity that owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with such entity. 
"Applicant" means any person who files a written application for a franchise under this chapter. 
"Basic service" means any service tier regularly provided to all subscribers which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals or such other definition as may be adopted by federal law. It shall include all PEG access channels. 
"Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as further amended. 
"Cable service" or "cable communication service" means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service; and (3) cable internet access service. 
"Cable system" or "cable communication system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple customers within the city, but such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way, including streets or easements; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541(c)) if such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (4) an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. 573; or (5) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. Notwithstanding the above, the term "cable system" also includes any facility that is a community antenna television system under California law. A reference to a cable system refers to any part thereof, including, without limitation, converters. 
"Cable television committee" or "telecommunications committee" shall mean a committee whose membership and powers, if formed, shall be as designated in city. 
"Construction" means any new construction, reconstruction, rebuild or upgrade of the system. 
"Designated access provider" means the entity or entities designated by the city under Section 5.28.030(G)(1). 
"Document" or "record" means those materials normally generated, used and retained in the operation and management of a cable system, in whatever form stored, including but not limited to computerized records and programs, paper records, and video or audio-taped records. 
"Downstream channel" means a channel capable of carrying a transmission from the headend to remote points on the cable system or to interconnection points on the cable system. 
"Fiber optic" means the transmission medium of optical fiber, along with all associated electronics and equipment capable of carrying cable services by means of electric lightwave impulses. 
"Franchise" means the non-exclusive authorization granted pursuant to this cable ordinance by the city to a grantee to construct, rebuild, maintain and operate a cable system under, on and over streets within all or specified areas of the city. The terms and conditions of this cable ordinance and any franchise agreement between a grantee and the city collectively constitute the franchise. The term "franchise" does not include any other license, permit or agreement that may be required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city or for disturbing the surface of any street. 
"Franchise agreement" means a contract between the city and a grantee entered into in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and which, together with this chapter, constitute the franchise. 
"Franchise area" means the geographic area for which a franchise is issued. The franchise area may be specified to authorize provision of service not only in areas within the existing city limits, but also in other areas as those areas are annexed in the future. 
"Grantee" means any person to whom a franchise is granted by the city council. 
"Gross revenues" means all cash, credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, as to revenues from operation of the cable system, or by any other entity that operates a grantee's cable system, from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the grantee's operation of a cable system, including the studios and other facilities associated therewith, to provide cable services. "Gross revenues" include, but are not limited to, fees charged to subscribers for basic service; fees charged to subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, re-connection and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments or other payment received as consideration from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system; converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees; advertising revenues, including a per capita share of advertising revenues for advertising carried on more than one cable system; revenues from home shopping channels; sales of programming guides; and such other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop. The definition shall be interpreted in a manner which permits the city to collect the maximum franchise fee permitted by law, irrespective of the source of revenue. "Gross revenues," however, shall not include any bad debt (defined as unpaid subscriber or advertiser accounts), any taxes on services furnished by a grantee which are imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, city, or other governmental unit and which are collected by a grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. The franchise fee is not a tax. 
"Headend" means a grantee's facility for signal reception and dissemination on the cable system, including cable, antennas, wires, satellite dishes, monitors, switchers, modulators, processors for television broadcast signals, equipment for the interconnection of the cable system with adjacent cable systems and interconnection of any separate networks which are part of the cable system, and all other related equipment and facilities. 
"Institutional network" means a communications system, whether physically integrated with a cable system or not, that is constructed, operated or maintained by a grantee whose transmissions are principally available to persons other than cable television subscribers (i.e. government agencies, educational institutions and hospitals). 
"Interconnect" or "interconnection" means the provision by a grantee of technical, engineering, physical and all other necessary components to accomplish, complete and adequately maintain a physical linking of a grantee's cable system and cable services or any designated channel or signal pathway thereof, with any other designated cable system or programmer so that cable services of technically adequate quality may be sent to and received from such other systems. 
"Ordinance" shall refer to this cable communication franchise procedures, terms and enforcement measures ordinance. 
"Person" means any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, corporation or other form of organization authorized to do business in the state of California, and includes any natural person. 
"Public property" means any real property owned by the city or any other governmental unit that is not otherwise defined in this chapter as a street. 
"Residential services" means cable services delivered to single or multiple dwelling units. 
"School" means any accredited primary school, secondary school, college and university. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service provided by a grantee and for which a separate charge is made by the grantee. 
"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, right-of-way, easement or other public way, now or hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used for the purpose of installing, maintaining and operating a cable system. 
"Subscriber" means any person who is lawfully receiving, for any purpose or reason, any cable service or services provided by a grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service. 
"Transfer" means the sale, lease, assignment, mortgage, consolidation, merger, or any other disposition of a franchise, or any change in the ownership or control of a grantee or any person which owns, controls, or manages the grantee directly or through one or more intervening partnerships or corporations. 
"Upgrade" means an improvement in channel capacity or other technical aspect of cable system capacity that may be accomplished without a rebuild of the cable system. 
"Upstream channel" means a channel capable of carrying a transmission to the headend from remote points on the cable system or from interconnection points on the cable system. 
B.  Other Terms. Words not defined in this section shall be given the meaning set forth in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. as amended. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.030 - Programming and channel capacity. 
A.  Grantee Compliance. A grantee shall meet or exceed the programming and channel capacity requirements set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Initial Channel Capacity. 
1.  A grantee, except a grantee operating a cable system that was constructed prior to the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted, shall provide a cable system which uses at least five hundred fifty megahertz equipment of high quality and reliability. At minimum, a grantee shall integrate optical fiber or other technology providing equivalent or greater functionality, performance and capacity, into any cable system construction and design in a manner which permits it to take full advantage of the benefits of that technology, including increased reliability and improved system performance. 
2.  At minimum a grantee, except a grantee operating a cable system that was constructed prior to the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted, shall install and activate the return portion of the cable system in the sub-low frequency spectrum of five to thirty megahertz. 
3.  A grantee shall initially include a sufficient number of downstream and upstream channels with sufficient capability and technical quality to enable the implementation and performance of all the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to remote access transmissions and transmissions to and from access center(s) and interconnection points, as set forth in, but not limited to this chapter. 
C.  Broad Programming Categories. A grantee shall provide at least the following initial broad categories of programming: 
1.  Educational programming; 
2.  News and information; 
3.  Sports; 
4.  General entertainment (including movies); 
5.  Children or family-oriented; 
6.  Arts, culture, and performing arts; 
7.  Foreign language; 
8.  Science or documentary; 
9.  Weather information; 
10.  Ethnic programming; 
11.  Minority programming; 
12.  National, state and local government affairs; and 
13.  PEG access programming. 
D.  Deletion or Reduction of Programming Categories. A grantee shall not delete or so limit as to effectively delete any broad category of programming identified in this section and within its control without the consent of the city or as otherwise authorized by law. 
E.  Leased Access Channels. A grantee shall meet the leased access channel requirements imposed by federal law. 
F.  Broadcast Channels. To the extent required by federal law, a grantee shall provide to all residential subscribers the signals of: 
1.  Local commercial television stations and qualified low-power stations; and 
2.  Qualified local non-commercial educational television stations. 
G.  PEG Access. 
1.  Designated PEG Access Providers. 
a.  The city may designate PEG access providers, including itself for governmental access purposes, to control and manage the use of any or all access facilities provided by a grantee under this chapter. To the extent authorized by the city, the designated access provider shall have sole responsibility for operating and managing such access facilities. 
b.  A grantee shall cooperate with designated access providers in the use of the cable system and access facilities for the provision of PEG access as provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement. A grantee may enter into operating agreements with designated access providers under which the designated access providers will facilitate and coordinate the provision of PEG access services. 
2.  PEG Channel Capacity and Technical Capability. 
a.  A grantee shall provide a minimum of one downstream channel for PEG access. 
b.  A grantee shall install, maintain and replace as necessary, a link between the primary access center and the headend. 
3.  Access Interconnections. A grantee shall ensure that technically adequate signal quality, routing systems, and switching and/or processing equipment are initially and continuously provided for all access interconnections required by its franchise agreement both within grantee's cable system and with other cable systems throughout the duration of this chapter. 
4.  Change in Technology. In the event a grantee makes any change in the cable system and related equipment and facilities or in the grantee's signal delivery technology which directly or indirectly substantially affects the signal quality or transmission of access programming, the grantee shall at its expense take necessary steps or provide necessary technical assistance, including the acquisition of all necessary equipment, to ensure that the capabilities of access programmers are not diminished or adversely affected by such change. 
5.  Technical Quality. 
a.  A grantee shall maintain all access channels (both upstream channels and downstream channels) and all interconnections of access channels at the same level of technical quality and reliability required by this chapter and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations for residential subscriber channels. 
b.  A grantee shall have no responsibility for the production quality or program content of the access programming distributed on the access channel or channels. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.040 - Franchise—Required and duration. 
A.  Franchise Required. No person may use the streets of the city to construct, operate or repair a cable system, and no person or entity may provide cable service within the city without a franchise. Any person or entity may apply for a franchise. An independent contractor does not need a franchise to install, service or repair a cable system for a grantee. 
B.  Description of Authorization. Any non-exclusive franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit a grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable system in the city of Soledad, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street or highway, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from a public utility franchised or permitted to do business in the city of Soledad, except that an encroachment permit shall be required for work or encroachment on public property or in the public rights-of-way. The construction, operation and repair of the cable system shall be subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the city, including zoning ordinances and ordinances establishing construction standards or procedures for use of the streets. 
C.  Duration. Unless a different term is specified in a grantee's franchise agreement, a franchise shall be for eight years. A franchise does not confer rights other than as provided by this chapter and the franchise agreement, or as mandated by federal or state law. 
The term of an existing franchise may be extended by the city by resolution of the city council for a period not to exceed twelve months. 
D.  Owner Consent Required. A franchise does not authorize a grantee to construct, operate, or repair any other type of system, or to provide service to or install its cable system upon private property without owner consent, or to use publicly or privately owned conduits or poles without a separate agreement with the owners, except that nothing in this section limits any rights the grantee may have to use compatible or apportionable easements pursuant to Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 541(a)(2) and other applicable law. 
E.  Grantee's Expense. Unless otherwise specifically stated in a franchise or required by law, all acts which a grantee is required to perform under the franchise or applicable law must be performed at the grantee's expense. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.050 - Franchise—Application. 
A.  Filing. An application for a new franchise or for a renewal franchise must be filed with the city clerk. New franchises and renewal franchises that are not subject to the formal renewal provisions of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) through (g) shall be reviewed as provided in Section 6.1. Applicants that submit proposals subject to the formal renewal provisions of the Cable Act shall be reviewed as provided in Section 5.28.060(B). 
B.  Application Requirements. An application for a franchise shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  A detailed statement of the form or business organization of the applicant including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The names, residence or business addresses of all officers, directors and associates of the applicant, 
b.  The names, residence or business addresses of all officers, persons, and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control five percent or more of the ownership of the applicant, and respective ownership share of each such person or entity, 
c.  The names and addresses of any affiliate of the applicant and a statement describing the nature of any such affiliate, including but not limited to the cable communication systems owned or controlled by the applicant and its affiliates, and the areas served thereby, 
d.  If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence or business addresses of each general partner; if a general partner is a corporation or partnership, the name and address of such corporation or partnership, and provide the same information for that corporation or partnership that is required of an applicant under subsection (B)(2) of this section (if the partnership is scheduled to dissolve at a particular time, the time for dissolution shall be stated), and 
e.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall show the names, residence or business addresses of its officers and directors; if the corporation is a subsidiary of another corporation or partnership, the application shall show the name and address of such other corporation or partnership and provide the same information for that corporation or partnership that is required of an applicant under subsection (B)(2) of this section; 
3.  A listing of all city employees, officials or appointees that have any interest, direct or indirect, in the applicant or any affiliate; 
4.  A copy of each written agreement and a description of every oral agreement or understanding the applicant has with any other person relating to the proposed franchise, that gives such person the right to manage, control, or to obtain the right to manage or control a grantee or its particular cable system. If a franchise is granted to a person acting on behalf of or as the representative of another person, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever; 
5.  A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable communication system service and in related or similar fields; 
6.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year just prior to the date of the application hereunder; or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system in the city; or a statement from a certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system in the city; 
7.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable franchise(s) awarded to the applicant or its affiliate; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such cable system(s); and the amount of the applicant's and its affiliate's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
8.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A precise description of the franchise area for which a franchise is sought and a map specifically showing the proposed service area or areas within which the applicant proposes to provide cable service. A proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational or for the completion of upgrades or improvements in the cable plant throughout the entire area to be served, 
b.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges and service charges, 
c.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant and that such standards of operations are in compliance with those contained in Title 47, subpart K (Section 76.601 et seq.) of the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, 
d.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual or minimum channels or spectrum, equipment, facilities and services proposed by the applicant to provide for PEG access; 
9.  Any other details, statements, information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any provision of any other ordinance of the city; 
10.  A declaration by the applicant that the application is true and complete, that no person not shown in the application has any interest in the application for a franchise, and that the applicant has read this cable ordinance and will abide by its provisions. 
C.  Application Fee Required. At the time it applies for an initial franchise, an applicant shall submit an application fee in an amount to be set by the city council which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or money order, to pay the costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application or any part thereof, and which shall be in consideration thereof, and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part. 
D.  Grantee's Application Incorporated. The grantee shall provide all services specifically set forth in its application and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically agrees that its application, as modified by any negotiation between the city and grantee as expressed in the franchise agreement, is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise agreement. In the event of a conflict between such proposals and the provisions of the franchise, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the community, in the opinion of the city, shall prevail. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.060 - Franchise—Review of application. 
A.  Initial Franchise or Non-Formal Renewal. In the case of an application for an initial franchise or for a renewal franchise that is not governed by the formal renewal provisions of the Cable Act: 
1.  The city may advertise for additional applicants and issue a request for proposals (hereinafter "RFP"). 
2.  The city may give public notice when it receives a properly completed franchise proposal. After receiving a proposal that contains the required information, the city may schedule a meeting or meetings to determine whether a franchise should be granted. In making this determination, the city may consider: 
a.  The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable franchise; 
b.  Whether the applicant for renewal's quality of service under its existing franchise, including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing practices and the like has been reasonable in light of the needs of the community; 
c.  Where the applicant has not previously held a franchise, whether the applicant's record in other communities indicates that it can be relied upon to provide high-quality service throughout any franchise term; 
d.  Whether the applicant has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment set forth in a proposal satisfying any minimum requirements established by the city; 
e.  Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and in light of the requirements established by the city; and 
f.  Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on streets, public property and private property that will be used by the applicant's cable system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property, involve disruption of property or public services, or interfere with the use of streets or public property; the effect of granting the franchise on the ability of the proposed cable service to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community, including PEG access channel capacity, facilities and financial support; and whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal qualifications to provide the proposed cable service. 
3.  The city shall return any proposal that does not include all the information required by this chapter. 
B.  Formal Renewal Applications. Applications for renewal governed by the formal renewal provisions of the Cable Act shall be submitted in accordance with this section and shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. A grantee which intends to exercise rights under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) through (g) shall submit a notice in writing to the city clearly stating that it is activating the formal renewal procedures of the Cable Act. At the same time it submits this notice, it shall also submit the required application fee. A grantee which has applied for renewal under the formal renewal provision of the Cable Act shall submit all information requested by the city within the time frame delineated by the city. 
C.  Standing Not Granted. This chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant or grantee standing to challenge the issuance of a franchise to another applicant or grantee. Nothing in this section prohibits the city from relying on studies or proceedings previously conducted in drafting an RFP, if the city attorney concludes that those studies or proceedings continue to reflect community needs and interests. Nothing in this section prohibits an applicant for renewal from submitting a proposal under 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h). 
D.  Final Franchise Agreement Required. If, considering the factors set forth above and applicable law, the city determines that a franchise should issue to an applicant, the city may promptly prepare a final franchise agreement for approval and signature by the applicant and the city. In addition to other matters that may or must be addressed therein consistent with the Cable Act, the franchise agreement shall specify, subject to applicable law: (1) the franchise area for which the franchise is awarded, and the terms and conditions under which the grantee must extend service to persons within that franchise area; (2) the term of the franchise; (3) requirements for cable system design and performance; (4) equipment and facilities requirements; and (5) requirements related to channels, facilities, and equipment for PEG access and community use (including institutional uses). The franchise area may be larger, smaller or the same as the franchise area identified by the grantee. No franchise shall be effective or shall issue until the applicant has entered into a franchise agreement with the city, the franchise agreement has been approved by the city, and the grantee has filed an unconditional acceptance of the franchise in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.070 - Franchise—Contents of proposal and review. 
A.  Request For Proposal—Requirements. Every city RFP, including a request for a renewal proposal issued pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(b), shall specify minimum requirements that an applicant must satisfy for facilities and equipment, including access facilities and equipment; channel capacity for PEG access use; and such other requirements as the city may establish in an RFP under the Cable Act. The RFP shall attach a draft franchise agreement and shall invite comments on that draft franchise agreement. In addition, the RFP shall require each applicant to provide at least the information necessary to determine the degree to which granting the franchise is likely to result in damage to streets, public property, or private property or disrupt use of or require replacement of streets, public property, or private property; and information required to permit the city to determine whether the applicant has the financial, legal and technical qualifications to operate a cable system in Soledad. The RFP shall require each applicant to provide information required to assess its proposal. It may also contain or refer to other information that may assist an applicant in preparing a proposal. The information sought shall include at least the following: 
1.  Changes to the information submitted with the application; 
2.  The names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all persons with five percent or more ownership interest, including the names and addresses of affiliates holding such ownership interests directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named person; and a statement describing the applicant, its officers and directors, and its partners or major shareholders, indicating business experience and other pertinent information, including experience and performance in the cable communication system and service field showing any interest in other franchises, the date such franchises were granted, and the status of installation and operation thereof, and the value, size and character of the operations under the other franchises; 
3.  Information showing that the applicant, any person controlling the applicant, and any other entity which will constitute a cable operator of the cable system under the Cable Act are legally qualified to hold the franchise, applying the standards set forth in Section 5.28.080; 
4.  A demonstration of the applicant's technical and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
5.  A statement prepared by a certified public accountant or certified by the applicant's chief financial officer regarding the applicant's financial ability to perform as proposed; 
6.  A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend and access facilities, especially PEG access facilities; such description should specify the model and make of the system components the applicant intends to use or, if the applicant has not selected a particular brand of equipment, the minimum manufacturer's specifications which the components used must meet; 
7.  A detailed description of the procedures the applicant intends to follow in constructing, operating and maintaining the cable system. If the applicant plans to upgrade or rebuild an existing cable system, the description should explain the steps which will be taken to upgrade the cable system, the cable service disruptions which are expected to result, the steps the applicant intends to take in order to minimize such service disruptions, and how the applicant intends to compensate affected subscribers for such service disruptions; 
8.  An estimate of plant mileage that will be installed and its location, the proposed construction schedule, and information on the availability of space in conduits and on poles in the areas to be served, including an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
9.  A schedule of the maximum initial rates and charges to subscribers (including late fees, disconnect fees and fees for each cable service the applicant intends to provide) and a description of the service that will be provided for those rates; 
10.  A narrative description of the future cable-related needs and interests of Soledad; a showing that the proposal will adequately meet those needs and interests, including, particularly, how the proposed cable system will provide for public access and how it will be upgraded or rebuilt to take advantage of changes in technology during the franchise term; and a copy of any community needs assessment conducted or relied upon by the applicant; 
11.  Pro forma financial projections for the proposed cable system for the term of the proposed franchise, including a statement of projected income and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
12.  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state requirements; 
13.  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served in whole or in part by an existing cable grantee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur and the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild; 
14.  The effect construction of the cable system is likely to have on streets, public property and private property that will be used by the applicant's cable system; the extent to which construction, installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property or public services (including cable service) or use of streets; and the expected effect of granting the franchise on the ability of the proposed cable service to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community; 
15.  A declaration by the applicant that the application is true and complete, and that no person not shown in the application has any interest in the application for a franchise. 
B.  Request for Proposal—Authorization. The city council may authorize the issuance of any RFP by resolution. 
C.  Request for Proposal—Instructions. The city may prepare instructions and furnish the same to all interested persons stating how a proposal shall be submitted. 
D.  Cable-Related Needs to be Met. It is the obligation of an applicant to submit a proposal that shows that, if granted a franchise, the applicant will meet the reasonable cable-related needs and interests of the community. An applicant shall submit additional information it deems appropriate to the consideration of its proposal, whether the information is required or not. 
E.  Bid Bond and Deadline. The city manager may establish a deadline for the receipt of proposals from any interested applicants. Each applicant shall submit fifteen copies of its proposal. Each proposal shall be accompanied by a bid bond in the amount of twenty thousand dollars. If the franchise is not awarded to an applicant, the applicant's bid bond will be returned. If the franchise is awarded, the bond will be used to pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in evaluating the applicant's proposal that are chargeable by law to grantee, and the remainder shall be returned. 
F.  Additional Information. The city may request additional information from any applicant as required to understand or evaluate the applicant's proposal. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.080 - Legal qualifications. 
A.  Legal Ability to Perform. In determining whether an applicant has the necessary legal ability to perform as promised and to assist the city in evaluating the past performance of the applicant under 47 U.S.C. Section 546 or Section 7 above, the city shall evaluate the applicant's proposal in light of this section: 
1.  The city shall not grant a franchise to any applicant which submitted a request for a franchise or for renewal of a franchise pursuant to subsections A and B of this section where the request was denied, or any challenges to the franchising decision were finally resolved on a date three years or less preceding the submission of the new request where the previous denial was on grounds that the applicant failed to propose a cable system which met the needs and interests of the community; or that the applicant did not meet the requirements of subsection A of this section; or, in the case of a renewal request, that the applicant had failed to comply with the requirements of its franchise, or failed to provide adequate service to subscribers; 
2.  Every applicant must have the necessary authority under California law to operate a cable communication system. An applicant shall show that it is qualified to obtain, the necessary federal licenses or waivers required to operate the cable system proposed; 
3.  An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during the five years prior to the issuance of the RFP to which the applicant responds, the applicant has been convicted of acts or omissions of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers of the cable system, or to substantially comply with lawful obligations under the franchise or obligations under applicable law, including obligations under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anti-competitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct; 
4.  An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in response to an RFP issued by the city, or intentionally withholds information which the applicant lawfully is required to provide; 
5.  For purposes of subsections (A)(1), (3) and (4) of this section, the term applicant includes any affiliate. 
B.  Opportunity to Explain. The city may provide an opportunity to any applicant which has engaged in acts or omissions which may provide the basis for denying a request for a franchise under subsection (A)(4) of this section to show that it would be inappropriate to base a decision on the act or omission, by virtue of: the particular circumstances surrounding the act or omission and given the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing from the act or omission and to prevent its recurrence; the involvement of applicant's principals, owners or managers; or the remoteness of the act or omission from the operation of cable communication systems. 
C.  Cable Act Renewal Provisions Prevail. This section shall not be interpreted to require the city to take any action that would be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. Section 546. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.090 - Limitations of franchise. 
A.  No Implied Rights. No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by a franchise except those specifically prescribed therein. 
B.  Reservation of Rights. The city reserves every right and power which is reserved to it by this chapter or by any ordinance or resolution of the city, and a grantee, by its acceptance of a franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of any of its rights or powers. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.100 - Non-exclusive franchise and competition encouraged. 
A.  Non-exclusive Franchises Only. Franchises granted under this chapter shall be non-exclusive. 
B.  Reservation by City. The city reserves the right to grant a franchise to another person at any time, or to construct, operate and/or repair a cable system itself. Competition among cable companies is encouraged. 
C.  Exclusive Contracts for Cable Service Prohibited. No person who holds a franchise may enter into an exclusive contract for the provision of cable service to any person or building, or demand the exclusive right to serve a person or building as a condition of extending service, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
D.  Parity of Franchises. A franchise and the right it grants to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive and do not explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems or other communications systems within the city, affect the city's right to authorize use of the public right-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or other communications systems or for other purposes as the city determines appropriate, or affect the city's right itself to construct, operate or maintain a cable system or other communications system, with or without a franchise. 
In the event that, after the effective date of a franchise, the city grants a franchise to another person or persons to use and occupy the public right-of-way for the purpose of operating a cable system or other communications system that is comparable in scope to a franchise, the material terms and conditions of such additional franchise or franchises shall be reasonably comparable to the materials terms and conditions of the franchise, taking into consideration all of the circumstances in existence at the time such additional franchise or franchises are granted, including without limitation any applicable legal limitations on the city's regulatory authority. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.110 - Other limitations of franchise. 
A.  No Expectancy of Renewal. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to create an expectancy of renewal or to in any respect entitle any grantee to renewal or extension of a franchise, except as may be expressly required by applicable law. 
B.  Prior Lawful Occupancy Prevails. Any privilege claimed under any franchise by a grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy and to the city's regulation of the street or other public property, subject to Section 5.28.140. 
C.  Delegation of Authority. The city may transfer or delegate any right, power or duty from any officer, employee, department or body of the city to any other officer, employee, department or body of the city. 
D.  Non-Recourse Against City. A grantee shall have no recourse against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement or non-enforcement. 
E.  Grantee Subject to City Police Powers. A grantee shall at all times be subject to the exercise of the police power of the city, including but not limited to the power of the city to adopt consumer protection laws regarding cable communication. 
F.  Public Interest Promoted. The provisions of any franchise shall be liberally construed in favor of the city in order to promote the public interest. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.120 - No waiver. 
A.  Failure Not Waiver. The failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under a franchise or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically waived in writing. 
B.  Waivers are Specific. Waiver of a breach of a franchise agreement or this chapter is not a waiver of any similar or different breach. Neither the granting of a franchise nor any provision in this section shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city, including without limitation the right of eminent domain. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.130 - Amendments to ordinance and franchise agreement. 
A.  Ordinance Not a Contract. This chapter shall not constitute a contract between a grantee and the city. The city may amend any provision of this chapter and may adopt regulations consistent with this chapter. This includes, without limitation, the right to alter the insurance and security fund requirements in this chapter, to account for inflation or changes in the risk to the city. 
B.  Amendment of Franchises. A franchise agreement may authorize a grantee to provide services in addition to those authorized by Section 5.28.030, subject to appropriate additional conditions to protect the public interest. The city may amend any franchise agreement upon the application of a grantee when necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of developments in the field of telecommunication that, in the opinion of the city, will afford the grantee an opportunity to serve its customers more efficiently, effectively and economically. Such amendments shall be subject to such conditions as the city determines are appropriate to protect the public interest. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.140 - Conditions of street occupancy. 
A.  Installation—Location. A cable system shall be installed only on the property of a grantee, on existing pole or conduit facilities that the grantee may use under a valid pole or conduit attachment agreement or order of the city, on the property of a subscriber, in compatible easements that the grantee is entitled to use, or under the streets of the city. Installation of new poles on the streets is forbidden without the prior written consent of the city. A grantee's placement of its cable system pursuant to its franchise shall not be deemed to give the grantee a property interest in any particular location on the streets or upon public property. The city reserves the right to designate where a cable system is to be placed on the streets and upon public property including any public utility easements controlled by the city. The cable system shall be placed in public utility easements unless otherwise designated by the city. 
B.  Installation—Timing. A grantee shall begin the installation, upgrade or rebuild of its cable system within a reasonable length of time after the effective date of its franchise, which date shall be specified in the franchise agreement. A grantee shall be obligated to complete the construction of its cable system promptly and within a time specified in the franchise agreement, which time shall be reasonable in light of the nature of the construction required to build the cable system proposed by the grantee. A grantee is obligated to obtain all permits, licenses, approvals, and contracts and pay all fees required in order for it to begin and complete its cable system in accordance with its franchise agreement. 
C.  General Construction and Operational Practices. 
1.  The construction, operation, and repair of every cable system in the city and all parts thereof shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. To this end, each person who constructs, operates or repairs a cable system shall do so in accordance with all applicable federal, state, local and industry codes now or hereafter in effect. Without limiting the foregoing, the installation of any cable system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code (or any superseding code) of the American Insurance Association (or successor organization) and all applicable laws affecting electrical installations and buildings, now or hereafter in effect. A franchise agreement may identify specific construction codes that a grantee must satisfy in addition to this general requirement. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the most stringent code requirement or standard shall apply. The city may adopt reasonable additional standards as required to ensure that work continues to be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, or to reflect changes in standards which may occur over the term of a franchise, after consultation with each affected grantee. 
2.  The construction, operation, and repair of the cable system shall be performed by experienced personnel who shall keep the cable system in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. All installations shall be durable and use equipment of good quality. 
3.  Each grantee shall construct, operate, and repair its cable system so as not to endanger or unduly interfere with the property of the city; any gas, electric, or telephone fixture or other public utility property, including any water or sewer lines or fixtures; or the lives or property of persons; or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the use of streets. A grantee shall protect (at its expense) public property and private property from damage caused by the construction, operation and repair of its cable system, and promptly repair damage the grantee causes or compensate the owner of the property for damage the grantee causes. It shall repair damaged property or pay compensation within no later than ten days of the date of the damage. Each grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain its cable system with due care for the safety and integrity of persons and property, and shall use appropriate safety devices, warning signs, barricades and lights to prevent harm to persons or property. 
4.  A grantee shall notify any person whose property is damaged by that grantee within four hours of the time the damage is discovered. At a minimum, this section requires a grantee to place a prominent notice in a prominent place on the damaged property, and to make diligent efforts to contact the property owner or resident directly. 
5.  All excavation shall be performed so as to create the least inconvenience to the public, and in accordance with permits issued by the city. The city shall have the right to supervise all excavation. The grantee shall restore excavations to the then current standard specifications of the city. 
6.  If a grantee disturbs any street, public property or private property during the course of constructing, operating or repairing its cable system, that grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore the street or property to as good condition as before said work was commenced as is possible to the reasonable satisfaction of the city (in the case of streets or public property) or the owner (in the case of private property). Each grantee shall at all times comply with the requirements of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(a)(2)(A) through (C). If any utility property is affected, including gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or storm drain, the owner shall be notified immediately and repairs shall immediately be made under the direction of the affected utility. The streets, public property or private property affected shall be replaced or restored promptly, no later than within ten days of the date of the disturbance. 
7.  In any area where any electric or telephone systems are underground, a grantee shall install its cable system underground. If, after a grantee installs its cable system, electric or telephone systems are relocated so that any electric or telephone systems in an area are underground, the grantee shall place its cable system in that area underground. Between a street and a subscriber's residence, if both electric and telephone utility wiring is aerial, a grantee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial installation. 
8.  A grantee shall maintain records of the location of its cable system for both underground and aerial cables. A grantee shall provide information regarding the location of its cable system upon request of the city or any authorized governmental body for engineering design purposes. Location information shall be provided within thirty days of request. 
9.  Notwithstanding any requirements of underground service alert, grantee shall pothole underground facilities at its expense upon request of the city or any authorized governmental body for engineering design purposes to ascertain the vertical and horizontal location of said facilities. Potholes shall be provided within thirty days of request. Requester shall be notified forty-eight hours in advance of the pot-holing operation, and when the underground facility is exposed for measurement. After requester obtains measurements, grantee shall fill, compact and pave pothole to the satisfaction of the city. Grantee shall perform all tasks of an "operator" under California Government Code 4216 (underground service alert) and shall be a member of Underground Service Alert of Northern California and Nevada. 
10.  A grantee shall initially provide to the city a map of the grantee's cable system within the public right-of-way. This map shall be updated semi-annually, and shall at all times be provided at no cost to the city. 
D.  Relocation of Facilities. 
1.  For Governmental Bodies. A grantee is required to remove, relay and relocate its cable system at its expense whenever the city (on its own behalf or on behalf of an assessment district) or any authorized governmental body requires it to do so for reasons of traffic conditions; public health and safety and protection of property; or because the city or authorized governmental body elects to change or alter the grade, align or widen a street, or sell or vacate any street or public property, to move any building or structure, or to construct, operate or repair any water pipes, lines or mains, sanitary and storm sewers, watercourses, drainage ditches, conduits, playgrounds, power lines, tracks, traffic control devices or other public improvement, public utility, public structure or facility, which change, alteration, sale, vacation, movement, construction, operation or repair will be aided by removal, relaying or relocation of a grantee's cable system. An affected grantee shall be given written notice requesting the removal, relaying or relocation of its cable system at least fifteen days in advance of the date removal, relaying or relocation of the cable system must be completed. 
2.  For Other Authorized Entities. If any removal, relaying or relocation is required to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the facilities of another person which is authorized to use the streets or public property, a grantee shall, after at least fifteen days advanced written notice, take action to implement the necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. The city may resolve disputes as to responsibility for costs associated with removal, relaying, or relocation of facilities among entities authorized to install facilities in the streets or on public property if such entities are unable to do so themselves. 
3.  For Third Persons. A grantee shall, upon the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise, lower, relay, relocate or remove its wires, cables and other facilities to accommodate the moving of the building, as the grantee shall determine. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering, relaying, relocation or removal of a grantee's facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to establish the reasonable cost of such changes and require such payment in advance. A grantee shall temporarily move its cable system as required under this section if required payments are made and the grantee is given at least forty-eight hours advance written notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
E.  Failure to Remove, Replace or Restore. If a grantee fails to remove, relay or relocate its cable system as required or within the time period specified in this section; or if a grantee fails to restore, repair or replace streets or public property as required and within the time period specified in subsection C of this section; the city may perform the work itself or hire someone to perform the work, and the grantee shall compensate the city for all reasonable expenses it incurs. In the event a grantee fails to restore, replace or repair private property as required and within the time period specified by subsection C of this section, the owner may perform the work itself or hire someone to perform the work, and the grantee shall compensate the owner for all reasonable expenses incurred. If a grantee fails to protect streets or public property as required by its franchise, the city may do so, and the grantee shall compensate the city for all reasonable expenses incurred thereby. The grantee shall pay expenses incurred by the city or property owner within ten days of receipt of an itemized account of such expenses. 
F.  Removal or Relocation in Event of Emergency. In event of emergency, or where a cable system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety or property, the city may remove, relocate or relay that cable system without prior notice at grantee's expense. 
G.  Authority to Trim Trees. A grantee shall comply with the city tree ordinance if and when it trims trees and shrubbery upon and overhanging streets and other public property. If the city requests it, trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. 
H.  No Guarantee of Accuracy of Maps. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing structures. In streets, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation by grantee at its expense. 
I.  Contractors. All contractors or subcontractors shall be properly licensed, and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as a grantee would have under its franchise and applicable laws if the work were performed by the grantee. Each grantee shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of its contractors and subcontractors is performed consistent with the franchise and applicable law, shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of its contractors or subcontractors, and shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by any of its contractors or subcontractors. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.150 - Consumer protection—General. 
A.  Customer Protection Requirements. A grantee shall meet or exceed requirements for customer protection established by the city of Soledad, whether adopted before or after its franchise was issued. The city manager may from time to time propose amendments to the rules as necessary to ensure that high-quality customer service is provided by each grantee. The city manager shall provide a copy of amendments to the standards to every person holding such a franchise and to every person which has a pending application for a cable franchise at the time the draft standards are developed. The city manager shall provide each such person the opportunity to submit written comments on the amendments to the standards. After reviewing the comments, the city manager shall submit the standards to the city council for approval. 
B.  Enforcement in Franchise Agreement. In the case of any franchise issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the franchise agreement shall provide for enforcement of specified customer service standards of a grantee, which standards must meet or exceed the standards established by the city under subsection A of this section. 
C.  Uniform Standards. The standards developed under subsection A of this section shall require a uniform level of service quality to all subscribers within the city at a reasonable cost. The standards may recognize the fact that different standards may apply to smaller systems or systems serving areas of low density which may not be required to meet standards reasonably applied to larger systems, because such smaller systems and systems serving areas of low density may not be able to satisfy certain obligations without substantially increasing costs to subscribers. Moreover, the standards may recognize that a cable system serving fewer subscribers may have fewer calls or demands for service from subscribers, which difference may justify certain differences in standards. 
D.  Failure to Meet Standards. Any grantee which fails to satisfy the standards adopted by the city under subsection A of this section shall be given notice that it may be found to have failed to provide adequate service within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. Section 546(c)(1)(A) or (B), as appropriate. 
E.  Right of Privacy. A grantee shall maintain the right of privacy of any subscriber, programmer or any other person resulting from any device or signal associated with the cable system. A grantee shall not place in the building, structure or any facility of any subscriber any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written consent of the subscriber, revocable at the discretion of the subscriber, and shall not use the two-way communications capability of the cable system for unauthorized or illegal subscriber surveillance of any kind. For purposes of this subsection, tenants who occupy premises shall be deemed to be subscribers, regardless of who actually pays for the service. Written consent, as required in this chapter, shall not be required of any subscriber by a grantee as a condition of receiving cable services. 
F.  City's Rights Not Limited. Nothing in this section shall be read to limit the city's right to adopt other consumer protection laws. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.160 - Rate regulation. 
A.  Uniform Charges. All charges to subscribers and users shall be uniform throughout the franchise area with a written schedule of fees for all services offered available upon request. A grantee shall be required to inform in writing each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable-related services. 
B.  Non-Discrimination of Fees. A grantee shall not, with regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that a grantee may establish different rates for different classes or types of subscribers based upon cost-of-service differentials or economic disadvantage provided that a grantee not discriminate among subscribers of the same class. 
C.  Review of Initial Rates. All materials pertaining to the review of initial rates or any proposed rate increase, subject the city's regulatory authority, shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. Final determinations will be made by the city council and will take into consideration public comment as required by the Cable Act. 
D.  Rate Regulation Consistent with Law. The city may regulate rates except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by state or federal law. Any regulated rate shall be adopted by resolution and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of city council resolution. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.170 - Franchise fees. 
A.  Franchise Fee Rate. A grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five percent of the gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system in the city, or the maximum fee permitted by federal law, if larger. 
B.  Payment of Franchise Fee. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a grantee shall pay the franchise fee due to the city on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than thirty days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
C.  Quarterly Statement of Gross Revenues. Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a grantee or other entity subject to a fee under this provision shall file with the city within thirty days of the end of each calendar quarter a financial statement showing the grantee's or such entity's gross revenues during the preceding quarter and the number of subscribers served. 
D.  Late Payment Fee. In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth in subsection C of this section, or is underpaid, the grantee will be charged interest from the due date at an annual interest rate equal to three percent above the rate for three-month federal treasury bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department sale of such treasury bills occurring prior to the due date of the franchise fee payment. In addition, the grantee subject to the fee will pay a late charge of five percent of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid franchise fee payment. 
E.  Franchise Fee is Separate Fee. The franchise fee shall be paid in addition to fees, charges or assessments required by the city (including, but not limited to, business license fees), unless such fee, charge or assessment must be treated as a franchise fee under the Cable Act. The franchise fee does not constitute rent to compensate the city for the grantee's occupancy of the right-of-way nor does the franchise fee compensate the city for the impacts on the city of the grantee's use of the public right-of-way. 
F.  Audit. The city may arrange for and conduct an audit of the financial records of a grantee, its contractors, subcontractors or affiliates for the purpose of verifying franchise fee payments. The city shall notify the grantee in writing at least seven days prior to the date of the audit, and the grantee shall make available for inspection and copying its books and records, and those of any affiliate it controls as may be relevant to the determination of gross revenues and franchise fees due. Grantee shall make the records available to the city at the grantee's expense at the Soledad city hall or at another location agreed to by the grantee and the city. Grantee's failure to make available its book and records shall be sufficient cause to support revocation of the franchise. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.180 - Protection of city and enforcement—Liability insurance. 
Unless otherwise provided in the franchise, the following will prevail: 
A.  Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance. A grantee shall, during the continuance of this chapter and at no expense to the city, maintain public liability and property damage insurance, including products liability and completed operations, and contractual liability coverage, in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence on account of bodily or personal injuries, including death, or on account of property damage, arising from or caused, directly or indirectly, by the performance under this chapter. This insurance shall be a per occurrence policy. 
B.  Business Automobile Insurance. A grantee shall during the continuance of this chapter and at no expense to the city, maintain business automobile insurance, in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence on account of bodily or personal injuries, including death, or on account of property damage arising from or cause, directly or indirectly, by the performance under this chapter. This insurance shall be a per occurrence policy. 
C.  Additional Insured. Under the public liability, property damage and automobile liability insurance required in subsections B and C of this section, the city, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional insured by endorsement and as to such additional insured, the insurance required in this section shall be primary and the policies shall contain by endorsement (signed by an authorized representative of the insurance provider) a cross liability clause. 
D.  Workers' Compensation Insurance. A grantee shall during the continuance of this chapter and at no expense to the city, maintain workers' compensation insurance, as required by law, for all grantee's officers and employees. 
E.  Certificates of Insurance. 
1.  The insurance required by subsections B, C and D of this section shall be evidenced by certificate or certificates submitted to the city which shall be executed by the insurance company or companies involved and which shall state that the insurance evidenced thereby may not be terminated without thirty days prior written notice thereof being received by the city. The certificate(s) shall be submitted to the city before or at the time a grantee executes a franchise agreement and shall be resubmitted annually to the city on the anniversary of the initial filing. 
2.  A grantee shall file certificates of insurance which shall certify the total limits of coverage in effect. If such limits are higher than the limits required by the city in this chapter, the higher limits shall be certified and shall apply to the coverage afforded to the city. 
F.  Additional Insurance. A grantee, in addition to all other insurance requirements in this section, shall maintain insurance in the type and amount as may be required in any license, permit or agreement obtained in connection with the construction, operation or repair of its cable system and which is necessary to complete any construction, operation, or repair (e.g., highway permit, railroad crossing agreement, corps of engineers permit), regardless of who secured the license, permit or agreement. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.190 - Protection of city and enforcement—Performance bond. 
A.  Performance Bond. Within ninety days of the effective date of a franchise or at a time specified in a franchise, a grantee shall establish in the city's favor a performance bond in an amount not less than five percent of the estimated cost of constructing, upgrading or rebuilding the cable system required by the franchise agreement or one hundred fifty thousand dollars, whichever is greater. The city may also consider submission of a letter-of-credit in lieu of a performance bond. 
B.  Recovery. In the event a grantee subject to such a performance bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade or other work in the public rights-of-way in a safe, timely and competent manner in accord with the provisions of a franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, or the cost of completing or repairing the cable system construction, upgrade or other work in the public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund. 
C.  Elimination of Bond. Upon completion of the cable system construction, upgrade or other work in the public rights-of-way and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall eliminate the bond or reduce its amount after a time appropriate to determine whether the work performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established considering the nature of the work performed. The city may subsequently require a new bond or an increase in the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade or other work in the public rights-of-way. 
D.  Bond Rating. The performance bond shall be issued by a surety with an A-1 or better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property or Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city; and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.200 - Protection of city and enforcement—Security fund. 
An applicant for a grant of a franchise, franchise renewal, franchise modification or franchise transfer shall, prior to the city's execution of the aforementioned, provide the city either a cash security deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit. The security fund shall be in an amount to be determined by the city manager, but not less than twenty-five thousand dollars and shall be from a financial institution in a form satisfactory to the city manager. The amount of the fund shall be based on the scope of the applicant's existing and proposed cable operations in the city, the applicant's technical and financial qualifications, and the applicant's history of compliance with its franchise agreements in the city and elsewhere. The security deposit or letter of credit shall be used to ensure the faithful performance of the franchise agreement; compliance with this chapter; applicable federal, state and local law; all orders and permits; and the payment of any claims liens, fees or taxes due the city that arise by reason of the construction, operations, repair or maintenance of the cable system. The city may withdraw funds from the security deposit or make demand for payment upon the letter of credit for the monetary amount of any remedy imposed pursuant to this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.210 - Indemnification. 
A.  General Indemnity. A grantee shall agree to accept responsibility for loss or damage to any person or entity, and to defend, indemnify, hold harmless and release the city, its officers and employees, from actions, claims, damages, disability or the cost of litigation that are asserted by any person or entity to the extent arising out of the negligent acts or omissions or willful misconduct in the performance by the grantee under a franchise, whether or not there is concurrent negligence or willful misconduct of the city but excluding liability due to the sole active negligence or misconduct of the city. This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages or compensation payable to or for the grantee or its agents, under workers' compensation acts, disability benefits acts or other employees' benefits acts. 
B.  City Property. A grantee shall be liable to the city for any loss of or damage to city property arising from the grantee's actions, negligence or willful misconduct. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.220 - Remedies—Liquidated damages. 
A franchise agreement may specify liquidated damages, for the city or third party beneficiaries of any franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.230 - Termination. 
A.  Removal of Cable System. Upon revocation or upon any other termination of a franchise by passage of time or otherwise, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at the grantee's expense, its cable system from streets, public property and any private property occupied pursuant to the revoked, canceled or terminated franchise. The city shall notify the grantee in writing that the cable system should be removed, and identify any period during which the grantee will be required to continue to operate the cable system as provided in the franchise. In removing its cable system, a grantee shall refill and compact, at its expense, any excavation that shall be made and shall leave all streets, public property and private property in as good a condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of the cable system. The insurance, indemnity and damage provisions of the grantee's franchise shall remain in full force and effect until the cable system is removed. 
B.  City's Right to Purchase System. Upon revocation or cancellation of a franchise, or upon any other termination of a franchise by passage of time or otherwise, the city shall have the alternative right to buy the grantee's cable system. If the franchise is terminated for cause, the city may purchase the cable system at an equitable price, within the meaning of the Cable Act; otherwise, the cable system may be purchased at fair market value, less the value of the franchise, within the meaning of the Cable Act. The grantee shall sell its cable system subject to such warranties and terms as are appropriate under the circumstances. 
C.  Transfer or Abandonment. If the city does not purchase a grantee's cable system as provided in subsection B of this section, and the grantee has failed to commence removal of its cable system within ninety days after termination of the franchise, or such other date specified by the city under the franchise, or if the grantee has failed to complete such removal within six months after removal is required to have begun, the city may: 
1.  Declare all right, title and interest to the grantee's cable system to be in the city or its designee with all right of ownership including but not limited to the right to operate the cable system or transfer the cable system to another for operation by it (upon such declaration by the city, the grantee shall be entitled to receive an equitable price from the city, within the meaning of the Cable Act, for the value of the cable system, less any costs and damages suffered by the city as a result of the delay in removal); or 
2.  Declare the cable system abandoned and cause the cable system, or such part thereof as the city shall designate, to be removed at no cost to the city (the cost of said removal shall be recoverable pursuant to Sections 5.28.180 through 5.28.200, or from the grantee directly). 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.240 - Transfers. 
A.  Prior Written Approval Required. Prior written approval of the city council shall be required before a franchise is assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or disposed of in any manner, directly or indirectly, either by forced or involuntary sale, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise; and before title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, passes to or vests in any person or persons. A change in control of a grantee or any person that manages, owns or controls the grantee is a transfer within the meaning of this section. 
B.  Applications. The proposed transferee shall make a written request of the city for approval of the transfer. The application shall provide complete information regarding the proposed transfer, including (1) all documents embodying the transaction, (2) financing documents, (3) documents identifying any person who will be responsible, through any arrangement, for managing or controlling the cable system, (4) documents showing that the proposed transferee has the financial, technical, and legal ability to operate the cable system after the transfer so as to satisfy all its obligations under a franchise without adversely affecting subscribers, (5) information regarding the length of time that a grantee has held the franchise(s) involved in the transfer, and (6) the information required by Sections 5.28.050(B) and 5.28.070(A). The proposed transferee shall also pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the application. 
C.  City Response. Upon receiving a transfer application, the city may require additional information from the grantee or the proposed transferee as required to evaluate the proposed transaction, and both shall cooperate to provide the information to the city. The city shall be under no obligation to transfer the franchise if the grantee's acts or omissions make the franchise subject to revocation; nor shall the city be required to transfer the franchise unless it is fully satisfied that any interests it or the public has in the franchise will be fully preserved and protected, that past non-performance will be corrected, and that the proposed transferee has the ability and is likely to comply with the franchise in the future. Under no circumstances shall the franchise be transferred unless the proposed transferee agrees to accept all the terms and conditions of the franchise, agrees that the transfer does not constitute a waiver of any rights by the city or indication that the prior grantee is or has been in compliance with the franchise, and agrees to assume all the obligations and liabilities of the prior grantee. The city may conduct such public hearings as it deems appropriate to consider the transfer request. 
D.  Change in Control. A "change in control" for purposes of Sections 5.28.240 through 5.28.260, includes a change in actual working control in whatever manner exercised and shall be deemed to have occurred whenever there is a disposition of five percent or more of any interest in a grantee or any person that, through any arrangement, manages or controls the grantee. 
E.  Evidence of Transfer. A grantee, upon transfer, shall within sixty days thereafter file with the city a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage, lease or other written instrument evidencing transfer of ownership control or lease of the cable system, certified and sworn to as correct by the grantee. 
F.  Transfer Null Without Authorization. Any transfer made without the authorization required in this chapter renders a franchise null and void from the time of the transfer. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.250 - Special rules for open video systems. 
A.  Application for an OVS Franchise. 
1.  Franchise Required. Before constructing or operating an open video ("OVS") system, an OVS operator may be required to obtain an OVS franchise from the city. The grant of an OVS franchise does not obviate the obligation to obtain additional franchises, permits and authorizations, as the city may require from time to time should the system provide other services; or obviate the obligation to pay such additional compensation as the city may establish for use of the right-of-way to provide other services. 
2.  Contents of Application for Initial or Renewal OVS Franchise. In order to obtain an initial or renewal OVS franchise, an operator of an OVS system may be required to apply for an OVS franchise. Any application must contain the following information, and such information as the city may from time to time require. The franchise may not be transferred without the prior approval of the city. 
a.  Identity of the applicant; the persons who exercise working control over the applicant; and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate parent; 
b.  A proposal for construction of the OVS system that sets forth at least the following: 
i.  A description of the services that are to be provided over the facility, 
ii.  The location of proposed facility and facility design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, where it is to be located, and the size of facilities and equipment that will be located in, on, over or above the rights-of-way, 
iii.  Identification of the area of the city to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed franchise area's boundaries; 
c.  A description of the manner in which the system will be installed, and the time required to construct the system, and the expected effect on right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
d.  A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities; 
e.  Proof, attested to by a certified public accountant, that the applicant has the financial resources to complete the proposed project, and to construct, operate and repair the proposed facility over the franchise term. It is not the intent of the city to require an applicant to prove that the services it proposed to offer will succeed in the marketplace; 
f.  Proof that applicant is technically qualified to construct, operate and repair the proposed facility. At a minimum, the applicant must show that it has experience or resources to ensure that work is to be performed adequately, and can respond to emergencies during and after construction is complete; 
g.  Proof that the applicant is legally qualified, which proof must include a demonstration that the applicant: 
i.  Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities, 
ii.  Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of antitrust laws, consumer protection laws or similar laws) that allows city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of franchise, or provisions of this title, 
iii.  Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those relating to the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities, and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so; 
h.  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law. 
3.  Additional Information Regarding Affiliates; Presumptions. To the extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the financial or technical resources of another person, including another affiliate, the proofs required under subsection (A)(2) of this section should be provided for that person. An applicant will be presumed to have the requisite financial or technical or legal qualifications to the extent such qualifications have been reviewed and approved by a state agency of competent jurisdiction; or if applicant is a holder of a franchise in the city for a cable system, and conduct under other franchise provides no basis for additional investigation. 
4.  Applications for Transfer. An application for a transfer of an OVS franchise must contain same information required by subsection (A)(2) of this section, except that, if the transferor submitted an application under subsection (A)(2) of this section, to the extent information provided by the transferor under that section remains accurate, the transferee may simply cross-reference the earlier application. 
5.  City Review. The city may request such additional information as it finds necessary, and require such modifications to the application as may be necessary in the exercise of the city's authority over OVS facilities. Once the information required by the city has been provided, the application shall be promptly reviewed and shall be granted if the city finds that: 
a.  The applicant has the qualifications to construct, operate and maintain the system proposed in conformity with applicable law. The city shall provide a reasonable opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise under subsection (A)(2)(g) of this section, by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of telecommunications facilities. An application for a franchise area shall not be granted if the grantee has no plans for constructing a system within the entire area for which the franchise is sought; 
b.  The applicant accepts the modifications required by the city to its proposed system. This section shall not be read to authorize the city to exercise authority it does not otherwise have under applicable law; 
c.  The applicant enters into a franchise agreement and complies with any conditions precedent to its effectiveness; 
d.  In the case of a transfer, the city must also determine that: 
i.  There will be no adverse effect on the public interest, or the city's interest in the franchise, 
ii.  Transferee agrees to be bound by all the conditions of the franchise and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor, and 
iii.  Any outstanding compliance and compensation issues are resolved or preserved to the satisfaction of the city; 
e.  An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files or in the previous five years: filed materially misleading information in a franchise application; or intentionally withheld information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide. 
6.  Compensation. Every operator of an OVS system shall pay compensation to the city as follows: 
a.  To the extent that the system is used to provide cable services: a percentage of gross revenues each quarter equal to the gross revenue percentage paid by any cable operator for the same quarter. In addition, unless an OVS franchise agreement provides otherwise, an OVS operator (1) shall pay to the city, at a time directed by the city, an amount equal to the highest amount contributed by any cable operator under its franchise for and in support of public, educational and government use (including institutional network use) of its cable system; and (2) to the extent that a cable operator is providing other support for public, educational or governmental use, the operator must duplicate that support within a time and in a manner directed by the city, or provide a cash equivalent acceptable to the city. In applying this section, the city shall ensure that the obligations borne by the OVS operator are no greater or lesser than the obligation imposed upon the cable operator providing the greatest benefits to the community. The compensation required under this section or specified in a franchise shall increase as the compensation that a cable operator is required to provide (in cash and in other forms) increases. 
b.  To the extent that the OVS system is used for the provision of telecommunications services, the OVS operator shall pay such fee as may be established from time to time by the city. 
7.  Minimum OVS Franchise Requirements. Every OVS franchise must require the applicant to comply with all provisions of the cable ordinance, as if the OVS system were a cable system, as may be permitted by applicable law. Without limiting the foregoing, the franchise must ensure that the OVS system operator is obligated to comply with Sections 5.28.030, 5.28.140 and 5.28.170 (except as inconsistent with subsection (A)(6) of this section, compensation, above); Sections 5.28.180 through 5.28.220 as if the OVS system were a cable system; and must preserve the city's rights to establish additional obligations from time to time and to regulate the system to the maximum extent permitted by law. Further, the OVS franchise must ensure that the relevant books and records of the OVS system, no matter who may hold them, are available for inspection and copying; and that the OVS operator will prepare and submit such relevant reports as may be required by the city. 
8.  Customer Service Standard Certification. An OVS system that enters into an agreement to comply with the customer service standards applicable to cable systems may be certified by the city for so long as it complies with those requirements and may advertise its compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
5.28.260 - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Connections to a Grantee's System; Use of Antennas. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, acoustically, inductably or otherwise, with any part of a grantee's cable system or facilities, for the purpose of enabling the reception of any television, radio, picture, program, sound, or data signals, or other services, without payment to and authorization from the grantee, except that subscribers shall have the right to attach devices to the grantee's cable system to allow them to transmit signals or services for which they have paid to VCRs, television sets or other terminal devices; and subscribers shall have the right to use their own remote control devices, converters and other similar equipment, and the grantee shall provide information to subscribers which will allow them to adjust such devices so that they may be used with the grantee's cable system. It shall also be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment of the grantee used for the distribution of television, radio, picture, program, sound or data signals, or other services, unless the grantee fails to remove such devices from the property of such person if the person chooses not to take service, or if the grantee places such devices on any property where it has no right to place such devices. The grantee shall not, as a condition to providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove or disconnect any existing antenna, except at the express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit or discourage a subscriber from installing an antenna switch, provided such equipment and installations are consistent with applicable codes. 
B.  Warranties and Guarantees. The city may require a grantee to provide guarantees and warranties from any entity that manages, owns, or controls it, as required to ensure compliance with any franchise issued to the grantee. 
C.  Severability. If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the city and shall thereafter be binding on the grantee and the city. 
D.  Operation of a Cable System Without a Franchise. Any person who occupies public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system and who does not hold a valid franchise from the city shall be, to the extent permitted by applicable law, subject to all provisions of this chapter including without limitation, Section 5.28.140 regarding conditions of occupancy of the streets and public rights-of-way and Section 5.28.170 regarding franchise fees. In its discretion, the city at any time may require such person to enter into a franchise agreement within thirty days of receipt of a written notice by the city that a franchise agreement is required; require such person to remove its property and restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the city within such time period; remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and charge the person the costs therefor; require such person to pay fair compensation to the city in the form of fees or in-kind benefits; and/or take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law, including filing for and seeking damages for trespass. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by action of the city and is memorialized in a written franchise agreement. 
E.  Effective Date. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective thirty days after the date of passage. However, any existing grantee or its immediate successor need not comply with all the terms and conditions set out in this chapter until a date mutually agreed to by the city and the grantee in writing; in no event shall that date be later than the expiration date of the existing franchise. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 5.32 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Garage sale defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, a "garage sale" means a sale conducted indoors or outdoors on residential premises by the occupant of such premises, at which miscellaneous items of personal property are offered for sale to the general public. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.020 - Garage sale—Where conducted. 
Garage sales shall be conducted only on residential premises occupied by the person conducting the sale. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.030 - Garage sale permit required. 
Before any garage sale may be conducted, a permit must be obtained. Written application for a permit, for which no fee shall be charged, shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall set forth: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant, and the names and addresses of any persons owning an interest in the property to be sold, if different from the applicant, and an indication of the property owned by persons other than the applicant; 
B.  The location of the proposed sale; 
C.  The date or dates during which the proposed sale is to be conducted; 
D.  An affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury that the person or persons conducting the sale is or are the owners of the property offered for sale, that the property has not been acquired or assigned to the applicant or applicants for the purpose of resale and that no previous sale has been conducted by the applicant or on the premises within the period of six months immediately prior to the date of the application. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.040 - Limit on permits—Nonassignability. 
No permit shall be issued to the same person or for the same premises within any six months period. No permit shall be transferable to another person or to another premises. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.050 - Days and hours of sale. 
No permit shall be approved and no sale shall be conducted for more than three consecutive days or for more than two consecutive weekends of two days each. The sale shall not be conducted before eight a.m. or after six p.m. on the permitted days. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.060 - Display of property for sale. 
Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed within five feet of the public right-of-way of any residentially zoned premises; provided, however, that a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within the front or side yard of the premises. Property may be displayed only during hours of sale. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.070 - Signs. 
Signs advertising a garage sale for which a permit has been issued under this chapter may be placed or erected on the sale premises, but not at any other location, subject to the following conditions: (a) no such sign shall exceed four square feet in area, and (b) no such sign shall be displayed at times other than the permitted times of sale. Such signs shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 17.36.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
5.32.080 - Violation an infraction. 
Every person who, for himself or herself or as the agent of another, commences, engages in, conducts or carries on any sale as provided in this chapter without procuring the permit required by Section 5.32.030, or who fails to comply with the conditions and provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 454 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986)  
Chapter 5.36 - CARDROOMS*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 472. 
 
5.36.010 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained, within the incorporated area of the city, in any building, place, premises or room owned, managed, supervised, possessed or controlled by him or it, any table or tables which are used by the public or offered for use by the public for the playing of cards, or any gambling, and for the use of which a fee or compensation in any form is charged players, without first obtaining from the city a license to do so for each such building, place, premises or room. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.020 - License—Application—Determination—Renewal. 
A.  A written application, verified under penalty of perjury, for a license under this chapter shall be filed with the chief of police upon forms to be provided by the city. The application, which shall be reviewed by the chief of police and the planning director, shall be accompanied by an application fee to be fixed by resolution of the city council and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, occupation, business status and residence address of the applicant and all persons having a financial interest in the obtaining of such license; 
2.  The location and ownership of the premises for which the license is sought; 
3.  The number of tables for which the license is sought; 
4.  A diagram of the location of the subject premises, depicting the proposed location of gaming tables, entrances and exits to the premises, and lighting both in the interior and exterior of the subject premises; 
5.  Proof that any person employed/to be employed as a gambling enterprise employee has obtained a valid work permit, as required by Business and Professions Code Section 19910.5 and/or all other applicable laws or regulations, from the State of California Department of Justice, Division of Gambling Control; 
6.  Such further information as the chief of police may require in order to determine that the operation of such a cardroom premises would be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and would not be injurious to the health, safety, welfare and morals of the people of the city. 
B.  The chief of police, before issuing any permit, shall inspect the tables and the premises in question. An application shall not be approved unless the chief of police is satisfied that the operation of the cardroom at the premises proposed would not constitute a violation of any state law or ordinance of the city, and that it would not be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the people of the city to operate such business upon the premises for which the permit is sought. 
C.  If the chief of police denies an application, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the applicant within ten days after the date of denial. Notice shall be effected by personal service upon the applicant or by United States mail directed to the applicant at his place of residence, as shown on the license application. The applicant may appeal therefrom, in the manner set forth in Section 5.36.045. 
D.  Licensed cardrooms in the city shall be limited to two licenses for each three thousand and fraction thereof persons residing in said city, the population thereof at any pertinent time to be determined by the city manager in accordance with the federal census or other reliable information. 
E.  Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of one year after the date of issuance, unless reviewed by the chief of police upon written application of the licensee. The provisions of subsections B and C of this section shall apply to an application for renewal. The period of renewal shall not exceed one year. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.031 - Cardroom operations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following rules and regulations: 
A.  No more than four card tables may be operated at any single licensed premises; 
B.  Permissible games. 
1.  A licensee may allow the play of any and all games at the card room permitted by the Gambling Control Act by first complying with the requirements of the Act and then by providing advance written notification to the police chief, with right to object, as follows: 
i.  The licensee shall provide the police chief with the bureau approval letter for any game and its rules for play at least fifteen days before seeking to play that game. 
ii.  The police chief shall have fifteen days to object to allowing the licensee to play any proposed game. If no objection is made, the police chief shall add the new game to the list of permissible games that may be played at the card room. 
iii.  The police chief may recommend a proposed limit on bets for any permissible game to the city council. 
iv.  The police chief shall maintain a list of permissible games that may be played at the card room and the rules on how each game and variation thereof is to be played. 
v.  No games shall be played at any cardroom unless it is listed as a permissible game and approved by the bureau of gambling control. 
vi.  The licensee shall allow the playing of permissible games only in strict conformity with the rules on file with the police chief. 
2.  The police chief may, at any time, and in his/her discretion, withdraw the approval of a permissible game by considering, in addition to other factors he/she deems relevant, the following: 
i.  Whether the playing of the game has led to an increase in complaints of cheating or an increase in police service. 
ii.  Whether the playing of the game has created a public nuisance or disorder in the community. 
iii.  Whether the playing of the game has been detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Soledad. 
3.  A licensee may appeal the decision of the police chief to object to a game as a permissible game or to withdraw approval of a permissible game, unless such game is prohibited by the Gambling Control Act, pursuant to the procedure established in Section 5.36.045. 
C.  No cardroom shall contain more tables for the playing of cards than the number for which a business license fee has been paid for the current calendar year; 
D.  Not more than eight players at a time shall be permitted at any one card table; 
E.  Every cardroom shall be located on the ground floor of the premises, and no card games shall be played or permitted to be played at any other location within or upon the premises; 
F.  All cardrooms shall be closed at two a.m. and shall remain closed until eight a.m. of each day; 
G.  All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation; 
H.  Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty it shall be to supervise the game and to insure that said game is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with the applicable provisions of the Penal Code of the state of California. Said person may supervise more than one table; 
I.  No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any cardroom; 
J.  No cardroom shall cash any checks for players; 
K.  Each cardroom operator shall file with the chief of police a current list of rates charged. No changes in rates shall be made without first filing such new rates with the chief of police. No cardroom operator shall charge any rates other than those shown as posted and as filed with the chief of police; 
L.  The cardroom operator shall not permit, cause, create, conduct, or allow to be maintained a public nuisance of any kind upon or about the premises on which a cardroom is operated; 
M.  During hours of operation, doors must be kept unlocked and the premises accessible to the general public; 
N.  Cardroom activity shall be physically separated from other activities on the premises; 
O.  No player shall be allowed to wager in excess of established table stakes; 
P.  There shall be posted in every cardroom in letters plainly visible from all parts thereof, signs stating that only the games permitted in subsection B of this section are permitted to be played and stating the charge per hour (if any) exacted from each player for the privilege of playing; 
Q.  House table rules, table betting limits, and hours of operation shall be clearly posted. 
(Ord. 648 § 2, 2007; Ord. 624 § 2, 2005; Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 716, § 3, 4-4-2018)  
5.36.032 - Minimum age of persons present. 
A.  Neither an operator nor any employee of a cardroom shall permit any person under the age of twenty-one years of age to participate in any card game or to be present upon the premises upon which a card table is operated. 
B.  No person under the age of twenty-one years of age shall enter within, or be present within, the premises upon which a cardroom is operated: nor shall such person participate in any card games played on the premises. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.033 - Incentives prohibited. 
No operator or employee shall offer or give, or permit to be offered or given, any bonuses, alcoholic beverages or other gifts or incentives to persons engaged in card playing on the premises. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.034 - Bet limit. 
A.  The city council shall establish by adoption of a resolution, which resolution may be amended from time to time at the pleasure of the city council, the amount of bets for the games permitted to be played in a cardroom. No cardroom permit holder or other person in charge or control of any cardroom operating under any license held or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit any person playing in any of the games permitted pursuant to this chapter to make any single bet or wager in excess of the amount established by resolution of the Soledad city council. The current bet limit of one hundred dollars per bet for all games shall remain in force and effect until the council adopts its first resolution establishing betting limits pursuant to this section. 
B.  Betting limits shall be clearly posted to give patrons adequate notice of the rules related to wagering. 
C.  No cardroom owner, operator or employee shall permit bets made by the owner, operator or employee while such person is working in the cardroom area or otherwise on duty. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 716, § 4, 4-4-2018)  
5.36.035 - Loans and pawns prohibited. 
A.  No cardroom operator or employee shall loan money or permit money to be loaned, with or without security, to any person as a stake in any card game, or for any other reason, on the premises upon which the cardroom is operated. 
B.  No cardroom operator or employee shall purchase or permit the same of any property, real or personal, to be used for extending on the premises upon which a cardroom is operated. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.036 - Shills and dummies prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any cardroom operator to employ a person to act in the capacity of a shill or dummy, and it shall be unlawful for any person to act in the capacity of a shill or dummy. As used in this section, the term "shill" means an accomplice of a gambler who participates in a card game, and the term "dummy" means one who plays in a card game acting for a cardroom operator or employee while ostensibly acting for himself. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.037 - Violations of state law prohibited. 
It is not the intent of this chapter to permit the operation of a cardroom for the playing of any game prohibited by the state of California, including but not limited to, those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code, which sections includes banking and percentage games. The playing of any such games is hereby expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.040 - License—Nontransferable—Suspension or revocation. 
A.  Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable and any attempt to transfer shall render the license in question invalid. 
B.  Licenses under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police upon the occurrence of one of the following: 
1.  Conviction of the licensee or any employee of said licensee for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Conviction of the licensee or any employee of said licensee for violation of Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state of California or any other statutory provision of the state of California regarding gambling; 
3.  Determination of the chief of police that the operation of such place or establishment constitutes a public nuisance under the provisions of Sections 3479 and 3480 of the Civil Code of the state of California; 
4.  The licensee is operating the cardroom in a manner which poses a serious and immediate threat to the health or safety of the public; or 
5.  The licensee is in violation of any of the sections of this chapter, or any applicable law, rule or regulation. 
C.  Upon the suspension or revocation of a permit by the chief of police, notice of such suspension or revocation shall be given in writing to the licensee and the licensee may appeal therefrom in the manner set forth in Section 5.36.045. 
(Ord. 648 § 3, 2007; Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.045 - Appeals from administrative actions. 
A.  If a business license is denied, suspended or revoked by the chief of police, the applicant for or persons holding such a business license may appeal the decision to the city manager, or his/her designee, by filing a written notice of appeal in the city manager's officer within ten days after the action is taken by the chief of police. 
B.  Upon receipt of said written notice of appeal, the city manager or designee shall set a date for hearing said appeal, which date shall be within twenty days after receipt of appellant's notice of appeal. The city manager or his/her designee shall conduct the hearing on the appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant at least ten days prior to said hearing by placing the same in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified, return receipt requested. 
C.  Hearings on appeals from denial, suspension or revocation of business licenses shall be conducted informally and need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant information shall be considered, including sworn testimony, if it is the sort of information on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. A transcript shall be made of the proceedings. 
D.  The city manager or designee shall render his/her decision within thirty days after the close of the hearing. The city manager's or designee's decision shall be final and no appeal may be taken to the city council. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.046 - Violations, penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.04 of this code. 
(Ord. 560 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.36.050 - Purpose of regulations. 
A.  It is the stated purpose of this chapter to regulate cardrooms and card tables in the city concurrently with the State of California, and to impose local controls and conditions upon cardrooms as permitted in the Gambling Control Act as codified in Division 8, Chapter 5 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 19800) and Title 4, Division 18 and Title 11, Division 3 of the California Code of Regulations, subject to all regulations promulgated by the State of California Department of Justice Bureau of Gambling Control. All such references in this chapter to the Gambling Control Act are to such laws, as may from time to time be amended. 
B.  The registration of any corporation, individual, partnership or other entity or person under the provisions of the Gambling Control Act does not entitle such state registrant to any license or permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 2, 4-4-2018)  
Chapter 5.40 - SOLICITORS—PEDDLERS—TRANSIENT VENDORS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows: 
A.  "Peddler" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling from place to place or from house to house in the city, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale, or selling and delivering the same to purchasers. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. 
C.  Wherever the terms "selling" or "sales" are used herein, "buying" and "purchasing" shall be deemed included. 
D.  "Solicitor" or "canvasser" means any individual traveling from place to place or from house to house in the city, taking or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, for himself or herself or for another person, firm, or corporation, uses or occupies a space, within or without a building, for the purpose of exhibiting goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property to prospective purchasers and taking orders for future delivery, or for the purpose of taking orders for services to be performed in the future. 
E.  "Transient vendor" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, and whether acting for himself or herself or as the employee, agent, or consignee of another person, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any nature within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies a temporary location in the city, within or without a building for the exhibition, sale and delivery of such goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property. Persons so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.020 - Licenses—Required. 
It is unlawful for any solicitor, canvasser, peddler, or transient vendor, as defined in Section 5.40.010 of this chapter, to engage in business within the city limits without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.030 - License application. 
Applicants for licenses under this chapter shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
A.  Name and physical description of the applicant; 
B.  Permanent home address and telephone number; 
C.  Local address and telephone number; 
D.  A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted and of the place where the same will be conducted; 
E.  If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer, or if acting as agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be; 
F.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
G.  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, measuring two inches by two inches, and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
H.  The fingerprints of the applicant; 
I.  The names of at least two reliable persons residing in the county of Monterey, state of California, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business reputation, or, in lieu of the names of such references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business reputation of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate the applicant's character and responsibility; 
J.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense, whether felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations. Also, as to any such offense, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
K.  Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state, or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.040 - License fee. 
At the time the application is filed with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay a fee sufficient to cover the cost to the city of processing the application. The amount of the fee shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.050 - License—Investigation and issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application under the provisions of this chapter, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's moral character and business reputation as he shall deem necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  If as the result of such investigation the chief of police finds the moral character or business reputation of the applicant are such as will endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare, he shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons for the same and shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. The notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last-known address. 
C.  If as the result of such investigation the moral character and business reputation of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse his approval on the application and shall return the application to the city clerk. 
D.  Upon receipt of an approved application from the chief of police the city clerk shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required license to the applicant. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the city clerk and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the license shall be operative. It shall also show the license number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the license is issued. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.060 - License—Expiration. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on June 30. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.070 - License—Badges. 
The city clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his or her license a badge, which shall be worn continuously by the licensee on the front of his or her hat or outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while the licensee is conducting business in the city pursuant to such license. The badge shall bear the appropriate words, i.e., "licensed solicitor," "licensed peddler," or "licensed transient vendor," the period for which the license is issued, the number of the license, in letters and figures clearly discernible. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.080 - License—Transfer prohibited. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.090 - Use of streets. 
No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have an exclusive right to use or occupy any location in the public streets or in any public place in the city, nor shall any such licensee be permitted a stationary location or allowed to operate in any congested area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For purposes of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether an area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.100 - License—Exhibition. 
Every person required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit his or her license when requested to do so by any citizen of the city. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.110 - Registration by property owners. 
The city clerk shall keep a register to be signed by the owner, occupant, or person legally in charge of any premises in the city who does not wish to be called upon by persons conducting the business of solicitor, peddler, or transient vendor. The address of the subject premises shall be shown on the register opposite the signature of the registrant. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.120 - Entry upon registered premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of solicitor, peddler, or transient vendor, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any premises in the city where: 
A.  The owner, occupant, or person legally in charge of the premises has signed the register referred to in Section 5.40.110 of this chapter; and 
B.  The owner, occupant, or person in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on said premises, a sign bearing the words "no solicitors," or words of similar import. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.130 - Enforcement authority. 
It shall be the duty of any city police officer to require any person seen soliciting, peddling, or engaging in the business of a transient vendor, who is not known to such officer to be duly licensed to do so, to produce his or her license, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.140 - Records. 
The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violations of this chapter and the city clerk shall record such violations on the permanent record of the license kept pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of Section 5.40.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.150 - License—Revocation. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
B.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the licensee in the course of carrying on the business of solicitor, peddler, or transient vendor; 
C.  The violation of any provision of this chapter; 
D.  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; 
E.  Conducting the business of solicitor, peddler, or transient vendor in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.160 - Notice of hearing on revocation. 
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.40.150 of this chapter shall be given in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown on the license application or at the last-known address of the licensee. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.170 - License—Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in denying a license applied for under the provisions of this chapter, or by a decision made with reference to the revocation of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within ten days after notice of the action or decision complained of has been mailed to such person's address as shown on his or her license application form, or to such person's last-known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The city clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city council and at its next regular meeting the council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as is hereinabove in this section provided for the mailing of notice of action or decision. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.180 - Claims of exemption. 
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter, or from the payment of a license fee as provided in Section 5.40.040 of this chapter, shall cite to the city clerk the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the city clerk proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(Ord. 478 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
5.40.190 - Charitable solicitations. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, charitable organizations which have been approved as such by resolution of the city council shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter including the payment of fees. Provided, however, that before commencing any fund drive the organization shall file with the chief of police a list of its solicitors showing their names and addresses and the dates and areas of solicitation. To qualify for this exemption, a verified statement or a declaration under the penalty of perjury, signed by the president or other duly authorized officer of the organization, shall be filed with the city clerk. The statement or declaration shall include the following facts, each of which shall be a condition precedent to the allowance of such exemption: 
1.  The organization must be nonprofit, as determined by applicable provisions of the Corporations Code of the State of California; 
2.  The organization must maintain books of account which are subject to audit and open for inspection by the general public; 
3.  At least seventy-five percent of the proceeds of the solicitation must be applied to the charitable, philanthropic, nonprofit purposes of the organization; solicitation expenses shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the amount collected; 
4.  The organization shall not conduct more than one solicitation or fund drive per year within the city, which drive shall not exceed thirty days in length. 
B.  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to solicitations conducted through the United States mail or by telephone. 
(Ord. 478, § 1 (Exhbt. A) (part), 1989)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter:  
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the animal control ordinance. 
(Prior code § 3-1)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed as set out in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
A.  "Animal" means any wild or domesticated animal, poultry, bird, reptile, fowl or fish, or any other creature. 
B.  "At large" means any animal off the premises of its owner and not under the direct control of the owner or some responsible person authorized by such owner. 
C.  "Cat" means any cat of either sex or any age. 
D.  "Dog" means any member of the canine family, and also includes both male and female gender, whether neutered or spayed. 
E.  "Dog license" refers to the license required by this chapter, to be issued annually for each individual dog. 
F.  "Guard dog" means any dog used for the purpose of guard duty. 
G.  "Livestock" includes cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine, and all other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets. 
H.  "Owner" means any person, firm or corporation owning, having an interest in or having control or custody or possession of any animal. 
I.  "Quarantine" means the taking up and impounding of an animal in the designated animal shelter by the animal control officer for a period of fourteen days or, in the discretion of the animal control officer, or the director of field services, the confinement of an animal by the keeping of it in a substantial pen, or by tying it with a stout chain on the property of the owner of the animal, so that the animal does not come into contact with any other animal or human being for a period of fourteen days. 
J.  "Shelter" means a facility designated by the director for impoundment of animals and authorized by the city manager. 
K.  "Stray animal" means any animal off the premises of its owner, not under restraint, and not in the immediate presence of its owner or person(s) of reasonable responsibility. 
L.  "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the license fee for the current year has not been paid and to which the dog license tag provided for in this chapter is not properly attached. 
M.  "Wild animal" means any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal, including, but not limited to, mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. 
(Prior code § 3-2)  
Chapter 6.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Chief animal control officer. 
The position of chief animal control officer is established. The chief of police is designated ex officio chief animal control officer. The chief animal control officer and persons performing their duties under his supervision and control (including persons designated as humane officers under Section 607f of the Civil Code by a humane society which has contracted with the city to provide animal care or protection services within the city limits), as well as any peace officer, have the duty to enforce the provisions of this title and shall have the power to arrest persons violating any of the provisions of this title as provided in Section 836. 5 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 3-3)  
6.08.020 - Interference with duty. 
No person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any animal mentioned in this title from the possession of the chief animal control officer nor interfere with the chief animal control officer or his deputies in the performance of their official duties. 
(Prior code § 3-4)  
6.08.030 - Entering upon premises. 
A.  The chief animal control officer, any officer or employee thereof or other duly designated representative of the city or peace officer has the right to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this title or other applicable law by entering into any building or upon any property within the city when the person has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building and/or upon any property any violation of the provisions of this title or other applicable law; provided, that: 
1.  If the building and/or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor; and if the building and/or property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner thereof or other persons having authority over the building and/or property and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor; 
2.  If entry into the building or upon the property is refused, the chief animal control officer, any officer or employee or other duly designated representative of the city or any peace officer shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Sections 1822.50 through 1822.57 of the Code of Civil Procedure, for the entry and inspection of the building and/or the property; 
3.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the chief animal control officer, any officer or employee thereof, or other duly designated representative of the city or any peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or the maintaining of any animal is hazardous, unsafe or dangerous, so as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, he has the right to immediately enter and inspect the building and/or property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect the entry and make the inspection, whether the building and/or property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the building and/or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor. 
B.  This section shall not prohibit the chief animal control officer, any officer or employee thereof or any peace officer from entering upon any public or private property in the city for the purpose of capturing an animal running at large in violation of this title or other applicable law. Any person who denies, prevents or obstructs, or attempts to deny, prevent or obstruct, such capture is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 3-5)  
6.08.040 - Zoning. 
The requirements of this title are in addition to, and not in limitation of, the requirements of the city zoning ordinance. Any license or permit issued pursuant to this title ceases to be valid if the use for which the license or permit was granted becomes a prohibited use for the zone in which it is then located. If the use for which a license or permit was granted becomes one requiring the issuance of a use permit, the use is not valid unless a use permit is obtained. 
(Prior code § 3-37)  
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Dog licenses. 
A.  License and Tag Required. Every person owning or having charge, care or control over any dog shall, after his dog attains the age of four months, annually secure from the city clerk a license and tag for the dog. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness upon the dog and during the term of the license shall remain so attached. 
B.  Vaccination. Every person owning or having charge, care or control over any dog shall, immediately after his dog attains the age of four months and at intervals of not more than twenty-four months thereafter, secure the vaccination of the dog by a licensed veterinarian with a canine antirabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Public Health. 
C.  Confinement of Dogs Under Four Months. All dogs under four months of age shall be confined to the premises of, or kept under physical restraint by, the person owning or having charge, care or control of the dog; provided, however, that this subsection does not prevent the sale or transportation of a puppy four months old or younger. 
D.  Vaccination Prerequisite to Issuance of License. The city clerk shall not issue a license to any person for any dog until the person has submitted a certificate of vaccination approved by the chief animal control officer showing that the dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 3-8)  
6.12.020 - When dog licenses due and payable—Application. 
All licenses shall be due on May 1st of each year and delinquent on June 1st of each year, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Each application for a license shall state the age, sex, color and breed of the dog for which the license is desired and the name and address of the owner. 
(Prior code § 3-9)  
6.12.030 - Dog license fee. 
A.  Every person owning or having charge, care or control over a spayed female or neutered male dog of the age of four months or over shall pay an annual license fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, to be paid between May 1st and May 31st, inclusive, of each year, or within thirty days after the owner of the dog establishes residence in the city, or within thirty days after the dog reaches the age of four months. 
B.  Every person owning or having charge, care or control over an unspayed female or unneutered male dog of the age of four months or over shall pay an annual license fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, to be paid between May 1st and May 31st, inclusive, of each year, or within thirty days after the owner of the dog establishes residence in the city, or within thirty days after the dog reaches the age of four months. 
C.  If the license fees set forth in subsection A or B of this section are not paid between May 1st and May 31st, inclusive, or within thirty days after the owner establishes residence within the city, or within thirty days after the dog reaches the age of four months, a penalty equal to the amount of the applicable fee shall be imposed, which is in addition to the license fee for the dog. 
(Prior code § 3-10)  
6.12.040 - Lost or destroyed tags. 
In the event any tag issued under this chapter is lost, destroyed or mutilated, the owner of the dog for whom it was issued may obtain a duplicate thereof, upon the payment of one dollar. 
(Prior code § 3-11)  
6.12.050 - Register of tags. 
The city clerk shall keep a register wherein shall be kept the name with the address of the owner to whom the tag is issued, a description of the dog, the number of the tag given and the date of its issuance. 
(Prior code § 3-12)  
6.12.060 - Kennel licenses and fees. 
A.  Kennel License In Lieu of Individual Dog Licenses. Notwithstanding provisions in this chapter to the contrary, any person owning, or having charge, care or control over five or more dogs, which dogs have been vaccinated as required by this chapter, may obtain a kennel license at an annual license fee of fifty dollars, in lieu of a license for each of such dogs. 
B.  Commercial Kennel or Dog Hospital Licenses. Each commercial kennel or dog hospital shall pay an annual license fee, which license fee shall be in lieu of licenses for all dogs temporarily in such kennel and not owned by the person or persons operating the kennel or hospital. The amount of the license fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Duration. Kennel licenses shall be so issued for an annual period commencing on May 1st of each year and ending on April 30th of the following year. 
D.  Running at Large. No dog licensed under a kennel license shall be permitted to run at large except: 
1.  While participating in hunting, dog shows, exhibitions or field trials, while under the control of the owner, or handler; or 
2.  While on agricultural lands owned or operated by the person obtaining the kennel license. 
(Prior code § 3-13)  
6.12.070 - Exemptions from dog license requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter requiring dog licenses shall not apply to: 
A.  Any dog owned by or in the charge or care of a nonresident of the city traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding thirty days, nor to any dog brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in a dog show or dog exhibition, and entered for, and kept at any dog show or dog exhibition provided such dogs are not permitted to run at large; 
B.  Any dog owned by a person moving into the city which dog has been currently licensed by the county or by any of the cities of the county, during such time the person was a resident of the city or the county and having attached to its collar or harness a tag evidencing the existing unexpired license for such dog issued by the city or by the county, provided such dog has been vaccinated with a canine antirabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Public Health within the previous twenty-four months. 
(Prior code § 3-14)  
6.12.080 - Exhibition of license. 
No person shall fail or refuse to exhibit the registration of any dog required to be licensed by this chapter when required to do so by the animal control officer or any peace officer. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-15)  
6.12.090 - Dogs running at large. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care or control of any dog, whether licensed and vaccinated or not, to suffer or permit any such dog to run at large within the city. A dog is running at large unless it is (A) restrained by a leash held by some person or made fast to some stationary object, or (B) confined within a cage or other dog-tight enclosure, or (C) accompanied by a person and is sufficiently trained to be reliably responsive to the recall company and control of the person, or (d) on the property of its owner other than roads, streets, alleys or ways over which other persons have a right to pass. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-16)  
6.12.100 - Dog feces. 
No owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog shall permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care to control, any such dog to defecate and to allow the feces thereafter to remain on any public sidewalk or park or any other public property, or any improved private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of the dog; provided, however, that the foregoing does not apply to public or private street gutters. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-17)  
Chapter 6.16 - RABIES PROTECTION 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Animals suspected of having rabies. 
Whenever the owner or person having the custody or possession of a dog or other animal shall observe or learn that the dog or other animal shows symptoms of rabies, or acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, or if the dog or other animal bites any person, the owner or person having custody or possession of the dog or other animal shall immediately notify the county director of health services, or his representative, to make an inspection or examination of such dog or other animal, until it is established to the satisfaction of the official that it has or has not rabies. 
(Prior code § 3-32)  
6.16.020 - Confinement of animals suspected of having rabies. 
Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, or whenever any dog or other animal has shown symptoms of rabies, or acts in such a manner as to lead the county director of health services to believe that it might have rabies, the owner or person having possession of the dog or other animal shall, upon order of the county director of health services, quarantine it and keep it tied up or confined for a period of ten days, and shall allow the county director of health services, or his representative, to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during that period. In lieu of such confinement the owner or person having possession of the dog or other animal may have the dog confined in an establishment controlled and supervised by a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than five days, after which the dog or other animal may be released from the veterinary establishment upon the certification of the veterinary controlling or supervising the establishment that the dog or other animal displays no symptoms whatsoever of rabies, and upon vaccination and licensing under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-33)  
6.16.030 - Destruction of rabid animals. 
If it appears to the county director of health services, or his representative, upon the examination provided by Section 6.16.020, that a dog or other animal has rabies, he may kill and destroy the animal forthwith. 
(Prior code § 3-34)  
6.16.040 - Quarantine of bitten animals. 
Whenever any animal is bitten by another animal having rabies, the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal so bitten shall, upon being informed thereof, either kill the animal or quarantine it, and keep it confined or tied up for a period of six months. The county director of health services or his representative has the power, in his discretion, to kill or quarantine the animal so bitten, in case the owner or person having custody or possession thereof fails to do so immediately, or in case the owner or person having the custody or possession thereof is not readily accessible. 
(Prior code § 3-35)  
6.16.050 - Quarantine because of rabies. 
Whenever the disease known as rabies is developed in any dog or other animal in the city, the county director of health services is authorized to declare a quarantine in a specified area in the city which shall include the location where the animal so affected with rabies is found and a sufficient area contiguous thereto to safeguard against the spread of the disease in such areas. "Quarantine," for the purpose of this chapter, means the strict confinement, upon the private premises of the owners or an establishment controlled and supervised by a licensed veterinary, under restraint by a chain leash and chain collar or closed cage or paddock, of all animals specified by the quarantine order. Forthwith upon the declaration of any such quarantine by the county director of health services, he shall give notice in writing to the chief animal control officer of the city, who shall cause to be gathered in and promptly destroyed all dogs which they or any of them may find other than those securely confined in such quarantined area as described in this section. 
(Prior code § 3-36)  
Chapter 6.20 - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Keeping of certain animals as public nuisance. 
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to keep within the limits of the city any animal, fowl or livestock which (A) unreasonably disturbs the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood in which the same is kept by reason of noise, odor or other offensive conditions created by, or resulting from the keeping of such animal, fowl or livestock, or (B) interferes with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or (C) creates a significant risk of injury to life or property. 
(Prior code § 3-6)  
6.20.020 - Vicious or unsafe animals. 
A.  For purposes of this section, a vicious or unsafe animal is one having vicious propensities and which is likely to attack, bite and injure persons or other animals without provocation. Where records of the animal control officer indicate that an animal has, on more than one occasion, bitten a person other than its owner, or attacked another animal without provocation, it is prima facie evidence that the animal is a vicious and unsafe animal. Except when confined as provided in Section 6.20.110, the keeping of a vicious or unsafe animal is a public nuisance. 
B.  Whenever the animal control officer has reason to believe that any animal is vicious or unsafe, he may issue an order directing the owner of the animal to abate the nuisance by disposing of the animal or by adequately confining the animal as provided in Section 6.20.110. If the owner of the animal, for any reason whatsoever, fails to comply with the order of the animal control officer, the animal control officer may issue an order directing the owner to appear at a designated hearing to show cause why he or she should not be required to surrender the animal to the animal control officer or take such other steps as may be designated to abate the nuisance. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, and of the designated action, shall be served upon the owner of the animal, either personally or by registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at his last known address, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The city manager, or his designated representative, shall act as hearing officer at the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer may order the animal to be surrendered and destroyed, or may order such other measures as in his judgment are necessary to abate the nuisance. 
C.  Whenever the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that an animal is vicious or unsafe and that it constitutes an immediate hazard to persons, the animal control officer may immediately seize the animal. If the animal control officer is unable to locate the owner, or if the owner is unable or unwilling to take the necessary steps to confine the animal in the manner prescribed in Section 6.20.110, the animal control officer may immediately impound the animal. The animal shall be returned to its owner only if the animal control officer is satisfied that the owner will confine the animal as provided in Section 6.20.110. If the owner fails or refuses to make such arrangements for the confinement of the animal, or if the owner cannot be located after reasonable effort to do so has been made, the animal control officer may order the animal to be destroyed, or he may take such lesser measures as, under the circumstances, he deems necessary in order to protect persons from injury. In the event a vicious or unsafe animal cannot be safety impounded under the foregoing provisions of this subsection, the animal control officer or a police officer may enter upon any premises where the animal is kept and slay the animal. 
D.  It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail or refuse to comply with any order issued under this section by the animal control officer. Each additional day that the owner continues to disobey the order constitutes a separate and distinct violation of this section. 
E.  A keeping charge as provided in Section 6.24.030 shall be assessed against the owner of any animal for each day during which the animal is impounded under this section, and the animal shall not be released until the owner pays all such charges. 
(Prior code § 3-7)  
6.20.030 - Keeping livestock and domestic fowl prohibited generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city, or permit to be kept or maintained upon land within the city owned by or under the control of the person, any cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, burros, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, game birds or other domesticated animals or fowl, except as specifically permitted under provisions of this title. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-18)  
6.20.040 - Keeping wild animals prohibited generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city, or permit to be kept or maintained upon land within the city owned by or under the control of the person, any animal commonly designated as a "wild species," including but not limited to lion, tiger, leopard, bobcat, cheetah, puma, bear, monkey or other member of the ape family, rodent, serpent or reptile, except as specifically permitted under provisions of this title. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-19)  
6.20.050 - Keeping of bees. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city, or permit to be kept or maintained upon land within the city owned by or under the control of the person, a hive of bees, except as specifically permitted under provisions of this title. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-20)  
6.20.060 - Permit to keep livestock, domestic fowl, wild animals, or bees. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 6.20.030, 6.20.040 and 6.20.050, a person may keep within the city species of livestock, domestic fowl, wild animals, or bees described in those sections upon obtaining from the chief animal control officer a permit to do so. In order to issue such a permit the chief animal control officer must find, after investigation, that the keeping would not endanger persons or property, would not create a public nuisance under the provisions of Section 6.20.010, and would not be contrary to state law or any other city ordinance, specifically including the city zoning ordinance; he also must determine that the place of keeping is not within fifty feet of any family residence or building designated for human occupation, other than a building or residence occupied by the keeper. 
B.  Before acting upon an application for the permit the chief animal control officer shall submit to the planning commission a copy of the application, together with a copy of his investigation report and a statement of his decision; a copy of the investigation report and of the statement of decision shall at the same time be mailed to the applicant. Within thirty days after the date of the submission the decision of the animal control officer may be appealed to the city council by the planning commission or by the applicant by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. If no such appeal is filed within the thirty days' period, the chief animal control officer may take action to approve the permit, approve the permit subject to conditions, or deny the permit, in accordance with the statement of decision submitted to the planning commission. 
C.  If an appeal of the chief animal control officer's decision is taken pursuant to the provisions of subsection B of this section, the city council shall, upon not less than ten days' prior written notice to the planning commission and to the applicant, hold a public hearing upon the application. Upon the conclusion of such hearing it shall render its decision, which is final. 
D.  Upon the filing of an application for permit under this section, the chief animal control officer may, in his discretion, issue a temporary permit to the applicant if he finds, from all of the circumstances of the particular case, that it would be reasonable to do so and that doing so would not create a danger to persons or property or create a public nuisance under the provisions of Section 6.20.010. The temporary permit shall expire on the date that final action is taken upon the application. 
E.  Fees and charges for filing and processing a permit application under this section shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section and of Sections 6.20.030 and 6.20.040, no permit shall be required for the keeping of mice, guinea pigs, hamsters or small birds (other than birds of prey), which are confined in cages, or tropical or gold fish in aquariums. 
(Prior code § 3-21)  
6.20.070 - Application for permit. 
An application for any permit required pursuant to Section 6.20.060 shall be made to the chief animal control officer in writing upon a form furnished by that officer, containing such information as the chief animal control officer requires in order to make a determination. The fee for a permit shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall not be refundable. Permits granted shall be for the period of one year. An application for renewal of a permit shall be made at least forty-five days prior to the expiration thereof and shall be accompanied by the same fee required at the time for an original application. 
(Prior code § 3-22)  
6.20.080 - Revocation of permit. 
The chief animal control officer may, for good cause, revoke any permit or modify the terms and conditions of any permit after informal public hearing, written notice of which shall be served upon the holder of the permit at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing; provided, that in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety, the chief animal control officer may suspend or modify any permit without hearing for a period of not to exceed thirty days. 
(Prior code § 3-23)  
6.20.090 - Appeal of revocation of permit. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the chief animal control officer taken pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.20.080 may, upon the payment of an appeal fee fixed by resolution of the city council, have the action reviewed by the city council, but the filing of an appeal shall not stay any order of revocation or modification of the permit. 
(Prior code § 3-24)  
6.20.100 - General regulations for the keeping of animals. 
The following regulations apply to the keeping of animals of all kinds within the city: 
A.  All animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary fashion. If the number of animals kept, or the level of care exercised in the keeping of animals is such that the refuse of the animals, or the condition of the animals themselves, is evidence of neglect, the chief animal control officer may take remedial action. Upon notice, any person who does not clean up the area where animals are kept, or who fails to provide such care of the animals as the officer requests, is in violation of this section. 
B.  Animals confined in an enclosed area shall be provided with an adequate exercise area. If the animal is restricted by a leash, rope, or chain, the leash, rope, or chain shall be affixed in such a manner that it will prevent the animal from becoming entangled or injured and permit the animal's access to adequate shelter, food and water. The provision of this subsection does not apply to an animal which is in transit, in a vehicle, or in the immediate control of a person. 
C.  It is the duty of the owner to care for his animals. It is a violation of this section for a person to fail to provide the necessary food, drink and shelter for his animals. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the maximum number of dogs which shall be kept within one household is four. Likewise, the maximum number of cats which may be kept within one household is four. A household may possess both dogs and cats, but no more than four of each. For purposes of this section, animals under the age of four months shall not be counted. A violation of this subsection is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-25)  
6.20.110 - Confinement or destruction of vicious dogs and animals. 
Any dog or other animal having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is defined as a wild or vicious animal. Every wild or vicious animal must at all times be confined in a substantial pen. If any such wild or vicious animal is found running at large in violation of this section, it shall be taken up and impounded and shall not be released except upon the approval of the chief animal control officer after the payment of the fees provided in Section 6.24.030; provided, that if any such wild or vicious animal so found at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may be subject to summary destruction. 
(Prior code § 3-26)  
6.20.120 - Stray animals. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care or control of any animal described in Sections 6.20.030 or 6.20.040 to run at large within the city. A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-27)  
Chapter 6.24 - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - Impounding of dogs and other animals. 
It is the duty of the chief animal control officer to seize and impound any dog or other animal found running at large in violation of the provisions of Section 6.12.080 or 6.20.120. 
(Prior code § 3-28)  
6.24.020 - Destruction of unredeemed animals. 
All dogs or other animals impounded and not reclaimed or redeemed within seventy-two hours may be destroyed in some humane manner by the chief animal control officer, or he may, after the dog or other animal is impounded for seventy-two hours, place it with some responsible person and convey a valid title thereto. The seventy-two-hour period shall start to run on a currently licensed dog having thereon a license tag only after notice by first-class mail, with postage prepaid, has been mailed by the chief animal control officer to the owner at the address given on his application for the license; provided, however, that if the dog or other animal is seriously injured or ill, the chief animal control officer may, with the consent of the public health veterinarian and to prevent further suffering, destroy the dog or other animal prior to the expiration of the seventy-two-hour period. 
(Prior code § 3-29)  
6.24.030 - Impounding, redemption, vaccination and other fees and charges. 
Fees and charges are imposed by this section for the impoundment, vaccination, care and feeding of animals at the animal control shelter, and for the redemption of animals impounded or otherwise taken into the custody or control of the animal control officer. The city council shall by resolution establish, and may from time to time amend, a schedule of such fees and charges, which in each case constitute a debt from the owner of the animal to the city and which must be paid at the time the animal is redeemed by the owner. In addition, owners of animals are obligated to and shall reimburse the city for all costs reasonably incurred by the animal control officer in connection with the transportation, care and feeding of animals while in his custody or control to the extent that those costs are not provided for in the schedule. 
(Prior code § 3-30)  
Chapter 6.28 - VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.28.010 - Violations and enforcement. 
Any person who violates any provision of this title or who in any manner interferes or attempts to interfere with any duly authorized enforcement officer in the performance of any duty imposed by this title, and every person who unlawfully takes or attempts to take any dog or other animal seized pursuant to this title from the custody of the duly authorized enforcement officer, and any person who removes or attempts to remove from the public pound any dog or other animal impounded therein without having first redeemed the animal as provided by this title or obtained the permission of an authorized enforcement officer to do so, is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is declared to be an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3-38)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - HEALTH PERMITS FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Applicability—Statutory authority. 
This chapter does not apply to any business, facility or activity that is subject to regulation under the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, being Division 22 (commencing with Section 27500) of the California Health and Safety Code, except to the extent that regulation by a local agency is authorized under the provisions of Section 27503 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
8.04.020 - Health officer defined. 
"Health officer," as used in this chapter, means the county health officer, or his designated representative. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 10-6 (part))  
8.04.030 - Health permits required for certain businesses. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, controlling or carrying on as principal or agent in the city, the business or occupation of public laundry, manufacturing or bottling table water or other beverages, box lunch establishment, bakery establishment, bakery distributor, wholesale candy or confectionery manufacturing, confectionery or soda fountain, fruit stand, wholesale fruit produce, food products establishment, restaurant, lunch stand, retail or wholesale poultry house, poultry peddler, poultry slaughterhouse, sausage factory, meat market, meat peddler, wholesale meat house, fish market, wholesale fish market, fish peddler, public bathhouse, barbershop, beauty shop, grocery store or wholesale grocery business, without first applying for and securing a permit in writing from the health officer, and no business license shall be issued by any officer of the city until the permit has first been obtained. 
(Prior code § 10-6 (part))  
8.04.040 - Application for permit—Investigation and consideration—Issuance. 
If after an investigation and consideration of any application for a permit required by Section 8.04.030 it appears to the health officer that the place, vehicle, business, building or institution conforms to, and that the applicant has complied with, all the sanitary and health laws of the state, this code and ordinances of the city relevant thereto, the health officer shall grant the permit applied for. 
(Prior code § 10-7)  
8.04.050 - Denial of permit. 
The health officer, in his discretion, is empowered to deny or withhold a permit for which an application has been made, if, in his judgment, the building, premises, equipment, apparatus, vehicle, or other facilities for the establishing, maintaining, conducting, or operating the business or institution for which a permit is requested is or are insufficient, unfit or incapable of being used, maintained, or operated in a safe and sanitary manner without endangering the public health, safety, and general welfare, or if said building, premises, equipment, apparatus, vehicle or other facilities fail to comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of governmental authorities relating to public health and sanitation, including those set forth in this chapter or elsewhere in this code. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code § 10-8)  
8.04.060 - Suspension or revocation—Generally. 
The health officer may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter at his discretion upon proof to his satisfaction of a violation by the holder of the permit of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or law of the state, regulating and establishing standards for public health, comfort, sanitation and hygiene in the conduct, arrangement, management or operation of the businesses and institutions regulated by this chapter. It is unlawful, during the period of any such suspension, or after any such revocation, for any person to engage in any business, occupation or activity in the city for which such permit is required. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code § 10-9)  
8.04.070 - Suspension or revocation—Appeal to council. 
Any person whose permit issued under the provisions of this chapter has been suspended or revoked has the right to appeal to the council in writing within three days after notification of such suspension or revocation or within thirty days after the denial thereof, and to be heard by the council with relation thereto at its next regular or regular adjourned meeting, or at a special meeting of the council called for such purpose, and the action of the council upon such appeal shall be final and conclusive with respect to the suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(Prior code § 10-10)  
8.04.080 - Suspension or revocation—Operation pending appeal decision. 
In the event that an appeal is taken as provided in Section 8.04.070, the business or occupation (where the permit has already been granted) shall not be suspended until the final disposition of the appeal by the council as provided in Section 8.04.070. 
(Prior code § 10-11)  
8.04.090 - Term—Renewal—Posting. 
Except as otherwise provided, all permits issued by the health officer, as required by this chapter, are valid for the period that the business license of any person is valid unless sooner revoked or suspended, or unless the holder of the permit changes the location of his place of business or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise disposes of such business or institution or his interest therein for a period of thirty days or more. Upon the expiration of any permit, and within seven days thereafter, the person trafficking in, conducting or operating such business or institution shall apply for and secure a renewal of the permit in the manner provided for by this chapter. All permits issued shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place of the business vehicle or institution of the permit holder. 
(Prior code § 10-12)  
8.04.100 - Right of entry by health officer. 
The health officer or his designated representative, or any peace officer, has a right to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law by entering into any building or upon any property within the city when that person has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building and/or upon any property any violation of this chapter or other applicable law or regulation relating to public health and sanitation; provided, that: 
A.  If the building and/or property be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor; and if the building and/or property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner thereof or other persons having authority over the building and/or property and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor; 
B.  If entry into the building or upon the property is refused, the health officer or his designated representative, or any peace officer, shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50—1822.57, for the entry and inspection of the building and/or property; 
C.  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, if the health officer or his designated representative, or any peace officer, has reasonable cause to believe that the building and/or the property is contaminated or unsanitary, or in violation of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation relating to public health and sanitation, by reason of which there is an unsafe or dangerous condition requiring immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the building and/or property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make the inspection, whether the building and/or property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the building and/or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
Chapter 8.08 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE AND REGISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares: 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this article is to provide a continuing source of current information concerning hazardous substances and chemicals being utilized in the city to protect the general health and safety of the public and to enable emergency personnel to respond safely and speedily to emergency situations which may arise. 
2.  The city council declares that it is in the public interest to establish a continuing program for the purpose of preventing contamination from, and improper storage of, hazardous substances stored underground. It is the intent of the city council, in enacting this article to establish orderly procedures that will ensure that newly constructed underground storage tanks meet appropriate standards and that existing tanks be properly maintained, inspected, and tested so that the health, property, and resources of the people of the city will be protected. 
B.  Findings. 
1.  Essential information on the location, type, quantity and the health risks of hazardous materials used, stored or disposed of in the city is not now available to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, law enforcement agencies and emergency communications officers. 
2.  Hazardous substance and chemical information disclosure is necessary so that the city and other affected public agencies may respond effectively to fire or other emergency involving materials that exhibit hazardous characteristics and may pose hazards to the community. 
3.  Substances hazardous to the public health and safety, and to the environment, are stored prior to use or disposal in thousands of underground locations in the state. 
4.  Underground tanks used for the storage of hazardous substances and wastes are potential sources of contamination of the ground and underlying aquifers, and may pose other dangers to public health and the environment. 
5.  It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate the handling, use, processing or disposal of hazardous substances and chemicals. 
6.  It is the intent of the city council that this chapter establish an orderly system by which establishments that contain materials which may be hazardous are identified, and information regarding these materials is made available to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, law enforcement agencies and emergency communications officers in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged. 
(Prior code § 10-20)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Abandoned tank" means a tank that is not in use and not monitored and/or safeguarded in compliance with regulations promulgated by the department of health pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  "Business" means an employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county, district, and the state, or any department or agency thereof. For purposes of this chapter, "business" includes both profit and nonprofit business. 
C.  "CAS number" means the unique identification number assigned by the chemical abstracts service to specific chemical substances. 
D.  "Chemical name" means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the system developed by the chemical abstracts service. 
E.  "Common name" means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name. 
F.  "Establishment" means the physical premises of a business. 
G.  "Handle" or "handling" means to use, store, treat or generate a hazardous material in any fashion. 
H.  "Hazardous material" means any material or substance in "The Director' s List of Hazardous Substances," developed by the director of the department of industrial relations pursuant to the provisions of the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (SB 1874), cited in Article 9, Division 4, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code, or which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association as either flammable liquid, a class II combustible liquid, or a class III-A combustible liquid. 
I.  "Hazardous materials registration form" means the form required to be filed with the county health department by every person who owns or operates an establishment which uses hazardous materials. 
J.  "Hazardous substance": see "hazardous materials." 
K.  "Hazardous waste": see "hazardous materials." 
L.  "Health officer" means the health officer of Monterey County or his authorized representative. 
M.  "Laboratory" means a place equipped for testing, analyses or experimental study in a science, and utilizing hazardous materials as defined in this section in any amount. 
N.  "Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county, state or district. 
O.  "Primary containment" means the first level of containment, such as the portion of a tank which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous substance being contained. 
P.  "Product-tight" means impervious to the substance which is contained, or is to be contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the substance which it contains over the useful life of the tank. 
Q.  "Secondary containment" means the level of containment external to, and separate from, the primary containment. 
R.  "SIC code" means the identification number assigned by the Standards Identification Code to specific types of businesses. 
S.  "Single-walled" means construction with walls made of only one thickness of material. For the purpose of this chapter, laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered single-walled. 
T.  "Storage" or "store" means the containment, handling or treatment of hazardous substances, either on a temporary basis or for a period of years. "Storage" or "store" does not mean the storage of hazardous wastes in an underground storage tank if the person operating the tank has been issued a hazardous waste facilities permit by the California Department of Health Services. 
U.  "Substantial modification" means any change to an underground storage tank facility, including, but not limited to, the following: replacement of a tank, installation of a new pipeline, and installation or replacement of monitoring devices. 
V.  "Unauthorized release" means any release or emission of any hazardous substance which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, unless such release is authorized by the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to Division 7 of the California Water Code. 
W.  "Underground storage tank" means any one of combination of tanks, including pipes connected thereto, which is used for the storage of hazardous substances and which is substantially or totally beneath the surface of the ground. "Underground storage tank" does not include any of the following: 
1.  Tanks which are located on a farm and store motor vehicle fuel which is used only to propel vehicles used primarily for agricultural purposes. 
2.  Tanks used for aviation or motor vehicle fuel located within one mile of a farm and the tank is used by a licensed pest control operator, as defined in Section 11705 of the Food and Agricultural Code, who is primarily involved in agricultural pest control activities. 
X.  "Use" means and includes the handling, processing or storage of hazardous materials. 
Y.  "User" means any person who uses or handles a hazardous material. 
(Prior code § 10-21)  
8.08.030 - Underground storage tanks—Construction standards. 
A.  Every underground storage tank installed after January 1, 1984, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install any new underground storage tank or facility until a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  Be designated and constructed to provide primary and secondary levels of containment of the hazardous substances stored in them in accordance with the following performance standards: 
a.  Primary containment shall be product-tight. 
b.  Secondary containment shall be constructed to prevent structural weakening as a result of contact with any released hazardous substances, and also shall be capable of storing, for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released hazardous substance. 
c.  In the case of an installation with one primary container, the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred percent of the volume of the primary tank. 
d.  In the case of multiple primary tanks, the secondary container shall be large enough to contain one hundred fifty percent of the volume of the largest primary tank placed in it, or ten percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary tanks, whichever is greater. 
e.  If the facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment must be able to additionally accommodate the volume of a twenty-four-hour rainfall as determined by a one hundred-year storm history. 
f.  Single-walled containers do not fulfill the requirement of an underground storage tank providing both a primary and a secondary containment. 
g.  The design and construction of underground storage tanks for motor vehicle fuels storage need not meet the requirements of paragraphs a through f of this subdivision if the primary containment construction is of glass-fiber-reinforced plastic, cathodically protected steel, or steel clad with glass-fiber-reinforced plastic, and such alternative primary containment is installed in conjunction with a system that will intercept and direct a leak from any part of the tank to a monitoring well to detect any release of motor vehicle fuels stored in the tank and which is designed to provide early leak detection, response, and to protect groundwater from releases, and if the monitoring is in accordance with the alternative method identified in subdivision 3 of subsection C of this section. Pressurized piping systems connected to underground storage tanks used for the storage of motor vehicle fuels and monitored in accordance with subdivision 3 of subsection C of this section shall also be deemed to meet the requirements of this subsection; 
3.  Be designed and constructed with a monitoring system capable of detecting the entry of the hazardous material stored in the primary containment into the secondary containment. If water could intrude into the secondary containment, a means of monitoring for water intrusion and for safely removing the water shall also be provided; 
4.  When required by the county department of health, a means of overfill protection for any primary tank, including an overfill prevention device or an attention-getting higher-level alarm, or both. Primary tank-filling operations of underground storage tanks containing motor vehicle fuels which are visually monitored and controlled by a facility operator satisfy the requirements of this subsection; 
5.  Different substances that in combination may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of flammable, toxic or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary and secondary container, shall be separated in both the primary and secondary containment, so as to avoid potential intermixing; 
6.  If water could enter into the secondary containment by precipitation or infiltration, the facility shall contain a means of removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal system shall also provide for a means of analyzing the removed water for hazardous substance contamination and a means of disposing of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
B.  For every underground storage tank installed on or before January 1, 1984, and used for the storage of hazardous substances, the following actions shall be taken: 
1.  On or before January 1, 1985, the owner shall outfit the facility with a monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases of any hazardous substances stored in the facility, and thereafter, the operator shall monitor each facility, based on materials stored and the type of monitoring installed; 
2.  There shall be provided a means for visual inspection of the tank, wherever practical, for the purpose of the monitoring required by subsection A of this section. Alternative methods of monitoring the tank on a monthly or more frequent basis may be required by the local agency, consistent with the regulations of the department of health. 
C.  The alternative monitoring methods include, but are not limited to, the following methods: 
1.  Pressure testing, vacuum testing or hydrostatic testing of the piping systems or underground storage tanks; 
2.  A groundwater monitoring well or wells which are down gradient and adjacent to the underground storage tank, vapor analysis within a well where appropriate, and analysis of soil borings at the time of initial installation of the well. The department of health shall develop regulations specifying monitoring alternatives. Further, the department of health shall approve the location and number of wells, the depth of wells and the sampling frequency, pursuant to these regulations; 
3.  For monitoring tanks containing motor vehicle fuels, daily gauging and inventory reconciliation by the operator, if inventory records are kept on file for one year and are reviewed quarterly, the tank is tested for tightness hydrostatically or, when appropriate with pressure between three and five pounds, inclusive, per square inch at time intervals specified by the department of health and whenever any pressurized system has a leak detection device to monitor for leaks in the piping. The tank shall also be tested for tightness hydrostatically or, where appropriate, with pressure between three and five pounds, inclusive, per square inch whenever there is a shortage greater than the amount which the department of health shall specify by regulation. 
D.  The following provisions shall apply to the abandonment, closure or temporary closure of underground storage tanks: 
1.  No tank shall be abandoned unless properly monitored and safeguarded in accordance with regulations promulgated by the department of health. 
2.  Tanks which are temporarily out of service and are intended to be returned to use must continue to be monitored and inspected. 
3.  Any tank which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this section must be closed or removed in accordance with regulations promulgated by the department of health. 
4.  Whenever an abandoned tank is located, a plan for the closing or removing or the upgrading and permitting of such tank and permit application therefor shall be filed within ninety days of its discovery. 
E.  The following provisions shall govern the maintenance, repair or replacement of underground storage tanks: 
1.  Permittee will carry out regular maintenance and upkeep in a careful and safe manner. 
2.  Any substantial modification or repair of a facility, other than minor, maintenance or emergency repairs, shall be in accordance with plans to be submitted to the department of health and a permit to repair shall first be obtained prior to commencement of any such substantial modification or repair. 
3.  Permittee may make emergency repairs to a facility in advance of seeking an additional permit approval whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge, or to protect the integrity of the containment. However, within five working days after such emergency repairs have been started, permittee shall seek approval pursuant to this chapter by submitting drawings or other information adequate to describe the repairs to the department of health. 
F.  The following provisions shall apply to the unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials: 
1.  Any unauthorized release from the primary containment which the operator is able to clean up within eight hours and which does not escape from the secondary containment, nor cause any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground storage tank, shall be recorded on the operator's monitoring reports. 
2.  Any unauthorized release which escapes from the secondary containment, increases the hazard of fire or explosion, or causes any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground tank shall be reported by the operator to the department of health within twenty-four hours after the release has been detected or should have been detected. A full written report shall be transmitted by the owner or operator of the underground storage tanks within five working days of the occurrence of the release. 
3.  The department of health shall review the operating permit whenever there has been an unauthorized release, or when it determines that the underground storage tank is unsafe. The department may terminate a permit for a facility when it has been determined that the operation of the facility would pose a threat to public health. 
(Prior code § 10-22)  
8.08.040 - Underground storage tank permit. 
Any person, firm or corporation which stores any hazardous materials in an underground storage tank shall obtain and keep current, an underground storage tank permit issued pursuant to this chapter. One such permit shall be issued for a single facility. Additional approvals shall be obtained for any underground storage tank thereafter connected, installed, constructed, substantially modified, replaced, closed or removed. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall cause, suffer or permit the storage of hazardous materials in underground tanks: 
1.  In a manner which violates a provision of this chapter or any other local, federal or state statute, code or regulation relating to hazardous materials; or 
2.  In a manner which causes an unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials or poses a significant risk of such unauthorized discharge. 
B.  Application for Permit. Application for a new, amended or renewed permit or any additional approval shall be made to the department of health on the form provided by the county. 
C.  Approval of Permit. A permit shall not be approved until the department of health is satisfied that the storage approved adequately conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Provisional Permit. If the department of health finds that the proposal does not completely conform to the provisions of this chapter, it may approve a provisional permit, subject to conditions to be imposed by the department when such a provisional permit is feasible and does not appear to be detrimental to the public interest. The applicant must be informed in writing of the reasons why a full-term permit was not issued. 
E.  Temporary Permit. A temporary permit for storage may be issued where storage does not exceed thirty days and occurs no more frequently than every six months. 
F.  Issuance of Permits. 
1.  Upon the approval of a provisional or full-term permit by the department of health, and upon the payment of any applicable fee, the department shall issue and deliver the permit to the applicant. The permit shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the permittee for purposes of notice and service of process; 
b.  The address of the facility for which the permit is issued; 
c.  Authorization of the storage facility approved under the permit, the permit quantity limit and the approved hazard class for the storage facility; 
d.  The date the permit is effective; 
e.  The date of expiration; 
f.  When applicable, a designation that the permit is provisional; 
g.  Any special conditions of the permit. 
2.  The department of health shall keep a record of all permits issued and all conditions attached thereto. 
G.  Terms. A permit may be issued for a term of three years, excepting provisional permits and construction and abandonment permits, which may be issued for any period of time up to six months, and temporary permits which may be issued for no longer than thirty days. 
H.  Fees. Fees shall be payable according to the following schedule: 
1.  Operating permits (this fee covers the permit to operate the tank and the registration of the hazardous materials in the tank): 
a.  Base fee per facility, for one through five tanks, is one hundred twenty-five dollars per year. 
b.  The fee for each additional tank over five is forty dollars per year. 
2.  Permit to construct or modify: 
a.  Base plan check fee (includes one tank) is one hundred twenty-five dollars. 
b.  The fee for each additional tank is forty dollars. 
3.  Permit to abandon: 
a.  Base fee for one tank is one hundred dollars. 
b.  The fee for each additional tank is thirty dollars. 
I.  Civil and Criminal Penalties. 
1.  Any operator of an underground storage tank shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than five thousand dollars per day for any of the following: 
a.  Operates an underground storage tank which has not been issued a permit; 
b.  Fails to monitor the underground storage tank, as required by the permit; 
c.  Fails to maintain records; 
d.  Fails to report an unauthorized release; 
e.  Fails to abandon an underground storage tank in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  Any owner of an underground storage tank shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than five thousand dollars per day for any of the following: 
a.  Failure to obtain a permit as specified by this chapter; 
b.  Failure to repair an underground tank in accordance with this chapter; 
c.  Failure to construct an underground storage tank in accordance with this chapter; 
d.  Abandonment or improper closure of any underground tank subject to this chapter; 
e.  Failure to outfit a facility with a monitoring system capable of detecting an unauthorized release of any hazardous substance stored in the facility as required by the department of health; 
f.  Knowing failure to take reasonable and necessary steps to assure compliance with this article by the operator of an underground tank. 
3.  Any person who falsifies any monitoring records required by this chapter, or knowingly fails to report an unauthorized release, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than five thousand dollars or more than ten thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
4.  In determining both the civil and criminal penalties imposed pursuant to this section, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm or potential harm caused by the violation, the nature of the violation and the period of time over which it occurred, the frequency of past violations, and the corrective action, if any, taken by the person who holds the permit. 
5.  Penalties under this section are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other legal remedies and penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable under other laws. 
(Prior code § 10-23)  
8.08.050 - Hazardous material registration form. 
A.  Any person who owns or operates an establishment that contains, at any one time during the year, hazardous materials as defined in Section 8.08.020, shall file a completed hazardous material registration form with the department of health within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Any person commencing operations in an establishment subject to this chapter shall file a completed registration form with the department of health within thirty days of the commencement of such activity. 
C.  Any business which has a laboratory or laboratories containing any hazardous materials is not required to list individual materials but must be listed as a laboratory on the registration form and its location in the establishment must be identified. 
D.  Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed registration form to the county health officer by July 1st of each year. 
E.  Any person required to file a registration form pursuant to this chapter shall file an amended registration form within thirty days of the following: 
1.  Change of business address; 
2.  Change of business ownership; 
3.  Change of business name; 
4.  Change of materials handled which would materially change the list of materials on file with the department of health. 
F.  The registration form shall be approved and signed by a responsible employee of each business under penalty of perjury. 
G.  The department of health shall record and maintain a file of all registration forms received. The registration information shall be made available only to agencies enumerated in Section 8.08.010(B). 
H.  The department of health will be notified in case of change in emergency response personnel as reported on the registration form. 
I.  When necessary, the county health officer may request additional information on how and where hazardous materials are stored, for the purpose of distribution to fire departments and other emergency response teams that may be called upon to provide emergency services in connection with the handling and use of hazardous materials. 
(Prior code § 10-24)  
8.08.060 - Contents of registration form. 
A.  Hazardous material registration forms shall be prepared by the department of health and made available to persons who use hazardous materials. 
B.  The hazardous materials registration form shall include requests for the following information: 
1.  Identification information, including, but not limited to, name, address, phone number and assessor's parcel number; 
2.  The names and phone numbers of at least two people representing the business able to assist agency personnel in the event of an emergency during nonbusiness hours; 
3.  The SIC code of the business if applicable; 
4.  A list of the hazardous materials at the establishment designated by CAS number, chemical name and common name as well as the form in which the material is stored and the maximum amount present during a thirty-day period; 
5.  Each business shall designate in the appropriate box if there is a laboratory at its establishment; 
6.  A sketch showing the location of any laboratory at the establishment; 
7.  For businesses consisting of more than one building, a sketch showing where the hazardous material is stored. 
(Prior code § 10-25)  
8.08.070 - Exemptions from disclosure. 
The following are exempt from the disclosure requirements of this chapter: 
A.  Any person who handles radioactive materials that are exempt under Sections 30180 and 30345 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code or licensed with the State Department of Health Services; 
B.  Hazardous substances contained only in consumer products packaged for distribution to, and use by, the general public; 
C.  Any person using, handling or storing less than five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons a month, whichever is lesser, of a hazardous material. The exemption of this subsection shall not apply to the use, handling or storage of known carcinogens except to the extent that such carcinogens are used or intended to be used for medical or therapeutic purposes; 
D.  Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident to transportation, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Hazardous Materials Regulations (40 CFR, subchapter C). 
(Prior code § 10-26)  
8.08.080 - Trade secrets. 
A.  If a person believes that a request for information made by the disclosure form involves the release of a trade secret or proprietary information, the person shall submit to the county health officer adequate information and substantiation of the claim of trade secrecy. 
B.  The county health officer and the proper public agencies shall protect from disclosure any and all trade secrets and proprietary information coming into his or her possession, as defined in subsection D of section 6254.7 of the California Government Code and Section 1060 of the California Evidence Code, when requested in writing by the user. 
C.  Any trade secret or proprietary information reported to or otherwise obtained by the county health officer shall not be disclosed to anyone except an officer or employee of the city, the county, the state or the federal government who demonstrates a need to know the information in connection with their official duties. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and county health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be considered employees of the city. 
E.  The health officer, with the city attorney, upon receipt of a request for his designation of information submitted as a trade secret by a user, shall determine whether any or all of the information so submitted is properly designated trade secret or proprietary information. No information shall be disclosed until a final determination of trade secret is made. 
F.  If the health officer and the city attorney determine that the submitted information should be designated as trade secret or proprietary information, then the materials involved will be identified only by the properties and returned to the appropriate agencies. 
G.  If the health officer and the city attorney determine that the information is not a trade secret: 
1.  The city attorney shall notify the person by certified mail. 
2.  The person shall have thirty days after receipt of notification to request reconsideration of the city attorney's determination and to provide the city attorney with any further data supporting the claim of trade secrecy privilege. 
3.  The city attorney shall determine whether such information is protected as a trade secret or proprietary information within fifteen days after receipt of the additional data supporting the claim of trade secrecy or, if no additional data is submitted, within thirty days of the original notice. The city attorney shall notify the person and any party who has requested the information that it is not protected as a trade secret. The final notice shall also specify a date, not sooner than fifteen days after the date of mailing of the final notice, when the information may be made available to the appropriate public agencies. 
4.  Prior to the date specified in the final notice, the person may institute an action in the superior court for a declaratory judgment as to whether such information is subject to protection under subsection A of this section. 
H.  The provisions of this section shall not permit a person to refuse to file a disclosure information form to the city attorney except under the conditions set forth in subsection E of this section. 
(Prior code § 10-27)  
8.08.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  The health officer is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement shall include the inspection of facilities and other activities directly related to the enforcement of this chapter. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the county health officer in the performance of these duties. 
B.  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 10-28)  
8.08.100 - Maintenance of files. 
A.  The health officer shall maintain active files of all registration forms received for a period of three years. Registration forms which are more than three years old shall be placed in inactive files and retained for a period of thirty years. 
B.  The county health officer shall index registration forms by street addresses and parcel numbers, and shall cross reference them by business name, and by the SIC code numbers and the CAS numbers listed on the registration forms. 
(Prior code § 10-29)  
8.08.110 - Fees. 
Each initial registration of a hazardous material disclosure form shall be accompanied by a filing fee of seventy-five dollars, and thereafter an annual fee of thirty-five dollars per year. 
(Prior code § 10-30)  
Chapter 8.10 - HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Sections: 
 
8.10.010 - Consistency with county plan. 
All applicable zoning, subdivision, conditional use permit and variance decisions and approvals shall be consistent with the portions of the Monterey County hazardous waste management plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
(Ord. 492 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1990)  
8.10.020 - Authority to attach conditions and requirements to land use approvals. 
The provisions of Section 8.38.010 do not limit the authority of the city to attach appropriate conditions to the issuance of any land use approval for a hazardous waste facility in order to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, and do not limit the authority of the city to establish more stringent planning requirements or siting criteria than those specified in the Monterey County hazardous waste management plan. 
(Ord. 492 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.12 - LABOR CAMPS 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Enforcement of state law by city. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by state law, the city assumes the responsibility for the enforcement of Part 1 (commencing with Section 17000) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, known as the Employee Housing Act, and the regulations adopted thereunder by the Commission of Housing and Community Development. 
(Prior code § 11-1)  
8.12.020 - County authorized to act for city. 
The director of health services of the county and the authorized employees of his department shall administer and enforce this chapter and the state law and regulations referred to in Section 8.12.020 for and in behalf of the city, except that the building inspector of the city shall administer and enforce all laws, rules and regulations relating to the construction of labor camps. 
(Prior code § 11-2)  
8.12.030 - Permits and fees. 
Every person operating a labor camp shall obtain a permit to operate such labor camp from the county director of health services, which shall be valid from the date of issuance through December 31st of the year of issuance. A fee for the issuance of such permit and for health inspection services shall be paid to the county director of health services at the time of issuance. The amount of the fee shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 11-3)  
Chapter 8.16 - FIREWORKS*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior code history: Prior code § 9-3. 
 
8.16.005 - Definitions. 
A.  "Guardian" means a parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody, or control of his or her minor. 
B.  "Fireworks stand" shall mean any structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale or display of "safe and sane fireworks." 
C.  "Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen years for whom a responsible guardian has the legal care, custody or control. 
D.  "Non-profit organization" means: 1) any non-profit association, charity, or corporation organized pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code or California Revenue and Taxation Code; 2) a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status; 3) an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary school, middle school, and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the City of Soledad. 
E.  "Qualified applicant" means any group or organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one full year preceding submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks required by this chapter and which continues to meet the criteria for the duration of any permit to sell fireworks issued by the city pursuant to this chapter: 
1.  The organization shall be a non-profit organization as defined in this chapter. 
2.  The organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the city. 
3.  The organization must have a demonstrated benefit or provide a service to the citizens of the city. 
4.  The organization must have a minimum bona fide membership of at least ten members who either reside in the city or are owners or operators of a business or other establishment located in the city or attest that the otherwise qualified organization has a minimum of ten volunteers that reside in the city to staff a fireworks booth. 
5.  The organization must not have been found by any court of competent jurisdiction or hearing administrative officer to be in violation of any civil or criminal local, state or federal law within twelve months prior to the organization's submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks. 
6.  The organization must not have had a permit to sell fireworks within the city revoked within twelve months prior to the organization's submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks. 
7.  The organization must have evidence of a valid license to perform the acts indicated on the application consistent with state law. 
F.  "Response cost" shall mean those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred by public safety or other city personnel for a response to a prohibited illegal possession, storage, or discharge of fireworks, and include the cost of providing law enforcement, firefighting, or other services arising from the unpermitted illegal possession, storage or discharge of fireworks, including but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of public safety or other personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at or otherwise dealing with the illegal unpermitted possession, storage or discharge of fireworks, and the administrative costs attributable to said response(s). 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any public safety personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of the illegal unpermitted possession, storage or discharge of fireworks. 
3.  The cost of repairing or replacing any public safety equipment or property damage, and the cost of use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of any illegal unpermitted possession, storage or discharge of fireworks. 
G.  "Safe and sane fireworks" means those fireworks approved and labeled by the California State fire marshal as "safe and sane" consistent with Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562, and relevant sections of Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 4-5-2017; Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014)  
8.16.010 - Fireworks—Restrictions on use. 
A.  Fireworks, other than "safe and sane" fireworks, prohibited. Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to possess, store, offer for sale, sell at retail or wholesale, use, discharge, explode or permit the use on their property or property under their control any fireworks except "safe and sane fireworks" as defined herein. 
B.  Restrictions on use of "safe and sane" fireworks. 
1.  No person, shall use, fire or discharge "safe and sane" fireworks at any city park, with the exception of the Soledad Little League Park or Gallardo Park, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Safe and sane fireworks may only be used, fired or discharged in the city between the dates of June 28 to July 4, between the hours of twelve p.m. and eleven p.m. 
C.  Public displays. The fire chief, and/or his/her designee shall have authority to grant permits for those activities enumerated in Section 12640 of the California Health and Safety Code, including supervised public displays of fireworks by a public agency. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 4-5-2017; Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 658 § 1, 2008: Ord. 618 § 1, 2005: Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.015 - Response Costs. 
A.  A person who has violated the provisions of this chapter may be liable for response costs incurred in responding to the illegal unpermitted possession, storage or discharge of fireworks. 
B.  If a person who violated this chapter is a minor, the responsible guardian(s) of the minor and the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, a person who violates this chapter need not be present at the event that causes the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. 
D.  Response costs imposed by this chapter are in addition to any other costs that may be recovered under this code. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 4-5-2017)  
8.16.020 - Fireworks—Restrictions on sale. 
The sale of fireworks within the city is restricted to those identified as "safe and sane," as defined herein. All such sales shall be conducted in a temporary stand or structure meeting the requirements of this chapter. Such stands may be maintained and operated only by qualified applicants, as defined in this chapter, who have obtained a permit to do so from the city. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.030 - Sale—Location. 
Temporary stands for the sale of fireworks shall be located in an open area, free of weeds or other combustible materials, and not less than fifty feet distant from the nearest permanent building, structure, or place where combustible materials are kept and stored. The construction, installation and use of temporary fireworks stands shall be subject to those rules and regulations specified by the fire chief, and/or his/her designee. Firework stands must be installed and removed in accordance with the dates specified in the current city council resolution concerning said matter. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.040 - Sales—Dates. 
No fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale within the city except during the period from June 28 to July 3 from ten a.m. to nine p.m., and on July 4 from seven a.m. to seven p.m. inclusive, of the same calendar year. Notwithstanding, the city council may, by resolution, allow for the sale of fireworks within the city on additional dates when such sales are an appropriate part of a local, state, or national event, when the state fire marshal has authorized the sale of such fireworks and when the city's fire chief, and/or his/her designee has determined that such sales do not pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Soledad when performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 618 § 4, 2005: Ord. 562 § 1, 1999: Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.050 - Fire extinguisher requirement. 
There shall be maintained in each premises or stand within which safe and sane fireworks are sold or offered for sale, a fire extinguisher of at least two and one-half gallons capacity which is in good order and condition and which is of a type approved by the fire chief, and/or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.060 - Prohibition during fire emergency. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, during times of extreme fire danger the fire chief, and/or his/her designee, may declare that a state of fire emergency exists and may entirely prohibit the use or sale of fireworks within the city until such time as the chief, and/or his/her designee, determines that the emergency no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.070 - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city without having first applied for and receiving a permit therefore from the city. Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks from a temporary fireworks stand may be granted by the city council upon the following conditions: 
A.  The maximum number of permits that will be issued to qualified applicants pursuant to this chapter during any one calendar year shall be established by resolution of the city council. In the event the number of applications exceeds the authorized number of permits, permit applications to be forwarded to the city council for consideration and approval will be chosen on a lottery basis. Drawing for permits will occur at a time and place designated by resolution. 
B.  Permits shall only be issued to qualified applicants, as defined in this chapter. 
C.  No qualified applicant may receive more than one permit for fireworks sales during any one calendar year. 
D.  All permits may require reasonable conditions and restrictions as prescribed by the city manager, fire chief, and/or his/her designee, and/or city council. 
E.  Submission. 
i.  All applications for permits to sell fireworks shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk on forms supplied by the city. Applications will be reviewed by staff and the fire chief and/or his/her designee. 
ii.  All applications must be filed no sooner than March 15 or later than April 15 of each calendar year. Late applications will not be accepted- no exceptions will be granted. 
iii.  All applications shall be accompanied by written assurance that, if the permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such a permit, deliver to the city an insurance certificate and endorsement evidencing coverage of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than one million dollars combined single limits for each occurrence for damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the permittee or his/her/its agents, servants, employees or subcontractors, and naming the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents as additional insureds. 
iv.  All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount established by resolution. 
v.  Repeat applicants (an applicant granted a permit in the previous year) shall be required to submit a financial statement concerning the previous year's sales setting forth the gross receipts from the fireworks stand, all expenses incurred and paid in connection with the purchase of the fireworks and sales thereof, and how the net proceeds were or will be disbursed. The filing of such a statement shall be a condition precedent to the granting of any subsequent permit. 
F.  The city council shall consider the approval of permits only once each calendar year, at a regular or special meeting in May. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.075 - Revocation of permit. 
The fire chief, and/or his/her designee, may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any provision of this chapter, or any of the terms and conditions set forth in a given permit. Revocation may constitute grounds for the denial of any subsequent permit application by the same permittee. Such revocation may be appealed to the city manager. Upon the permittee's request, the city manager, or her/his designee, shall meet with the permittee and the fire chief, and/or his/her designee, as soon after the revocation as practical, to review the fire chief's/designee's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014)  
8.16.080 - Violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment or in the county jail for not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with Section 12700 of the California Health and Safety Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of this chapter constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Such infractions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within the same year. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 4-5-2017; Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014; Ord. 658 § 2, 2008: Ord. 618 § 8, 2005: Ord. 475 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1989)  
8.16.085 - Administrative regulations. 
The city council is authorized to promulgate administrative regulations and procedures necessary for the successful and effective implementation of this chapter, including rules and procedures governing the submission and random selection of applications to sell safe and sane fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 2, 3-5-2014)  
Chapter 8.20 - REGULATION OF WATER SYSTEM CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is (1) to protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premise contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) to eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; and (4) to prevent the making of cross-connections in future. 
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the State of California Code of Regulations, Title 17 — Public Health entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections." 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city water department and any other source of water supply, or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. 
(Ord. 473 § 1(Exbt. A)(part), 1988)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
B.  "Approved backflow prevention device" means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services. 
C.  "Approved water supply" means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency. 
D.  "Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
E.  "AWWA standard" means an official standard development and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
F.  "Backflow" means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
G.  "Contamination" means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
H.  "Cross-connection" means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
I.  "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
J.  "Health agency" means the California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system. 
K.  "Local health agency" means the county or city health authority. 
L.  "Person" means an individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, municipality, public utility or other public body or institution. 
M.  "Premises" means any and all areas on a customers property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system. 
N.  "Public water system" means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption which has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year. 
O.  "Reclaimed water" means a wastewater which as a result of treatment is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
P.  "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing. 
Q.  "Service connection" means the point of connection of a user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
R.  "Water supplier" means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system. 
S.  "Water user" means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.030 - Cross-connection protection requirements. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited. 
2.  Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the city will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and at his/her expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted. 
3.  Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city's mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Where Protection is Required. 
1.  Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction. 
2.  Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and water originating from the city water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
3.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having (a) internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health department and the city, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist. 
C.  Type of Protection Required. 
1.  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP) and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 8.20.030. Situations which are not covered in Table 8.20.030 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city or health agency. 
TABLE 8.20.030 

Type of backflow protection required 
	Degree of Hazard 	Minimum Type 
Type of 
Backflow 
Prevention 
 A. 	Sewage and Hazardous Substances. 
Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply. 	AG 
	Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. this does not included a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
	Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
	Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
	Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected 	RP 
 B. 	Auxiliary Water Supplies. 	
	Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. A RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
	Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the city. 	RP 
 C. 	Fire Protection Systems. 	
	Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). 	DC 
	Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. A RP my be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
	Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from private reservoirs or tanks used. 	DC 
 D. 	Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 	RP 
 E. 	Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished. 	RP 
 
2.  Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall be at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city's mains from pollution or contamination. In such cases the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.040 - Backflow prevention devices. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city's potable water system. 
2.  The city will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention devices. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Device Installation. 
1.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The city shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
a.  Air-gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practicable. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
b.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above grade and not more than thirty-six inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
c.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practicable to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so that there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three inches clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These devices must be installed on their side with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated competency in testing of these devices to the city. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention devices. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Device Removal. 
1.  Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced. 
a.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. 
b.  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device. 
c.  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to the service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device. 
d.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree or hazard involved. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.050 - User supervisor. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.060 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  Water System Survey. 
1.  The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The city may require an on-premise inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
3.  The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premise to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification — Device Installation. 
1.  The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
2.  A second notice will be sent each water user who does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
C.  Customer Notification — Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. The written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city. 
2.  A second notice shall be sent to each water user who does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice with a thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.070 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service. 
B.  Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1.  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
5.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
6.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; and 
8.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For conditions 1, 2, 3 or 4, of subsection B of this section, the city will terminate service to a customer's premise after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated. 
2.  For condition 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 of subsection B of this section, the city will take the following steps: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise the water user of its intention to terminate water service; and 
b.  Terminate the water supply and lock the service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.080 - Qualifications of testers. 
Each person performing tests of backflow prevention devices pursuant to this chapter shall have the following minimum qualifications: 
1.  At least two years experience in plumbing or pipe fitting, or equivalent qualifications; 
2.  Hold valid certifications from the American Water Works Association (AWWA) California-Nevada Section, from a county certification, or equivalent training in the opinion of the health department. 
3.  Furnish evidence to show that he/she has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. 
Each person performing such tests in the city shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of the tests and the correctness of reports thereon submitted to the city. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
8.20.090 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Ord. 473 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1988)  
Chapter 8.24 - REGULATION OF PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE, AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS 
 
8.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
There is adequate and reliable scientific and anecdotal documentation to establish that the recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and similar products commonly known as "synthetic drugs" has been shown to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, and death. While state and federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the applicability of these laws and regulations. Without the prohibitions enacted by this chapter, these synthetic drugs can be possessed, displayed and sold without the city's ability to control the negative effects these substances have on the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide the city with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Business" means any commercial enterprise in the city subject to the business licensing provisions set forth in Chapter 5.05. 
"Consume, consuming or consumption" means to ingest, inhale, inject, smoke, or snort. 
"Distribute, distributing or distribution" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not. 
"Person" includes any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association or similar organization. 
"Possess, possessing or possession" means to have for consumption, distribution or sale in one's actual or constructive custody or control, or under one's authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority or power be exercised solely or jointly with others. 
"Provide, providing or provision" means offering to distribute or sell a product or substance to any person. 
"Psychoactive bath salts" means any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term psychoactive bath salts includes without limitation: 
1.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds: 
(A)  Cathinone(2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone), 4-methylmethcathinone (2-methylyamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propoan-1-one), 4-methyoxymethcathinone (1-(4-methoxyphyenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1-one), MDPV (methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3, 4-methylendioxy-N-methyylamphetamine), methylene (3, 4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-(methylarnino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-FMC(3-fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), butylone (13-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolybutanamine), a-PPP(a-pyrrolidinopropiophenon), MPPP (4'-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP (3',4'-methylenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinoprio-piophenone), a-PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-ylpentan-1-one); 
(B)  Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(C)  Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed compounds; 
(D)  Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or 
(E)  Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and 
2.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard. Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning, or other products with similar names, structures or packaging. 
3.  The term psychoactive bath salts shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act ("UCSA") (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058), regulated by one of the UCSA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the "CSA") (21 U.S.C. Sections 81 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration ("FDA"). 
"Psychoactive herbal incense" means any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term psychoactive herbal incense includes without limitation: 
1.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and contain any of the following chemical compounds: 
(A)  Cannabucyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl) phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-073 (napththalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200 ((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-2-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 ((6aR,1OaR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,10, 1Oa-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chroment-1-ol), CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylictan-2-yl)phenol) CP 47, 497 (2-[1R,3S0-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(nap-thalen-1-yl)methanone); 
(B)  Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(C)  Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(D)  Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or 
(E)  Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and 
2.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and are marketed under any of the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed and Black Mamba, or other products with similar names, structures or packaging. 
3.  The term psychoactive herbal incense shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is psychoactive herbal incense, and other synthetic drugs specifically excepted by the UCSA (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058) regulated by one of the USCA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 U.S.C. Sections 81 et seq.) or approved by the FDA. 
"Psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects" means affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis. 
"Psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects" means affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines. 
"Sell, selling or sale" means to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for monetary gain. 
"Synthetic drug" includes psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.030 - Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug with the city. 
B.  Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.040 - Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances claimed or represented to by synthetic drugs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product that person is providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within the city. 
B.  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following evidentiary factors: 
1.  The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a crystalline or powder product being marketed as a "glass cleaner"); 
2.  The business providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as a liquor store selling "plant food"); 
3.  The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as "not for human consumption," "not for purchase by minors," or "does not contain chemicals banned by Section 11357.5"); 
4.  The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as half of a gram of a substance marketed as "glass cleaner" costing fifty dollars); 
5.  The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine or marijuana); or 
6.  The product's name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug (such as "Eight Ballz" or "Green Buddha"). 
C.  Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.050 - Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the city. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.060 - Public nuisance. 
A.  It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the city. 
B.  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the city. 
C.  It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the city. 
D.  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the city. 
E.  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in Section 8.24.040. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.070 - Summary abatement 
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, and death, any violation of this chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If a code compliance officer, based on the facts then known, determines that a violation of this chapter presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health and safety, he/she may seek the assistance of the city manager and cause said violation to be subject to the summary abatement procedures set forth in Section 9.04.200 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.080 - Revocation of business license. 
No person holding a business license and owning or operating a business in the city may use that business to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. Along with other applicable penalties, a violation of this section by the holder of a city business license, or their employees or agents, shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension, revocation, or any combination thereof, of said license. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.090 - Penalties 
A.  Misdemeanor and infraction violations. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of this chapter constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Such infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars or a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year. An infractions is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a jury by trial and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her, unless he or she is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or her own recognizance or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve month period for any violation of this chapter for a crime made punishable as an infraction may be charged with a misdemeanor upon the third violation. 
B.  As set forth in Chapter 1.04 of this Code, it shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with any provisions or requirement of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any person, firm, corporation and/or entity and shall be punished accordingly. 
C.  The fine amounts set forth above may be modified, from time to time, by city council resolution. In no event shall such fine amounts exceed the amounts authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.100 - Seizure of evidence. 
Any product(s) or substance(s) possessed, provided, distributed or sold in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officers and removed, stored and disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
8.24.110 - Exclusions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law, including without limitation, intoxicating chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11000 et seq.). 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation, Cal. Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
C.  This chapter shall not be deemed to prescribe any act that is positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any state or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 2, 7-1-2015)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - NOTICED NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Conditions declared to be a nuisance. 
Each and every one of the following conditions or acts is hereby declared to be a public nuisance: 
A.  Dangerous or Substandard Building. The maintenance on any premises within the city of a building or structure which: 
1.  After an inspection by the fire department, is found to be a fire hazard or in a condition likely to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or 
2.  Is defined as substandard under the provisions of the State Housing Law set forth in Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code; 
B.  Unsanitary Building and Premises. Building and premises maintained in an unsanitary condition, or in a condition likely to cause sickness or disease or other injury to occupants, or to endanger the public health, safety and general welfare, as determined by the building official under applicable state and city laws, ordinances, rules or regulations; 
C.  Fire Hazards. Dry or dead trees, shrubs, weeds, grass and other vegetables matter, combustible refuse or waste, and any other type of material growing, placed, or allowed to remain on streets, sidewalks or private property which, as determined by the fire chief or fire marshal, by its nature and location, constitutes a fire hazard endangering other property, real or personal, in the vicinity; 
D.  Rubbish, Refuse and Waste. Rubbish, refuse and waste, which by reason of its location, character or visibility, interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of the life and property by others living in the vicinity, or creates a danger to the public health, safety and general welfare. As used in this subsection, "rubbish, refuse and waste" means all kinds of used or discarded matter and material having no substantial market value, including, but not limited to, rubble, broken building material and paving material, used building material and used household goods and appliances, used commercial fixtures and appliances, inoperative machinery and equipment of all kinds, inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, used bottles, crates and containers of any kind, scrap metal, scrap lumber, and paper goods, trees and garden trimmings, and any other items of a like nature, whether or not specifically described in this subsection; 
E.  Hazardous Obstructions. Any obstacle, fence, sign, landscaping or other object installed or maintained in the front or side setback area of a corner lot, reaching a height of more than three feet above the nearest street curb (or street surface if there is no curb); excepting, however, permanent buildings and structures constructed with all applicable zoning and building regulations, public utilities poles and installations, and tree trimmed at the trunk at least eight feet above the level of the nearest curb (or street surface if there is no curb) which are spaced so that their trunks do not obstruct the vision of motorists; 
F.  Polluted Water. Any pool, pond, stream, canal or other body of water which is unattended, unfiltered or otherwise maintained, resulting in the pollution or contamination of the water from algae or other bacteria growth, from animals or insects or the remains of the same, or other rubbish, refuse, debris and other foreign matter or other material placed or allowed to remain in the same, or which is allowed to become stagnant or a breeding place for mosquitoes or other insects, thereby creating a health danger to the public health, safety and general welfare; 
G.  Air and Noise Pollution. Any condition or activity which creates or causes noxious odors, excessive smoke or dust, noise or vibrations, or which otherwise is offensive to the senses, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property in the vicinity; 
H.  Defective Sidewalks and Driveways. Sidewalks and driveway which are broken, damaged, severely worn, or raised to such a degree as to create a danger of injury to persons using the same; 
I.  Attractive Nuisances. The maintenance on any premises within the city of a building, structure, pool, pond, excavation, piece of equipment, or other artificial device or condition which the owner, lessee or occupant thereof knows or should know that children will trespass upon, and which involves a reasonable foreseeable risk of death or injury to children, which they, because of their youth, cannot be expected to understand, apprehend or discover; 
J.  Failure to Remove Graffiti. The failure of an owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises in the city to remove graffiti from any building, wall, fence or other structure on said premises within thirty days after receipt of written notice to do so from the building official; 
K.  Nuisance Abatement by Statute. Any and all other conditions in and upon, and uses of, buildings and premises in the city which are defined as a public nuisance by Part 3 of Division IV of the Civil Code (commencing with Section 3479), or any other applicable state or city law, ordinance, rule or regulation, specifically including, but not limited to, the construction codes adopted by reference, with local amendments, in Chapter 15.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.020 - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.025 - Delegation of authority of city manager. 
For purposes of interpreting the various provisions of this chapter, whenever specific duties, powers or responsibilities are assigned to the city manager, such duties, powers and/or responsibilities shall be interpreted as being subject to delegation by the city manager to any appropriate number of designees. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.030 - Right of entry. 
When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the city manager or the city manager's authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a parcel of land or structure upon a premises a condition which makes the parcel of land or structure a nuisance or vexation as defined in this code, the city manager may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city manager shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.040 - Declaration of nuisance. 
When the city manager has inspected or caused to be inspected any condition on any parcel of land or structure and has found and determined that such condition on such parcel of land or structure is a nuisance, the city manager shall commence proceedings to cause the abatement of such nuisance and to make the costs of such abatement a special assessment against the parcel upon which such nuisance exists. If the city manager, pursuant to Section 9.04.200 of this code, declares an emergency nuisance, such emergency nuisance may be abated in accordance with said section. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.050 - Notice and order. 
A.  The city manager shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the parcel of land. The notice and order shall contain: 
1.  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the parcel of land and structures thereon; 
2.  A statement that the city manager has found the premises or structures to be nuisance with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Soledad City Code; 
3.  A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the city manager; 
4.  Statements advising that if the abatement work (without vacation also being required) is not commended within the time specified, the city manager may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner; 
5.  Statements advising (i) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the parcel of land may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the city manager to the board of appeals, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the city manager within fifteen days from the date of service of such notice and order; and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
B.  Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the city manager or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the city manager to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served to relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section. 
C.  Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt required, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the city manager. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the city manager, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, as the address of the parcel of land involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of the mailing. 
D.  Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons affecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the city manager. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.060 - Notices—Publication. 
In addition to posting the notice and order required by Section 9.04.050, the city manager shall direct the city clerk to publish such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.070 - Recording notice of code violation. 
A.  Whenever the city manager has knowledge of a violation of any provision of this code, or any other ordinance of the city, or any rule, regulation or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by the city, or any condition of an approval, permit or license granted pursuant to this code, the city manager shall notify the owner of the property upon which the violation is located on the city's intent to record a notice of code violation in the office of the recorder of the county. Such notice of intent shall be mailed to the owner at the address shown on the latest available assessor's roll, or as otherwise known to the city manager, and a copy thereof shall be posted upon the property. The notice of intent shall describe the nature of the violation and inform the owner that a notice of code violation will be recorded unless (i) a hearing before the city manager is requested within twenty days of the date of the notice or (ii) the violation removed within a time specified by the city manager. 
B.  In the event that a hearing is not requested and the violation has not been corrected, or in the event that after a hearing is conducted and consideration of all evidence presented thereat by the owner, the city manager determines that a violation of one or more of the aforementioned codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders or conditions in fact exists, the city manager may record the notice of code violation in the office of the recorder of the county. The determination by the city manager, following a hearing, that a violation exists, may be appealed to the board of appeals in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 9.04.080 of this code. 
C.  At the request of the owner or any other interested person and upon determination by the city manager that the violation has been fully corrected and no longer exists, the city manager shall furnish to the owner or other interested person a notice of expungement of the previous recorded notice of code violation. 
D.  The recording of a notice of code violation pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other rights, remedies or actions available to the city by reason of the same violation as described in the notice. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.080 - Board of appeals. 
A.  In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the city manager relative to the application and interpretations of this article, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting the planning director, assistant city manager and planning commissioner who is qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to nuisance abatement and who is not employed by the city. The city manager shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The member not employed by the city shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedures for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the city manager. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 6 of the most current adopted edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the city manager, who shall make them freely accessible to the public. 
B.  The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of city codes. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.090 - Appeal of notice and order. 
A.  Any person entitled to service under this article may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the city manager under this code by filing at the office of the city manager a written appeal containing: 
1.  A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Appeals of the.....of....;" 
2.  A caption reading: "Appeal of.....," giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal; 
3.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order; 
4.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order of action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
5.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside; 
6.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; 
7.  The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of a least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal; 
The appeal shall be filed within fifteen days from the date of service of such notice and order or action of the city manager; provided, however that if the parcel of land or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property, such appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the city manager. 
B.  Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the city manager shall present it as the next regular or special meeting of the board of appeals. 
C.  As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall not be less than five days nor more than thirty days from the date the appeal was filed with the city clerk. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least five days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of the board either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
D.  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of the city code shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. 
E.  Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.100 - Staying of order under appeal. 
A.  Enforcement of any notice and order of the city manager issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
B.  Procedures for the conduct of the appeals hearing shall comply with the provisions of the most current adopted edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Chapter 9. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.110 - Enforcement of the notice and order. 
After any order of the city manager or the board of appeals made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted for said crime in accordance with this code. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.120 - Abatement work. 
Abatement work may be performed by the city's own employees or by independent contractors, or any combination thereof. The city manager and his authorized representatives and contractors may enter upon private property as may be necessary or appropriate in order to abate the nuisance declared to exist upon such property. Prior to commencement of the abatement work by or on behalf of the city, the property owner may abate the nuisance at his own expense. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.130 - Notice and hearing—Report of costs. 
The city manager shall keep an accurate account of the abatement costs incurred by the city, including attorney's fees. Such account shall indicate, where appropriate, the costs attributable to each separate parcel of land upon which the abatement work is performed. Following completion of all abatement work, the city manager shall prepare a final itemized written report showing the total abatement costs and shall submit such report for confirmation by the city council at its next available regular meeting after the notice period set forth herein. At least ten days prior to the date of such meeting, a copy of the report together with a written notice of the date on which the same shall be considered by the city council shall be mailed to the persons to whom notice was mailed pursuant to Section 9.04.050(B), (C) and (D) of this code and a copy thereof shall also be posted upon the property involved and at city hall. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.140 - Protests and objections. 
At the time fixed for considering the report of costs provided for in Section 9.04.130, the city council shall hear any objections of the owners of the property to be assessed for abatement costs. Any person filing any protest or objection who is affected by the proposed charge shall file a written report of protests or objections with the city clerk at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of costs. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of the protest or objection. City council may modify the report of cost if deemed necessary. The city council may then, by resolution, confirm the report as submitted or modified. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.150 - Payment of abatement costs. 
The city manager may receive payment in full of the abatement costs charged against a parcel of land at any time after confirmation of the report by the city council pursuant to Section 9.04.130 and prior to the filing of such report with the county tax collector pursuant to Section 9.04.170. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.160 - Abatement by owner after issuance of notice and order—Fees payable. 
When the owner has fully abated a public nuisance pursuant to an order of abatement made and serves as provided in Section 9.04.050(B), (C) and (D) and when the work of abatement has been approved by the building official, all proceeding taken against such owner arising out of the nuisance shall be terminated and the owner shall be relieved of all penalties under the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in this section. The owner shall pay the city a fee, to be fixed by resolution of the city council, sufficient to reimburse the city for its costs incurred in investigating the matter and taking action under the provision of this chapter or any other relief to abate pursuant to any other code, ordinance, law, or statutes enforce by the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.170 - Filing report with county tax collector—Collection of assessment. 
After the city council has confirmed the report of costs to abate the nuisance declared to exist upon a parcel of land, and if such costs have not been paid in full, the city clerk shall transmit a copy of the report together with a copy of the resolution confirming the same to the county tax collector, who shall add the amount of abatement costs, or unpaid portion thereof, to the next regular tax bill as a special assessment for municipal purposes levied against such parcel. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner as ordinary municipal taxes. If such assessment is delinquent, the amount shall be subject to the same interest and penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.180 - Taxes paid in error— Refund—Claims. 
The city council may order refunded all or any part of a tax paid pursuant to the provisions of this article if the city council finds that all or any part of the tax has been erroneously levied. A tax, or any part thereof, shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city clerk on or before March 1st after the tax became due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who paid the tax or his guardian, executor, administrator, personal representative or successor in interest. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.190 - Alternative remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter limits the city to the remedies provided for in this chapter, or prevents the city from initiating and prosecuting any other remedy available to it for the abatement of a public nuisance, or for the recovery of costs for the abatement, under civil or criminal statutes of the state or under ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.200 - Emergency—Summary abatement. 
If in the opinion of the city manager, any nuisance, as defined in Section 9.04.010 constitutes an immediate hazard to the public health, safety or welfare or materially interferes with public travel or passage, the city manager may declare a nuisance an emergency and cause such nuisance to be abated immediately. The abatement work may be performed by the city's own employees or by independent contractors, or any combination thereof. The city manager and city authorized representatives and contractors may enter upon private property as may be necessary or appropriate in order to perform the abatement work. The collection of costs associated with such emergency abatement work shall be recovered as set forth in this chapter for nonemergency nuisance abatement. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.210 - Violation—Penalty. 
The owner, lessee or occupant of any premises within the city who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, upon a lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, or who violates the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.220 - Procedure not exclusive. 
The procedure set forth in this chapter for the abatement of a nuisance is not exclusive but in addition to any other procedure for abatement available to the city under the provisions of Section 3494 of the Civil Code, Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure, Section 38773 of the Government Code, or any other lawful authority. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.04.230 - Collection of costs by city. 
Whenever the city manager is authorized or directed to commence or sustain proceedings, either in law or in equity, to enforce the provisions of the code, or any other ordinance of the city, or any rule, regulation or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this code, or the provision of any code adopted by reference by this code, or any condition of approval, permit or license granted pursuant to this code, or to enjoin or restrain any violation of the same, or to otherwise abate any public nuisance, or to collect any sum of money on behalf of the city, then the city shall be entitled to collect all costs and expenses of the same, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney fees and reasonable investigation costs, which shall be set by the city council, by resolution, and made part of any judgement in any such action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 557 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 9.05 - SPRAY PAINT AND GRAFFITI 
Sections: 
  
 
9.05.010 - Purpose. 
Aerosol spray paint cans are currently being used as a means of defacing public and private property, resulting in the creation of unsightly graffiti. Graffiti reduces property values, encourages blight and frequently becomes a forum for gang related potentially criminal activities. In order to assist law enforcement personnel in dealing with this growing problem, the city council deems it necessary and appropriate to regulate the use and possession of aerosol spray paint cans and the applications of graffiti, and to provide for the abatement of graffiti. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.020 - Definitions. 
"Graffiti" means the intentional spraying of paint or marking of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances upon private or public property without permission of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.030 - Graffiti prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti upon any private or public property. A mistake as to the private property owner's identity shall not be a defense to a violation of this section. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.040 - Possession of aerosol spray paint cans by minors prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor person under the age of eighteen to have in their possession any aerosol spray can containing any substance commonly known as paint, while upon any public highway, street, alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool or other public place, whether such minor is or is not in any automobile, vehicle or other conveyance. 
B.  This section shall not apply if such minor is in possession of an aerosol spray can in order to perform a task as directed by the minor's parent, guardian, instructor or employer, and if that task would not be a violation of this chapter if conducted by an adult. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.050 - Sale of aerosol spray paint cans to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell to a minor any aerosol spray can containing any substance commonly known as paint. This section shall not apply to the furnishing of six ounces or less of an aerosol container of paint for the minor's use or possession under the supervision of the minor's parent, guardian, instructor or employer. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.060 - Signs to be placed in retail establishments. 
A sign not smaller than eight and one-half by eleven inches shall be prominently displayed in the proximity of the merchandise in all retail establishments which offer for sale to the public paint in aerosol spray cans. These signs shall read as follows: 
Possession by or sale to a minor of an aerosol spray can containing paint is unlawful. California Penal Codes 594.1, Soledad Municipal Code Sections 9.05.040 and 9.05.050. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.070 - Penalties. 
Violation of this chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.080 - Declared nuisance. 
For the reasons stated in Section 9.05.010 of this chapter, the city council finds and declares that the presence of graffiti on private or public property constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable provision of law. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.090 - Council to determine costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of the graffiti. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.100 - Authority to remove. 
Upon discovering the existence of graffiti on private or public property within the city, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.110 - Graffiti removal. 
The city manager or his designee shall determine the type of removal process, which may include, but is not limited to, painting out, washing of surface, sanding or fence plank replacement. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.120 - Prior consent for removal. 
Private property owners may submit prior written consent authorizing the city to abate graffiti upon discovery. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.130 - Notice of intention to abate and remove graffiti—Form. 
A.  If a prior written consent pursuant to Section 9.05.120 of this chapter has not been submitted to the city by the current owner of the real property shown on the current equalized assessment rolls, the city manager or his designee shall cause a notice of intention to remove graffiti to be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the real property upon which graffiti has been unlawfully applied. The notice shall advise the following: 
(1)  If consent to remove the graffiti is provided to the city by the owner, or by any person authorized by the owner, within ten days of mailing the notice, the city shall remove the graffiti at no cost to the owner. 
(2)  If the owner objects to removal of the graffiti by the city and/or to the costs which shall be assessed to the owner the owner may request a hearing before the city manager or his designee pursuant to Section 9.05.140 of this chapter by delivering to the city manager or his designee, within ten days of the mailing of the notice, a written request for a hearing setting forth the nature of the owner's objections. 
(3)  If within ten days of the mailing of the notice, the graffiti has not been removed and the city has not received from the owner either a consent to remove the graffiti or a written request for a public hearing, then the city shall be entitled to remove the graffiti and assess the costs of administration and removal to the property owner. 
B.  The notice of intention to remove graffiti shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE GRAFFITI 
____________ 
____________ 
____________ 
Re: Graffiti at (property address) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the real property located at ____________ you are hereby notified that the undersigned had determined pursuant to Section 9.05.080 of the Soledad Municipal Code that there exists upon said real property certain graffiti which constitutes a public nuisance. 
The City of Soledad desires to remove the Graffiti as quickly as possible. If within ten (10) days of the mailing of this notice you, or any person authorized by you, provides the City with written consent to remove the Graffiti, the City shall remove the Graffiti at no expense to you as the owner. If within ten (10) days of the mailing of this notice, the Graffiti has not been removed and the City has not received from you written consent to remove the Graffiti, the City shall determine the Graffiti a public nuisance and assess the costs of administration and removal to you without a hearing. 
If you object to the removal of the Graffiti from your property by the City and/or to the costs which shall be assessed to you pursuant to the terms of this letter, you may request a hearing before the City Manager or his designee pursuant to Section 9.05.140 of Chapter 9 of the Soledad Municipal Code by delivering to the City Manager or his designee, within ten (10) days of the mailing of this notice, a written request for a hearing setting forth the nature of your objections. 
You may appear in person at any hearing, or by any other responsible party or, in lieu thereof, you may present a sworn statement of the reasons you object to the removal of the graffiti from your property by the City and/or to the costs to be assessed. The sworn statement must be delivered to the City Manager or his designee before the time set for the hearing. 
If you desire the City to remove the graffiti from your property at no expense to yourself, please provide written consent to the City on or before ;daterule;, 199 ____________ . 
Notice mailed: ;daterule; Date 
____________ 
City Manager (or Designee) 
City of Soledad 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.140 - Public hearing and appeal. 
A.  If the city manager or his designee received within ten days of the mailing of the notice a written request from the owner of the property for a hearing, then a public hearing shall be held by the city manager or his designee on the objections made by the owner of the property. 
B.  Following the hearing, the city manager or his designee shall make written findings of fact showing whether graffiti tends to reduce the value of private property to promote blight and deterioration and be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Such written findings of fact shall be the basis for the decision of the city manager or his designee. 
C.  Appeal from any decision of the city manager or his designee may be made in writing to the city council within ten calendar days action is taken by the city manager or his designee. Within the same ten-day period, the appellant shall pay a non-refundable fee set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
9.05.150 - Treble damages. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil criminal judgement within a two-year period finding that any person is responsible for the unlawful application of graffiti, a fine in the amount of three times the cost of abatement shall be paid by the violator(s). 
(Ord. 512 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 9.06 - DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIALS 
Sections: 
  
 
9.06.010 - Legislative findings and authorization. 
The city council finds that there exists and has existed an increasing trend toward the display of adult materials at grocery stores, convenience stores, drug stores and other retail outlets within the city. The adult material is often displayed within the open view of children of tender years and is easily accessible to them. The city council finds that this material is adverse to the public peace, morals and good order of young children. The council further finds that it is in the best interest of the public safety, welfare and convenience of the city to prohibit the display of adult material and to adopt the following regulations so that adverse impacts upon young children are kept to a minimum. 
(Ord. 451 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
9.06.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Adult material" means all material that is defined as "harmful matter" in Section 313(a) of the California Penal Code. 
B.  "Display" means exhibiting or exposing adult material so that it is within open view of patrons, invitees and visitors to the premises where such material is located, except in a public place where minors are excluded, and except where devices commonly known as blinder racks are placed in front of such material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. 
C.  "Material" or "matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. 495 § 1, 1990: Ord. 451 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
9.06.030 - Display of adult material prohibited. 
No person shall display adult material, or permit, or allow the display of adult material. 
(Ord. 451 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
9.06.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed in Section 1.04.020 of this code. Any violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is continued, as provided in Section 1.04.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 451 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
9.06.050 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the criminal penalty provisions provided by this code, violation of any section or sections of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city. 
(Ord. 451 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 9.07 - ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
9.07.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an abandoned residential property maintenance and registration program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned residential buildings or structures and to establish uniform and reasonable regulations to prevent immediate risk and detrimental effects associated with abandoned and distressed properties. 
The city council finds that abandoned and distressed residential properties pose risk to the public peace, health and safety of citizens in that the detrimental effects from the lack of security and maintenance of abandoned and distressed residential properties endangers children unprotected from unsecured pools and other attractive nuisances, lead to neighborhood decline, contribute to lower property values, discourage potential buyers from purchasing a home adjacent to or in the neighborhoods with abandoned and distressed residences, and further endangers neighborhoods affected by the resulting squatting, vandalism, burglaries and other crimes. 
The city council further finds that the city will incur additional costs in administering and implementing the abandoned and distressed residential properties registration program and that it is in the best interests of the public for the city to recover the said costs through imposition of a registration fee. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used are defined as follows: 
"Abandoned property" means a property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale and/or property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Accessible property" means a rear or side yard property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, or other access. 
"Accessible structure" means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
"Agreement" means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Assignment of rents" means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender under a note secured by a deed of trust. 
"Buyer" means any person, partnership, co-partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or any legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this subsection. 
"Dangerous building" means any building/structure that is in violation of any condition(s), standards and/or regulations referenced in the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
"Days" means consecutive calendar days. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan, often used in California instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc. 
"Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale" means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
"Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or conditional. 
"Distressed" means a property that is occupied by a person(s) having the right to use or having the right of possession of the property and that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale and/or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and observation-based statements by neighbors, delivery agents, government employees, etc. that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at an auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults. 
"Local property manager" means a real property management company, real estate firm or realtor which maintains an office or place of business no more than fifty miles from the subject property. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Out-of-area" means outside Monterey County. 
"Owner" means any person, partnership, co-partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or any other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
"Owner of record" means the person, partnership, firm, corporation, fiduciary or any other legal entity having recorded title to the property at any given point in time as provided by the county recorder's office. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
"Residential building" means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential," whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
"Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the city manager or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. 
"Trustee" means the person, fiduciary, firm, corporation, or other legal entity holding a deed of trust on a property. 
"Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
"Vacant" means a building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.030 - Recordation of assignment of beneficial interest. 
Within ten days of the purchase and/or transfer of a loan/deed of trust secured by residential property, the new beneficiary/trustee shall record, with the county recorder's office, an assignment of rents, or similar document, that lists the name of the corporation, and/or individual, the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary/trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan/deed of trust. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.040 - Registration. 
A.  Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to recording a notice of default with the county recorder's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the city manager or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
B.  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be deemed distressed and shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee or his designee monthly until: 
1.  The trustor or other party remedies the default, or 
2.  It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the city manager or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
C.  The registration required by either subsection (A) or (B) shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation, legal entity, or individual), the direct street office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee, and, in the case of a corporation, entity, or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property. Any change in the information in the registration required under this paragraph shall be reported within ten days of the change. 
D.  An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by resolution of the city council. The fee and registration shall be valid for the fiscal year, or remaining portion of the fiscal year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due July 1 of each year and must be received no later than June 30 of the year due. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
E.  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
F.  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant. 
G.  Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
H.  At the time of registration, the beneficiary or trustee shall cause the water utility service to be registered in their name and shall maintain such utility in their name until the property is no longer vacant. 
I.  If any beneficiary or trustee fails to register a residential property, as required by this chapter, the city may register the residential property, impose a registration fee and assess the same against the property. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.050 - Maintenance requirements. 
In addition to the requirements of Chapter 15.10 of this code, properties subject to registration under Section 9.07.040 of this chapter shall comply with the following: 
A.  The vacant property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
B.  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
C.  Front and side yards visible from the fronting street shall be landscaped and maintained at the time registration was required in accordance with landscape provisions of Section 15.10.040 of this code and the requirements as set forth below: 
1.  Permitted landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
2.  Permitted landscaping does not include weeds, uncontained amount of debris, dirt or rocks, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
3.  Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscaping and removal of all trimmings. 
D.  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the city and state of California. 
E.  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.060 - Security requirements. 
A.  Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained by the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to any unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes but is not limited to the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows or doors securing means the prompt re-glazing or boarding of the window or door. 
1.  There shall be at least one operable door into the building or structure. If an existing door is operable, it may be secured with a suitable lock. All other operable doors may be closed from the interior by toe nailing them to the door frame or by securing with a suitable lock. 
2.  Boarding of doors and windows shall only be utilized as a security measure upon repeated breach of the building or structure. Boards shall be cut to fit the openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current International Property Maintenance Code standards at the time the boarding is completed or required. 
B.  If the property is owned by a corporation, firm or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner: 
1.  A local property management company shall be contracted to perform, at a minimum, bi-monthly inspections to verify that the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
2.  If the property is found to be non-compliant by the city, and upon notification of such non-compliance to the local property manager or responsible beneficiary/trustee/owner, the local property manager or responsible person or entity shall bring the property back into compliance within three days of notice thereof. At the discretion of the city manager or designee, an extension of time, not to exceed an additional two days, may be provided. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.070 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Pursuant to the city's police powers authorized in Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, as well as under this code and other provisions of state law, including but not limited to, California Government Code Section 38771, the city council hereby declares that violation of this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance and security requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.080 - Additional authority. 
In addition to lawful remedies provided in this code or otherwise, the city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property or preserve the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.090 - Maintenance and security by the city. 
A.  If any person or entity fails to maintain and secure their property as required by this chapter within the time specified by written notice of violation, the city manager shall cause the property to be maintained and/or secured by city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the property is expressly authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the maintenance or securing by direction of the city manager, the city manager shall cause a statement of the costs thereof to be prepared for submission to the city council. The city manager shall set a time and place for the city council to receive and consider the statement of costs, and shall serve on the owner or owners of the property a copy of the statement of costs and a notice of the time and place at which the city council will receive and consider the statement of costs. The statement of costs and the notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as provided in this code and shall be accompanied by a copy of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to maintenance and securing of properties, any individual or entity covered by this chapter, who fails to maintain and secure their property as required by this chapter within a reasonable time of issuance of a notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to have authorized the city to remove trespassers from the property. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.100 - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as provided in this title and any other enforcement and lawful remedies available to the city under the law. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.110 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal in accordance with the process and procedures established under Section 9.04.090, "Appeal of notice and order," of this code. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
9.07.120 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 2929.3, the city may impose a civil penalty in the amount not to exceed one thousand dollars per day for failure to maintain and secure abandoned property, as required by this chapter, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Notice. Prior to imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this section, the city shall first give notice of the violations of the maintenance and security requirements of this chapter. The notice shall include a description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation(s), and advise the owner of the city's intent to assess a civil fine if an action to correct the violation(s) is not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen days and completed within a period of not less than thirty days. The notice shall be mailed to the address provided in the deed of trust or other instrument specified in California Government Code Section 27321/5(a), or if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other instrument. 
2.  The city shall impose the civil penalty pursuant to this section if actions necessary to address the violation(s) at the abandoned property are not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen days and completed within a period of not less than thirty days from the date of mailing of the notice required by this section. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the city shall not impose a civil penalty pursuant to this section along with other administrative citations or fines authorized by other sections of this code. 
3.  The civil penalty imposed by this subsection shall stay in effect until January 1, 2013, the expiration date of Section 2929.3 of the California Civil Code, unless extended by the state legislation. 
B.  Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, corporation, and/or firm or entity that violates any portion of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and subject to prosecution and/or administrative enforcement and penalty fees as provided in Title 1 of this code. 
C.  As set forth in Chapter 1.04 of this code, it shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any person, firm, corporation and/or entity, and shall be punished accordingly. 
D.  Fines collected resulting from enforcement of this chapter will be placed in the general fund and used solely for the purpose of the code enforcement program in order to ensure and maintain the character and well-being of the city. 
(Ord. 661, § 1, 2009)  
Chapter 9.08 - CURFEW 
Sections: 
 
9.08.005 - Purpose. 
City has a compelling interest in protecting the safety and welfare of its minors. The objectives in enacting this chapter are to reduce juvenile crime and juvenile victimization, recognizing that minors have a special vulnerability to the dangers of the streets at night. 
The city council finds and determines that it is in the best interest of members of the community to establish a curfew as set forth in this chapter to prevent minors under the age of eighteen years from becoming victims or participants in street gangs and gang-related activities. It is the intent of the city council to allow minors under the age of eighteen years to move about freely while participating in legitimate activities, and to pursue legitimate activities during the hours specified in Section 9.08.010 with the permission of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(Ord. 555 § 1, 1998)  
9.08.010 - Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to be in or upon any public street, lane, alley, public park, playground or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, or vacant lots, either on foot or in a vehicle, between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. of the following day, Pacific Standard or Pacific Daylight Time. 
(Ord. 555 § 2, 1998: Ord. 520 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993)  
9.08.012 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Any minor violating the provisions of Section 9.08.010 shall be dealt with in accordance with the Juvenile Court Law of the state of California. 
B.  Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of a minor violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as established by the bail schedule adopted by the judges of the Monterey County municipal court. 
(Ord. 520 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993)  
9.08.015 - Exceptions. 
The restrictions set forth in Section 9.08.010 shall not apply to the following: 
A.  A minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor, or engaged in an emergency errand on behalf of such an individual; 
B.  A minor returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity, or dance; 
C.  A minor in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
D.  A minor engaged in legitimate activities relating to employment; 
E.  A minor exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1998)  
Chapter 9.09 - NOISE 
Sections: 
 
9.09.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that the making, creation, or maintenance of loud, unnecessary, unnatural, unusual or habitual noises that are prolonged, unusual, and/or unnatural in their time, place, use, and effect and are detrimental to the public health, comfort, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the city. The provisions of this chapter are enacted for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants by protecting citizens from excessive, unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any and all sources within the community. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 3-2-2016; Ord. 589 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.09.020 - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person within the city to make, or cause to be made or caused, by any natural or mechanical means, including but not limited to noise produced by any animal owned or in said person's possession or control, upon any premises owned, occupied, possessed, or controlled by him/her or upon any public street, alley, or thoroughfare, any unnecessary noise or sound which is physically annoying to persons of ordinary and normal sensitivity or which is so harsh or so prolonged, unnatural or unusual in its use, time, and place as to cause physical discomfort, or which is injurious or disturbs or endangers the lives, health peace and comfort of any person of reasonable and normal sensibility. 
B.  The standards that shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  The level, intensity, character and duration of the noise. Reference to the Soledad General Plan and Zoning Code for permissible noise levels, and measurement thereof on an A-weighted scale with an authorized sound level meter, may be utilized for making a determination of reasonableness, but are not a prerequisite to issuance of a citation; 
2.  The level, intensity and character of background noise, if any; 
3.  The time when and the place and zoning district in which the noise is occurring; 
4.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; and 
5.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
6.  Whether the noise endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals. 
7.  Whether the noise endangers or injures personal or real property. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to any public celebration, public holiday, or public parade conducted under authorized permit, nor shall such provisions apply to any sporting event or activity conducted under the direction and supervision of any public or private school; nor shall the provisions apply to the operation of any mechanical devices used by public employees or utility companies involved in remedying a dangerous, hazardous, or unhealthful situation at any time of the day or night. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 3-2-2016; Ord. 589 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.09.025 - Specific noise prohibitions. 
The following activities are specifically prohibited and considered violations of this chapter: 
A.  Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, loudspeaker, stereo, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in violation of the provisions of Section 9.09.020. 
B.  Noise sources associated with the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration, remodeling, paving, or grading of any real property, or demolition work, which creates sound which is in violation of Section 9.09.020 between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7.00 a.m. the following day. Notwithstanding, the chief of police or designated representative may, for good cause, exempt certain construction work from the provisions of this chapter for a limited time when an unforeseen or unavoidable condition occurs during a construction project and the nature of the project necessitates that work in progress be continued until a specific phase or task is completed. In such circumstances, the contractor or owner shall be allowed to work after 6:00 p.m. and to operate machinery and equipment necessary until the specific work in progress can be completed in a manner that will not jeopardize the inspection or acceptance of a project or create undue financial hardships for the contractor or property owner. 
C.  Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in violation of Section 9.09.020. 
D.  Unless otherwise permitted and conditioned pursuant to Chapter 9.12, any noise or commotion resulting from a party that produces sound in violation of Section 9.09.020. For purposes of this section, the word "party" means a gathering for social and/or entertainment purposes at a private residence or other location. The performance of any live band or use of the services of a DJ at any party at a private residence, whether or not said band or DJ uses electronic sound reproduction or any amplification device, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. is expressly prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 3-2-2016)  
9.09.030 - Penalty. 
The first violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction. any subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter within twelve months from a conviction for violating any provisions of this chapter and/or the forfeiting of bail in connection with a prior violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as set forth in chapter 1.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 3-2-2016; Ord. 589 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.09.035 - Liability for second police response. 
A.  Liability. 
1.  A second or subsequent response by police personnel within eight hours of the first response to a location at which there was a violation of Section 9.09.020 of this chapter, shall cause all persons responsible for such response to be jointly and severally liable for the cost thereof. A second or subsequent response to such an incident is an emergency response inasmuch as such response requires immediate action in order to safeguard the public health, welfare, and safety of the residents in the neighborhood where such violation is occurring. 
2.  The person responsible for the source of the violation of Section 9.09.020, and/or in charge of the premises at which the violation occurs, shall be deemed liable for the cost of the second police response. If either of those persons is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor shall be held jointly and equally liable for such costs. 
B.  Imposition of Costs. 
1.  To the fullest extent permitted by law, the costs of any second or subsequent police response shall include all reasonable costs incurred by the city in responding to the location of the site at which an alleged violation of Section 9.09.020 occurs. Costs shall include, but are not limited to, salary and benefits of city personnel, use of and/or damages to city equipment, treatment of injuries to city personnel, and administrative costs incurred to process, bill and collect appropriate costs of police response. 
2.  An invoice shall be prepared and sent to the responsible party notifying such person or persons of the specific charges for all reasonable costs incurred by the city attributable to the second police response. The responsible person or persons shall have the right to present any evidence or argument challenging the invoiced amount within ten days of the date the invoice was mailed. All challenges shall be made to the city manager or his/her designee. 
3.  The amount of all reasonable costs incurred by the city shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person or persons liable for such costs pursuant to subsection 9.09.035.A of this section. 
4.  If the persons liable for such cost are minors, both the minor and the parents or guardians of such minor are jointly and severally liable for the costs of the second response. Any person liable for such second response costs pursuant to this section shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such costs, including reasonable attorney fees. 
5.  The liability imposed by this section for second response shall be in addition to any fines, penalties or forfeitures imposed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 3-2-2016)  
Chapter 9.12 - OUTDOOR USE OF SOUND EQUIPMENT 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Outdoor use of sound reproduction or broadcasting equipment—Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in the city any sound reproduction or broadcasting equipment in such a manner as to cause sound to be projected therefrom outside of any building or out of doors, without first securing a permit to do so, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 3, 3-2-2016)  
9.12.020 - Application for permit. 
A.  Application for a permit under this chapter shall be filed with the chief of police and shall state the following: 
1.  The name and address of the person or organization applying for a permit; 
2.  The date or dates on which the equipment will be used, and the proposed hours of use; 
3.  The location or locations in which the equipment will be used; 
4.  The type of equipment to be used; 
5.  The requested duration of the permit—i.e. for a single event or a longer period of time. 
B.  The chief of police, and/or his/her designee, may deny the permit application for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of Code Section 9.09.020 or any other crime related to disturbance of the peace within the past three years or has been found civilly liable for the creation of a public or private nuisance by means of unreasonably loud or disturbing noise. 
2.  The applicant has knowingly made false statements in the application. 
3.  The proposed location(s) and/or time(s) for the use of the sound reproduction or broadcasting equipment, or other similar equipment, would be likely to create a violation of Section 9.09.020 without any mitigating circumstances or conditions. 
C.  The permit shall only be issued after payment of the permit fee set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the council. 
D.  The chief of police and/or his/her designee may set reasonable time, place, manner, sound level and duration restrictions on the use of sound reproduction and broadcasting equipment, or similar devices, as a condition for the permit. The permit shall contain the agreement of the permittee not to amplify the sound from the equipment beyond the degree reasonably required, so as not to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property in the vicinity, or create a public nuisance. 
In no event shall the use of such devices be permitted between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In setting such restrictions, the chief may consider, but is not limited to the consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Proximity of the proposed use to residential neighborhoods, medical facilities, senior facilities and schools; 
2.  Other proposed applicants who wish to use the same or a nearby area during the same time period; 
3.  The likelihood that the proposed use will result in a violation of Section 9.09.020; 
4.  The applicant's history of compliance with the requirements of this chapter during the past three years. 
E.  The chief of police and/or his/her designee is authorized to summarily suspend a permit at any time if use of the permitted sound reproduction or broadcasting equipment, or similar device, by the permit violates the terms and conditions of the permit or Code Section 9.09.020. The decision to suspend the permit shall take effect immediately. 
(Added during 1986 codification) 
(Ord. No. 699, § 3, 3-2-2016)  
9.12.030 - Exclusions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Sound reproduction from hand-held equipment for the pleasure and entertainment of the person carrying the equipment; provided, however, that the sound reproduction shall not be amplified beyond a reasonable necessity of such person so as to constitute a violation of Section 9.09.020; 
B.  Sound reproduction within automobiles for the pleasure and entertainment of the occupants of such automobiles; provided, however, that the sound reproduction shall not be amplified beyond a reasonable necessity of the occupants of such automobiles so as to constitute a violation of Section 9.09.020; 
C.  The operation of sound reproduction or broadcasting equipment within any dwelling for the pleasure and entertainment of the occupants of such dwelling; provided, however, that the reception shall not be amplified beyond the reasonable necessities of the occupants of the dwelling so as to constitute a violation of Section 9.09.020. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 3, 3-2-2016; Added during 1986 codification) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 699, § 3, adopted March 2, 2016, repealed the former § 9.12.030 that pertained to limitations on hours of use and derived from 1986 codification and enacted a new § 9.12.030 as set out herein.  
9.12.040 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies provided by this chapter are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies and are not intended to be exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 3, 3-2-2016; Added during 1986 codification) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 699, § 3, adopted March 2, 2016, repealed the former § 9.12.040 that pertained to issuance of permit and derived from 1986 codification and enacted a new § 9.12.040 as set out herein.  
9.12.050 - Reserved.  
Chapter - 9.16 
parades 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Parade defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, a "parade" is any procession, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or similar display in or upon any street or other public place in the city. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.020 - Permit required. 
Except as provided in Section 9.16.050, it is unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, or conduct any parade within the city unless a parade permit has been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.030 - Application for permit. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than one day nor more than thirty days before the date on which the parade is to be conducted. The application shall state the following: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization seeking to conduct such parade; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
C.  The date when the parade is to be conducted, and the time of day that it will start and terminate; 
D.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
E.  The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point; and 
F.  The approximate number of persons, the approximate number of vehicles, and the approximate number of animals scheduled to participate in the parade. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.035 - Indemnification; insurance. 
Prior to the issuance of a parade permit, the applicant shall execute an indemnification agreement indemnifying the city from and against all claims, demands and liability on account of injury to persons and property of third persons arising from the issuance and use of such permit. Prior to the issuance of such permit, the applicant shall furnish evidence of public liability insurance protecting the applicant against all such claims, demands and liability and naming the city and an additional insured, in the form of a certificate of insurance, containing the agreement of the insurer not to cancel or modify such policy of insurance without at least thirty days prior written notice to the city. The amount of such liability insurance shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of the Monterey Bay Insurance Fund. 
(Ord. 499 § 1, 1991)  
9.16.040 - Issuance of permit. 
Upon receipt of an application conforming to the requirements of Section 9.16.030, the chief of police shall issue the parade permit to the applicant. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.050 - Exclusions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Funeral processions; 
B.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and 
C.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.060 - Parking on parade route. 
The chief of police may, when reasonably necessary, prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to that effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of the signs. No person is liable for parking on a street in violation of this chapter if the street is not posted. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.070 - Interference with parade. 
It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
9.16.080 - Driving through parade. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between the vehicles, persons or animals composing a parade when the vehicles, persons or animals are in motion and proceeding along a public street as a parade. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
Chapter 9.18 - FIREARMS/WEAPONS DISCHARGE OR OPERATION*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 511. 
 
9.18.010 - Firearms, air guns, slingshots, etc. discharge or operation unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to fire, discharge, use or operate within the city limits a revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle (of any caliber), or any other firearm, or any air gun, BB gun, blow gun, paint-ball gun, gas-operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a slingshot or crossbow, which throws or discharges bullets, pellets or missiles of any kind to any distance, by means of powder or any explosive substance, or by means of the elastic force of air, rubber or steel springs, or by any other means, or to use the same in any manner to the danger or annoyance of any person or injury to property. 
(Ord. 621 § 2 (part), 2005)  
9.18.020 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to discharge or use of a firearm: 
A.  By a peace officer or other law enforcement officer during the performance of his or her duties or in the course of his or her training. 
B.  At a target range or practice range whose use is authorized by the city through the conditional use process (Chapter 17.42 of this code) and consent of the chief of police. 
C.  As part of a recognized training program, such as the ROTC, at a specified location and in the manner approved in writing by the chief of police. 
D.  Under circumstances where it would otherwise be lawful, by a person who reasonably believes that the person or property of himself or herself or another is in immediate danger and that the discharge or shooting of such weapon is necessary for the preservation of such person or property. 
E.  Under circumstances prohibited by either state or federal law. 
(Ord. 621 § 2 (part), 2005)  
9.18.030 - Firearms possession by minors. 
No minor under the age of sixteen years shall possess or use firearms of .22 caliber or greater, or air guns, BB guns, blow guns, slingshots, or bow or crossbow, except under the direct supervision and control of an adult. 
(Ord. 621 § 2 (part), 2005)  
9.18.040 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of this chapter constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of city, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. 
(Ord. 621 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 9.20 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Fortunetelling, etc., prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to exhibit, engage in or conduct for a fee or compensation of any kind the business, art or practice of fortunetelling, palmistry, phrenology, lifereading, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mind reading or necromancy. 
(Prior code § 15-7)  
9.20.020 - Injury to or interference with police department dogs. 
It is unlawful for any person to injure, tease, torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, disable or kill any dog used by the police department of the city or any officer thereof in the performance of the functions or duties of such department, whether or not the dog is being so utilized at the time, or to interfere or meddle with any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any such functions or duties. 
(Prior code 18-7)  
9.20.030 - Drinking of alcoholic beverages on public streets, public property or private property open to public view—Exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to consume any beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverages on the following premises: 
1.  Any public street, way, alley, park, playground, public parking lot or other property owned, leased or otherwise provided and maintained by the city for public use; or 
2.  Within one hundred feet of any public way while on private property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any statute of the state. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person or persons in attendance at any group activity in any public park in the city, which group activity has received special permission pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.12.010 of this code. Violation of the provisions of this section is declared to be an infraction. 
(Prior code § 15-8.1)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - CITY TRAFFIC CODE 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise defined in this chapter, the definition of any term used in this chapter shall be the same as the definition for such term as contained in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto. 
(Prior code § 14-1)  
10.04.020 - Enforcement by police. 
Officers of the police department or persons deputized by the chief of police shall have the power of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and such officers are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of fire or other emergency, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, direction or signal of a police officer and it is unlawful for any persons other than an officer of the police department or persons deputized to direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal. 
(Prior code § 14-2)  
10.04.030 - Designation of through highways, intersection stops and parking time limits. 
The city council may by resolution determine and designate the location of through highway, street and intersection stops and parking time limits within any designated area within the city. The council is authorized to direct the public works director to place, paint and maintain and cause to be placed, painted and maintained the necessary signals, markings or painted curbing in accordance with the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 599 § 1, 2003: prior code § 14-3)  
10.04.040 - Designation of loading zones, safety zones, signals, etc. 
The chief of police is authorized, and may determine and designate the location of loading zones, bus loading zones and safety zones or the method of turning at intersections, or the location of mechanical signals. The chief of police is authorized and directed to place, paint and maintain or cause to be placed, painted or maintained the necessary signs, markers or painted curbings in accordance with the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto. 
Whenever the chief of police directs the placement of curb markings designating prohibitions or restrictions, only the following colors only shall be used, and the colors used to indicate as follows: 
A.  RED indicates no stopping, standing or parking, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or sign posted as a bus loading zone. 
B.  YELLOW indicates no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than loading or unloading freight onto or from a commercial vehicle, or passengers, in an expeditious manner, and in no case for more than twenty minutes for loading or unloading freight onto or from a commercial vehicle nor for more than three minutes for loading or unloading passengers, except as otherwise indicated by signs placed pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  WHITE indicates no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox in an expeditious manner, and in no case for more than three minutes. This restriction shall be effective between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, except that it shall be effective at all times in front of a police station, fire station, hospital, mailbox, post office, hotel, or theatre open for business, except as otherwise indicated by posted signs. 
D.  GREEN indicates no stopping, standing or parking, for a period of time greater than that indicated by adjacent signing or stenciling on the curb, between the hours indicated by adjacent signing, or at any time, for any day, and except as otherwise indicated by posted signs. 
E.  BLUE indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 599 § 2, 2003: prior code § 14-4)  
10.04.045 - Designation of diagonal parking. 
The city council may, from time to time, after conducting a public hearing, designate by resolution, certain streets for diagonal parking. Any such designation should be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22503. 
(Ord. 546 § 2, 1995)  
10.04.050 - Parking regulations. 
A.  The city council may from time to time, by resolution, prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles on certain streets or highways, or portions thereof, within the city during all or certain hours of the day, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 22507 and 22508 of the Vehicle Code of the state; provided, that no such resolution prohibiting or restricting parking on a state highway shall be adopted until it has been submitted to and approved by the Department of Transportation of the state as required by Section 22506 of the Vehicle Code. With the exception of alleys, no such resolution shall apply until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed. 
B.  No person shall park any vehicle having a manufacturer's gross weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, or which is more than twenty feet in length, in any city parking lot. 
C.  No person shall park any vehicle in any city parking lot for more than twelve consecutive hours, except in designated city park and ride lot(s). The hours of the city's park and ride lot(s) shall be as determined by resolution of the city council from time to time 
D.  Except to the extent necessary for the loading and unloading of passengers or goods and for the provision of services, no person shall park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more on any street in any area zoned for residential use. 
E.  Commercial vehicles, including trailers and semi-trailers, may be parked on any street in any area zoned for industrial/commercial use; provided, that the city council may, by resolution, enact regulations establishing time limitations on such parking. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park, or to leave stopped, standing or parked, any trailer, semi-trailer or other non-motorized vehicle on any street, highway, alley, public parking lot or other property owned or controlled by the city, unless the same is connected to a motor vehicle. For purposes of this section, "semi-trailer" is defined as a vehicle designed for the carrying of persons or property, used in conjunction with a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by, another vehicle. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park, or to leave stopped, standing or parked, on any street or on any public or private property within the city any vehicle or trailer used for the collection, transportation or disposal of human waste or of any other type of "hazardous waste," as that term is defined in Section 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the temporary parking of portable toilet facilities when the same are allowed or required under the terms of a permit issued by the city for a special event of a temporary nature, or when the same are required for the use of persons working on construction projects in the city. 
H.  Except to the extent necessary for the loading and unloading of materials and for the provision of services, no person shall park or leave standing on any street or on any public or private property in the city any vehicle carrying as cargo any explosive substance, or any flammable or combustible liquid or gas, or any poisonous gas. 
I.  When the use of a street or portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street, or for the installation of underground utilities, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park any vehicle on such street or portion thereof. 
J.  It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon any private property, or upon property used for private parking purposes, without the consent of the owner of such property, the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either; provided, that signs specifying conditions under which parking is permitted shall be approved both as to wording and posting by the police department. 
K.  When a vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of any provision of this section, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle in the manner provided in, and subject to the requirements of, Sections 22651, 22651.5, 22852 and 22853 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
L.  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or when directed by a traffic officer or official direction sign or marking, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in any of the following places: 
1.  In a roadway other than parallel with the curb and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the regularly established curbline, except upon those have been marked for angle parking as determined by resolution, duly passed and adopted by the city council; 
2.  In any loading zone for a period longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or material; 
3.  Upon the paved or main traveled portion of any roadway when it is practicable to stay or park such vehicle off such part or portion of such roadway; 
4.  Upon any roadway unless at least fourteen feet of width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of such roadway opposite such stopped, parked or standing vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles. 
M.  Any resolution of the city council adopted pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section, which prohibits or restricts parking on certain streets within the city, may include a provision for preferential parking privileges for adjacent residents and merchants to whom a parking permit has been issued, as authorized by Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code of the state. If such provision is included, adjacent residents and merchants to whom a permit is issued shall not be subject to parking prohibitions or restrictions set forth in the resolution. Such a permit shall be issued to those entitled thereto by the chief of police, free of charge except to the extent necessary to cover the administrative cost involved. A permit so issued shall be personal to the permittee, shall be nontransferable, and shall expire when the permittee no longer qualifies for the preference as an adjacent resident or merchant. The permit shall be valid only when it is displayed prominently in or on a vehicle owned by the permittee so that it is readily visible from the street. It is unlawful for anyone other than the permittee to use or display such a permit on a vehicle parked in a location subject to the permit. 
N.  It is in unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any recreational vehicle on any public street, alley or public way within any residential district in the city. For purposes of this subsection N, "recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, camping trailer, or other vehicle or trailer, with or without motor power, designed or altered for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other human occupancy. "Recreational vehicle" specifically includes, but it not limited to: a "recreational vehicle" as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18010; a "truck camper" as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18013.4; a "camp trailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 242; a "camper" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 243; a "fifth wheel travel trailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 324; a "house car" as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; a "trailer coach" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 635; a van camper; or a van conversion. This prohibition shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Recreational vehicles parked for not more than twenty-four consecutive hours if parked adjacent to the owner's residence for the purposes of loading, unloading, cleaning, battery-charging, or other activity preparatory or incidental to travel; 
2.  Recreational vehicles left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow the performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle for a period not to exceed forty-eight hours. 
For purposes of this section N, a violation of this section shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a second violation within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred for each additional violation of the same provision within the same year. 
(Ord. 616 § 1, 2005; Ord. 510 § 1 (Exbt. A), 1991: Ord. 503 §§ 1 through 4, 1991; amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 14-14) 
(Ord. No. 705, § 2, 1-4-2017)  
10.04.055 - Vehicle removal. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department or any peace officer may remove a vehicle from a street under the following circumstances: 
A.  When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for seventy-two or more consecutive hours; 
B.  When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the city council and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 
C.  When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street where the use of such street or portion thereof is necessary for: (1) the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street, or (2) for the installation or repair of underground utilities, or (3) where the use of the street or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or (4) where the use of the street or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size and parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal; 
D.  When any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22651. 
(Ord. 599 § 3, 2003)  
10.04.060 - Operation of emergency vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to emergency vehicles of any political subdivision of the state or of a public utility, while the driver of any such vehicle is engaged in the necessary performance of public emergency duties. 
(Prior code § 14-15)  
10.04.070 - Repairing vehicles in streets—Use of flares. 
A.  Repairing, rebuilding or constructing any vehicle on any public street, highway or alley within the city, except to the extent that may be reasonably necessary temporarily to repair such vehicle in order to remove it from the street, highway or alley, is prohibited. 
B.  Open flares shall be used for the purpose of attracting attention to barriers or obstructions within the roadway. 
(Prior code § 14-16)  
10.04.080 - Prima facie speed limit for portion of Front Street. 
A.  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey by the city engineer, and pursuant to the provisions of Section 22358 of the Vehicle Code of the state, it is found and determined that the following prima facie speed limit upon a portion of Front Street in the city is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic on such street and is reasonable and safe and the following speed is the prima facie speed limit for that portion of Front Street: from a point fifty feet southerly of the centerline of Encinal Street to the northerly city limit, thirty-five miles per hour. 
B.  Appropriate signs giving notice of the foregoing prima facie speed limit shall be erected, or the existing signs maintained by the State Division of Highways shall be retained, at the locations where the existing speed limit signs of the State Division of Highways stand as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, such locations being in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 14-17)  
10.04.090 - Portion of Front Street designated through highway. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21354 of the Vehicle Code of the state the entire length of Front Street in the city is designated as a through highway and stop signs shall be erected, or the stop signs existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, maintained by the State Division of Highways, shall be retained, at all entrances thereto, except at the northerly and southerly city limits. 
(Prior code § 14-18)  
10.04.100 - Parking in violation of resolution of city council. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any public street or alley in violation of any resolution adopted by the city council restricting the parking of vehicles during all or certain hours of the day. 
(Ord. 506 § 1, 1991)  
Chapter 10.08 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person residing in the city to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city without first obtaining from the police department a license to do so. 
(Prior code § 4-1)  
10.08.020 - License—Application and issuance—Duration. 
The police department shall issue bicycle licenses upon written application on a form provided by the department. The license shall be valid until ownership of the bicycle changes. 
(Prior code § 4-2)  
10.08.030 - License—Inspection before issuance. 
The chief of police or an officer of the police department shall inspect each bicycle before licensing it and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which is determined by the inspecting officer to be in an unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Prior code § 4-3)  
10.08.040 - License—Scope. 
Bicycle licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate a bicycle for which the license has been issued upon all the streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. 
(Prior code § 4-4)  
10.08.050 - License—Fee. 
The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be one dollar and shall be paid in advance. 
(Prior code § 4-5)  
10.08.060 - License—Records. 
The police department shall keep a record of the date of issue of each bicycle license, to whom it was issued, and the number thereof. 
(Prior code § 4-6)  
10.08.070 - License—Purchaser or transferee to apply for new license. 
It is the duty of the purchaser or transferee of a licensed bicycle to apply for a new license therefor within five days of the sale or transfer of ownership. 
(Prior code § 4-7)  
10.08.080 - License—Stickers and registration cards. 
A.  The city shall provide decal license stickers, together with registration cards for bicycle licensees. 
B.  The license sticker and registration cards shall have numbers printed thereon, in numerical order, beginning with number one hundred. It is the duty of the police department to affix one such license sticker to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license fee. The license sticker shall remain on the bicycle so long as the licensee retains ownership. If a license sticker is so damaged from accident or normal use and wear that it is no longer legible, or if a registration card is lost, it is the duty of the registered owner to obtain a replacement from the police department for a fee to be fixed by the police department, sufficient to cover the cost of replacement. 
(Prior code § 4-8)  
10.08.090 - Reports by persons in business of buying secondhand bicycles. 
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to report each such purchase to the police department, giving the name and address of the person from whom the bicycle is purchased, the description of the bicycle purchased, the frame number of the bicycle and the number of the license found on the bicycle, if any. The report must be made within forty-eight hours after the purchase is made. 
(Prior code § 4-9)  
10.08.100 - Reports by persons in business of selling new or secondhand bicycles. 
All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are required to report each such sale to the police department, giving the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle is sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and the frame number thereof and the number of the license attached thereto, if any. Such report must be made within forty-eight hours after the sale is made. 
(Prior code § 4-10)  
10.08.110 - Report by person selling or transferring ownership of bicycle. 
It is the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report the sale or transfer by returning to the police department the registration card issued to the person as licensee of the bicycle, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred. The report shall be made within five days of the date of the sale or transfer. 
(Prior code § 4-11)  
10.08.120 - Tampering with identification marks. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It also is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker or registration card during the time in which such license sticker or registration card during the time in which such license sticker or registration card is operative. 
C.  Nothing in this section prohibits the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Prior code § 4-12)  
10.08.130 - Impoundment of bicycles by police. 
The police department, or any of the members thereof, may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and retain possession of the bicycle until the license required by this chapter is obtained by the owner of the bicycle. 
(Prior code § 4-13)  
10.08.140 - Distribution of unclaimed bicycles and toys. 
In accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217, the city council may from time to time authorize the distribution of bicycles or toys in the possession of the police department to tax exempt charitable or nonprofit organizations for use in authorized programs or activities designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. Any request from the police department to dispose of toys or bicycles pursuant to this section shall be made in writing to the city council and shall identify each item to be distributed and the proposed organization to whom such items shall be released. Upon receipt of such a request, the council may authorize the requested distribution upon making all of the following findings: 
A.  The involved toys and/or bicycles have been in the possession of the police department for a minimum of sixty days and have remained unclaimed during this period; and 
B.  The proposed receiving organization is a recognized tax exempt charitable or nonprofit entity; and 
C.  The proposed receiving organization's articles of incorporation, specifically authorize the participation in programs or activities designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(Ord. 548 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 10.10 - SKATEBOARDS 
Sections: 
 
10.10.010 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to the use and operation of skateboards on all streets, alleys, sidewalks, and rights-of-way in the city, whether public or private, and all other property owned by the city, and upon private property. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
10.10.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Skateboard" means any vehicle, device or conveyance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be, propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term "skateboard" also includes motorized skateboards. 
B.  "Central business district" means the area within the city bounded by Front Street, West Street, Monterey Street and Park Street, including the entire surface of each such street, as well as the sidewalks abutting on or adjacent to each such street. 
C.  "Highway commercial district" means the area within the city which is designated as highway commercial district on the zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
10.10.030 - Use and operation. 
A.  Use Prohibited in Business District and Highway Commercial District and on Public Property. It is unlawful for any person to ride upon any skateboard upon any sidewalk, roadway or public right-of-way within the central business district, highway commercial district, or any other business district within the city as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 235, or upon any lands, property or facilities owned or controlled by the city, or upon any private property within the central business district or the highway commercial district without the prior written permission of the owner, lessee or other person having control of such property. 
B.  Use Permitted in Residential Areas. The riding of skateboards shall be permitted, within the limits set forth elsewhere in this chapter, upon the public sidewalks, roadways, alleys, bike paths or any other public rights-of-way of the city in residential districts with the exception that the riding of skateboards shall not be permitted: 
1.  Upon any freeway; or 
2.  Upon any public or private sidewalk or ramp, or access way specially designed for use by the handicapped. 
C.  Restriction on Use of Roadways. No person shall use or operate a skateboard on a public or private street or alley in the city if there is a sidewalk adjacent to and parallel with the street. If no such sidewalk is present, skateboards may be operated in the street as far on the right-hand side of the roadway as is practicable, in the same direction as vehicular traffic. 
D.  Violation of Right-of-way. No person shall operate, ride or propel a skateboard on any roadway, sidewalk, alley, bike path or public right-of-way in the city in such a manner as to violate the right-of-way of any vehicle, bicyclist or pedestrian, or so as to endanger the safety of any person or property. 
E.  Use Prohibited During Hours of Darkness. No person shall operate or ride upon or propel a skateboard on any roadway, sidewalk, alley, bike path or other public right-of-way in the city between sunset and sunrise the following day. 
F.  Safety of Skateboard Riders. No person, while riding a skateboard, shall impair his or her hearing, vision or mental faculties, including, but not limited to, doing the following: 
1.  Wearing headphones; 
2.  Wearing of a mask or hood; or 
3.  By the use of drugs or alcohol. 
G.  Trick Riding. No person, while riding or operating a skateboard, shall perform any acrobatic, stunt or trick riding upon any roadway, sidewalk, bike path or public right-of-way, or upon any property or facility owned or controlled by the city. The use of ramps, jumps, chutes or any other portable device used to propel the skateboard off the pavement's surface shall be prohibited on any roadway, sidewalk, bike path, public right-of-way or public property. 
H.  Hitching Rides on Vehicles. No person riding any skateboard shall attach himself or herself or the skateboard to any vehicle, motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorized device of any kind when upon a roadway, bike path, sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
I.  Multiple Riders. No person riding or operating a skateboard shall allow any other person or persons to ride a skateboard simultaneously with that person. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
10.10.040 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Infraction. Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction, punishable as provided in Section 1.04.030 of this code, and as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Impoundment. Any skateboard used in the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officer and held by the city pending a determination by the prosecuting attorney that such skateboard is no longer needed for evidentiary purposes. At such time as the prosecuting attorney determines that such skateboard is no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, the city shall notify the owner or person from whom such skateboard was seized that such skateboard may be reclaimed. If such owner or person is a juvenile, then the notice shall be to the parent or legal guardian of such juvenile. 
(Ord. 505 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
Chapter 10.12 - INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Authority—Findings and declaration of public nuisance. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts of a vehicle as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and determinations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts of a vehicle on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts of a vehicle, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms have the following meanings: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes "street." 
B.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
D.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
E.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
F.  "Disabled/inoperative vehicles" means unable to run under its own power, unlicensed or determined to be unsafe to operate on a street. 
(Ord. 525 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993; Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.025 - Disabled/inoperative vehicles. 
A.  Vehicle storage and repair in R (residential) zoning districts shall be in conformance to the provisions of Soledad Municipal Code Title 17 (Zoning) Section 17.38.340. 
B.  In zoning districts other than the R (residential) districts, all vehicles except in emergency situations shall not be stored or repaired on any lot except when completely enclosed by a solid wood fence. The area shall not be located in any required front or street side yard as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
C.  No repair of vehicles shall be permitted in the required front or side yards as defined in the zoning ordinance except when they are minor in nature or in bona fide emergency situations. Repairs shall be complete within seven calendar days. 
(Ord. 586 § 2 (part), 2001; Ord. 525 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993)  
10.12.027 - Vehicle storage. 
A.  Vehicle storage in R (residential) zoning districts shall be in conformance to the provisions of Soledad Municipal Code Title 17 (Zoning), Section 17.38.340. 
B.  In zoning districts other than the R (residential) districts, no trailer, motor home, boat or other recreational vehicle shall be stored on any public street or in any required front or street side yard as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 586 § 2 (part), 2001: Ord. 525 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993)  
10.12.030 - Chapter exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or parts of a vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from a street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or parts of a vehicle which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
Nothing in this section authorizes the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22660) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.040 - Provisions nonexclusive. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. 
It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the city before or after the ordinance codified in this chapter by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.050 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter the chief and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts of a vehicle, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts of a vehicle) declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.060 - Abatement and removal—Contract or franchise. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons are authorized to enter upon private property public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.070 - Abatement and removal—Cost determination. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts of a vehicle) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.080 - Abatement and removal—Authority. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police may cause the abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.090 - Abatement and removal—Notice of intention. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership; provided, that such notice is not required if the owner of the property and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle, or part of a vehicle. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO 
ABATE AND REMOVE AN 
ABANDONED, WRECKED, 
DISMANTLED, OR 
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR 
PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC 
NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________ , license number ____________ which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.12 of the Soledad Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of a vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
NOTICE MAILED ;daterule; 
(date) 
_____
CHIEF OF POLICE 
CITY OF SOLEDAD 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle — notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle — make, model, license, etc.), your are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.12 of the Soledad Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal)owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the chief of police within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
NOTICE MAILED ;daterule; 
(date) 
_____
CHIEF OF POLICE 
CITY OF SOLEDAD 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.100 - Abatement and removal—Request for hearing. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the chief of police within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the chief of police on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city may abate and remove the vehicle or parts of a vehicle as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.110 - Abatement and removal—Hearing procedure. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the chief of police, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. These facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The chief of police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
The chief of police may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the chief of police may find that a vehicle or parts of a vehicle has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the vehicle or parts removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the chief of police shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the costs from the owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the chief of police but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.120 - Abatement and removal—Appeal. 
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the chief of police by filing a written notice of appeal with the chief of police within five days after his decision. 
The appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.12.090. 
In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.130 - Abatement and removal—Date of action. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts of a vehicle to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.12.110, or fifteen days after such notice of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts of a vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage plates or historical vehicle plates pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.140 - Notice and report to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts of a vehicle removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
10.12.150 - Abatement and removal—Costs assessed against property. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.12.110 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal from the order, the costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. This assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 443 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 10.16 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Right-of-way obstructions. 
No person shall place or leave, or cause to be placed or left, on any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way, any lumber, vehicles, parts of vehicles or equipment, machinery, lift trucks or equipment, cardboard, crates, cases, cans of any sizes, boxes, bales, barrels, paper, sports equipment, furniture, dirt, rubbish, rocks, bricks, concrete, trash, debris, inoperative vehicles, or other article or thing likely to obstruct the free passage or interfere with the use of such street, sidewalk, alley or public way; and no person shall permit any such article or thing to remain on any sidewalk in front of any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him- or herself. This section shall not apply to goods, wares and merchandise in actual course of receipt at or removal from a place of business, when the same is moved with reasonable diligence, and at least one-half of the sidewalk is, at all times, left unobstructed; or the material for use in the construction or repair of a building placed in the street under a permit from the building official; or to poles, posts, trees, trash cans, recycling boxes or other things placed on streets or sidewalks by, or with the permission of, the proper officers of the city. 
It shall be illegal for any person to occupy, live in, reside in, inhabit or dwell in any building, vehicle or structure that is located within any street, sidewalk, alley or public way. 
(Ord. 602 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.16.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes an infraction. Each such infraction is punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars. 
(Ord. 602 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 10.58 - FACILITIES TRIP REDUCTION 
Sections: 
 
10.58.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and explained: 
A.  "Alternative transportation modes" means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single-occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, public transit, bicycling, walking or alternative methods such as telecommuting. 
B.  "Applicable development" means any new development that will meet or exceed the fifty-employee threshold or any existing development that applies to increase its floor areas by twenty-five thousand gross square feet. Applicable developments include complexes exceeding the fifty-employee threshold and residential developments with twenty-five or more units. The following employee generation factors, categorized by type of use, may be used for purposes of determining whether a new or expanding development is subject to this chapter: 
Land Use Category 	Number of Employees 
Commercial (regional,) community or neighborhood) 	1/500 gross square feet 
Office/professional 	1/250 gross square feet 
Industrial 	1/525 gross square feet 
Hotel/motel 	0.8 per room 
Mixed use 	Sum of individual figures for each use 
Restaurant 	1 per 10 seats 
Hospital/other medical 	1 per 4 beds 
 
Note: Locally generated data concerning employment may be substituted for the employee generation factors set forth above upon approval of the city. 
C.  "Average vehicle ridership (AVR)" means the figure derived by dividing the number of employees (including those telecommuting) at a regulated work site who commute to and from work between six a.m. to ten a.m., Monday through Friday, by the number of vehicles driven by these employees between home and the work site over the five-day period. The methodology for calculating AVR is contained in Appendix 2, on file in the city clerk's office. 
D.  "Buspool" means a heavy-duty vehicle occupied by at least sixteen passengers and the routing/scheduling for which is arranged between employer(s) and transit operators. 
E.  "Carpool" means a light-duty motor vehicle occupied by at least two but not more than six employees traveling together. 
F.  "Commercial developer" means a developer of commercial project that falls under the definition of "applicable development" in this section. 
G.  "Complex" means any business park, shopping center or mixed use development in separate or common ownership, which can be identified by two or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  It is known by a common name given to the project by its developer. 
2.  It is governed by a common set of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
3.  It was approved, or is to be approved, as an entity by the city. 
4.  It is covered by a single tentative or final subdivision map or has been represented to the city as a single-site development. 
5.  It is located on a single assessor's parcel. 
At the discretion of the jurisdiction, a complex may also include the central business district and/or strip commercial areas. 
H.  "Congestion management program (CMP)" means the countywide program developed in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65088, et seq. requiring local jurisdictions and congestion management agencies to adopt and implement a trip reduction and travel demand element. The CMP law also requires designation of a CMP principal arterial network, a transit network, a land use impact analysis program, a deficiency plan and level of service monitoring system, and a seven-year capital improvement program. 
I.  "Developer" means the individual or company who is responsible for the planning, design and/or construction of an applicable development project. The developer is the individual who signs all permit applications on behalf of the property owner. 
J.  "Discretionary development/use permit" means any permit issued and/or approved by the planning director, planning commission or city council, including but not limited to a conditional use permit, a site plan permit, or a temporary use of land permit (as defined in Soledad Municipal Code Chapter 17.08), for the purpose of regulating property development use. 
K.  "Facility(ies)" means the total of all buildings, structures and grounds that encompass a development site, at either single or multiple locations, that comprise or are associated with an applicable development project. 
L.  "Mixed use development" means any development projects that combine residential with any one of these land uses: day care, office, commercial, light industrial, retail and business park. 
M.  "Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District (MBUAPCD)" means the regional governmental body responsible for the development and enforcement of regulations for control of air pollution within the counties of Monterey, Santa Cruz and San Benito. 
N.  "Park-and-ride lot" means a parking lot located near residential communities or along highways or other appropriate areas which can be used by commuters as a staging area for carpool formation. 
O.  "Parking cash-out program" means an employer-funded, tax-deductible program where employers provide a cash allowance to an employee equivalent to the parking subsidy the employer would otherwise provide. State law requires cities and counties to grant appropriate parking requirement reductions for developments that implement parking cash-out programs. 
P.  "Residential developer" means an individual, group or designee responsible for the development of single-family or multiple-family housing units in which twenty-five or more housing units will be constructed as a part of a single application. 
Q.  "Special event" means a seasonal, recurring activity or a singular event which attracts both residents and nonresidents to a facility for recreational or other activities. 
R.  "Telecommuting" means a method of conducting work without leaving one's residence and thereby eliminating the commute round trip. 
S.  "Tourist oriented development" means a development that will attract visitors or nonresidents to the jurisdictions within Monterey County. 
T.  "Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the implementation of programs, plans, pricing or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include pricing to effect travel mode change; an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single-occupant vehicle ("SOV") such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of vehicle trips; or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period. A listing of TDM techniques is included as Appendix 1, on file in the city clerk's office. 
U.  "Transportation management association (TMA)" means a group of employers or other uses joining together in a formal association with the intent to reduce trips. 
V.  "Trip reduction" means reducing the number of trips made in single-occupant vehicles. 
W.  "Trip reduction checklist" means the mechanism to be used by developers to outline TDM measures they will implement to reduce trips. 
X.  "Vanpool" means seven or more persons traveling to or from work in one vehicle. 
Y.  "Vehicle trip" means a point-to-point journey or trip in one direction utilizing a motorized vehicle. For example, an employed mother driving a car and dropping off two children at two day care facilities and then going to an instant cash facility on the way to her job, makes a total of four vehicle trips. 
(Ord. 537 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1994)  
10.58.020 - Voluntary employer trip reduction program. 
The transportation agency, local jurisdictions, AMBAG, MST and the private sector will implement a two-year voluntary trip reduction demonstration program focused on areas experiencing traffic congestion, LOS deficiencies and/or parking congestion. The effectiveness of the demonstration program will be evaluated by TAMC and summarized at the end of the two-year program. Program evaluations will also be performed by TAMC as specific programs are implemented so that programs can be finetuned as needed. At the end of the two-year demonstration program, mandatory trip reduction will go into effect at employment sites of over two hundred fifty employees if the 1.35 AVR or sixty percent drive alone rate or 1.6 percent per year trip reduction goals have not been met at the demonstration sites. 
(Ord. 537 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1994)  
10.58.030 - Facilities component. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to outline the requirements for the facilities trip reduction ordinance. It includes residential, tourist and commercial land use considerations for assisting in achieving the overall goals of 1.3 percent per year trip reduction, 1.35 average vehicle ridership, or sixty percent drive alone rate. 
The intent is to ensure that new development, redevelopment and expansion of existing development contain the needed infrastructure and programs to both reduce the need to travel and to encourage alternative transportation usage. "Trip" as used herein refers to all trip purposes. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to expansion of existing development and all proposed residential, commercial or tourist oriented developments. The following responsibilities are imposed upon developers: 
1.  All developers of applicable new residential developments with twenty-five or more units shall submit a trip reduction checklist as part of the application for any discretionary development/use permit. The checklist shall identify proposed design elements and facilities that encourage alternative transportation usage by residents of the development. 
2.  All developers of applicable new tourist oriented developments shall submit a trip reduction checklist as part of the application for any discretionary development/use permit. The checklist shall identify proposed design elements and facilities that encourage alternative transportation usage by visitors to the development. 
3.  All developers of applicable new commercial developments shall submit a trip reduction checklist as part of the application for any discretionary development/use permit. The checklist shall identify proposed design elements and facilities that encourage alternative transportation usage by the customers and employees of the development. 
C.  Responsibility of City. 
1.  The city shall take into consideration the nature and size of the project when reviewing the trip reduction checklist. The city will determine the necessary programs as part of the permit approval process. After review of the trip reduction checklist prepared by the developer, the city may require, but not be limited to, one or more of the following appropriate programs: 
a.  Provide ridesharing and nearby licensed child care facility information to employees/customers/tenants/buyers as part of move-in materials; 
b.  Install bicycle amenities, such as bicycle racks and bicycle lanes (where appropriate); 
c.  Provide for future transit stops as part of the site plan, as described in the MST Development Review Guidebook or subsequent publications; 
d.  Provide resources for site amenities that reduce vehicular tripmaking; 
e.  Park-and-ride facilities; 
f.  On-site child care facilities; 
g.  Facilities to encourage telecommuting; 
h.  Mixed land uses designed to reduce the length and number of vehicle trips; 
i.  Pedestrian and bicycle system improvements; 
j.  Pedestrian oriented design; 
k.  Educational and marketing strategies designed to induce tourists to reduce their vehicular trips; 
l.  Programs and projects to provide alternatives to automobile transportation into Monterey County; 
m.  Provide on-site banking automatic teller machines (ATMs), restaurants, dry cleaners, grocery and other typically needed services to reduce the need to travel. Link these uses with convenient and pedestrian oriented paths; 
n.  Provide preferential parking for employees who rideshare; 
o.  The city may require other measures to be added to or substituted for, as appropriate, any or all of the above. Additional measures which reduce trips are also acceptable. 
(Ord. 537 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1994)  
10.58.040 - Implementation schedule. 
The city shall incorporate measures and amenities into its zoning ordinance, development standards and subdivision ordinance as appropriate within six months of adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 537 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1994)  
10.58.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  Reporting of City. 
1.  As part of the annual conformance process of the congestion management program, the city shall make materials and documentation available to TAMC for review. 
2.  Trip logs and surveys of employees, as required pursuant to any subsequently implemented voluntary trip reduction demonstration program, shall be shared resources housed by the city and used to plan transit services, carpool matching, transportation modeling and emission reductions. 
3.  TAMC will from time to time monitor the effectiveness of various TRO implementation programs and provide reports and information on effectiveness to the city and other interested parties. 
B.  Enforcement and Penalties. Notwithstanding the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter through the procedures set fort in subsection C of this section, the city waives the imposition of penalties against employers failing to achieve target AVR of trip reduction goals established as a result of the two-year voluntary trip reduction demonstration program during the pendency of such program. 
C.  Violations. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction. 
For purposes of ensuring that the provisions of this chapter are fully adhered to, the city shall, following written notice, initiate enforcement action(s) against such party(ies) or designee(s) which may include, but not be limited to, the standard infraction procedures which may include a fine. 
D.  Administrative Appeals. The city council shall serve as the appeals board for any dispute arising out of this chapter. The appeals board shall have the authority to hear appeals, issue orders and dispose of cases. 
A property owner/developer required to revise a submittal pursuant to this chapter may, within thirty days and upon written notice to this city, appeal such action to the appeals board. The hearing shall be held before the appeals board within sixty days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decisions of the appeals board shall be final. 
E.  Severability. If any subsection, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 537 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1994)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Permit required—Cash deposit. 
It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, public way or public place in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the building inspector of the city and depositing with the building inspector upon receipt of such permit a cash deposit to defray the cost of restoring the surface of the street, alley, sidewalk, public way or public place, to its former condition as nearly as practicable; provided, however, that any public utility company need not make such deposit but shall be billed monthly for the cost of any such restoration. 
(Prior code § 20-1)  
12.04.020 - Application for permit—Issuance. 
The application for the permit required by Section 12.04.010 shall be in writing and addressed to and filed with the building inspector. It shall state clearly the nature, extent and location of the excavation proposed to be made and the purpose for which the excavation is to be made. When the applicant has complied with this chapter, the building inspector shall issue the permit applied for and deliver the permit to the applicant or his duly authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 20-2)  
12.04.030 - Time limitation for completion of work. 
The permit shall set forth the time for the completion of the work of refilling the same or the restoring of the surface of the excavation to its former condition. The time for commencement and completion may be extended by the city council only upon good cause shown for the extension. 
(Prior code § 20-3)  
12.04.040 - Penalty for work not completed on time. 
The permittee shall forfeit to the city as liquidated damages the sum of ten dollars per day for each day such work of refilling remains uncompleted beyond the period for completion fixed by the building inspector, or as extended by the city council, and the city attorney shall institute the necessary legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of damages and prosecute the proceedings to completion. 
(Prior code § 20-4)  
12.04.050 - Manner of doing work—Supervision by city engineer. 
All excavations, refilling and resurfacing shall be made under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer of the city and shall be conducted in such manner as to do the least possible damage to contiguous lands and improvements. 
(Prior code § 20-5)  
12.04.060 - Cost of resurfacing. 
All applicants for a street opening permit shall pay to the city as provided in Section 12.04.010 sufficient moneys to defray the cost of resurfacing the excavations. 
(Prior code § 20-6)  
12.04.070 - Report on permits—Deposit of moneys. 
It is the duty of the building inspector to report all street opening permits to the city clerk and the city council monthly and to deposit with the city council all cash deposits made under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 20-7)  
12.04.080 - Refilling and resurfacing. 
All excavations shall be refilled by the applicant under the direction of the city engineer and resurfaced by the city; provided, however, that the applicant may, upon written approval of the city engineer and the city council, resurface excavations. The work shall be done to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 20-8)  
12.04.090 - Barriers and lights—Access to fire hydrants—Movements of traffic. 
It is the duty of the applicant for an excavation permit in receipt of the permit to make the excavation in such manner as to provide free access to all fire hydrants and to provide safe and adequate crossings over the excavation for vehicular traffic and for pedestrians, should such crossings, in the judgment of the city engineer, be necessary. Suitable barriers shall be constructed about the excavation for the prevention of accidents, and adequate lights shall be continuously maintained on the excavation, from the period of sunset to sunrise. 
(Prior code § 20-9)  
Chapter 12.08 - PREMISES IDENTIFICATION 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Chart showing street numbers. 
The interim city manager or his/her designee shall keep current a chart showing the proper street numbers of every lot in the city and the numbers as shown on the chart are established and designated as the official street numbers for the city. The chart shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. 
(Ord. 580 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.08.020 - Numbers to be affixed to buildings. 
Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all buildings so as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers or addresses shall contrast with their background and shall be a minimum four inches in height for residential and six inches for commercial buildings. 
(Ord. 580 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.08.030 - Failure to affix numbers. 
It is the duty of the property owners and the occupants of every structure in the city to have placed thereon approved numbers or addresses. Any person failing to place such approved numbers or addresses to any structure within ten days after receiving notice to do so from the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 580 § 2 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 12.12 - PUBLIC PARKS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 667, § 2, adopted November 4, 2009, in effect repealed the former Chapter 12.12 §§ 12.12.010—12.12.040, and enacted a new Chapter 12.12 as set out herein. The former Chapter 12.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 19-1—19-3. 
 
12.12.005 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of the city council in the adoption of these regulations to afford the residents of the city the fullest possible use of recreation facilities within the city. By the adoption of these regulations, the city council proposes to protect the facilities which the residents of the city have established and assure that all will have an equal opportunity to use these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.010 - Park hours. 
The city council, by ordinance or resolution, may determine the hours during which public parks in the city are open for use by the public. Signs stating the hours during which each park is open shall be posted at all entrances to the park. Such ordinance or resolution may include provisions for the granting of permits for park special events at other than regular hours. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.020 - Use when closed unlawful. 
When signs are in place giving notice of the closing hour and the opening hour of a public park, it is unlawful for any person to remain in the park at any time between the time posted for closing and the time posted for opening of any park, except when attending a special event in progress for which a permit has been obtained as provided in Section 12.12.010. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.030 - Glass beverage containers prohibited. 
No person shall take into or possess in any public park or playground within the city and glass beverage container. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.035 - Consumption of alcohol prohibited. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 23004, in or upon any park or adjacent parking lot or right of way, provided, however, that it shall not be a violation of this section to consume alcoholic beverages: 
A.  At special event gatherings in any park in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to the requirements established by the provisions of this code. 
B.  At a city sponsored performing or cultural event at which the sale or service of alcohol beverages has been authorized. 
For purposes of this section, the act of "consuming" or "consumption" may be determined by the following in addition to any reasonable indicia of consumption: The act or appearance of drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or any controlled substance based upon a totality of circumstances, including but not limited to, any observations by a peace officer or any other person reporting the offense; the offender's appearance of drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or controlled substance; any statements or admission to drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or controlled substance by the offender; any smells or odors emanating from the offender's person; any results of any chemical test which measures the alcohol or intoxicating substance content of the offender; any other objective symptom of intoxication or use of an intoxicating or controlled substance; or the presence of open containers or instruments used to administer or ingest any intoxicating or controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.040 - Gambling on card and tile games prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive, directly or indirectly, anything of value, or to bet or wager anything of value, on any card or tile game in any public park or playground within the city. For purposes of this section, "anything of value" means money, coin, currency, check, chip, allowance, token, credit, merchandise, property or any representation of value. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.050 - Loitering and threatening, abusive or insulting language, disorderly conduct, or lewd and lascivious acts prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or have the purpose of engaging in threatening, abusive or insulting language, disorderly conduct, or lewd and lascivious acts tending to a breach of the public peace and enjoyment of park and recreation areas. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.055 - Public urination. 
It is unlawful for any person to urinate in public, other than when using a toilet, urinal or commode located in a restroom, bathroom or other structure enclosed from public view. This provision shall not apply to the following individuals who may not be able to adequately control the bodily functions that control urination: (1) children five years of age or younger; and (2) persons of any age who violate this section due to a verified medical condition. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
12.12.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes an infraction. Each such infraction is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars. The city manager and his/her subordinates also shall have the authority to eject from park and recreation areas any person acting in violation of these rules and regulations upon notice and warning. Failure of such person to leave the property or facility managed or belonging to the city upon being requested to do so by a duly authorized employee of the city for violation of any of these regulations shall be a further violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 667, § 2, 11-4-09)  
Chapter 12.14 - SKATEBOARD PARK 
Sections: 
 
12.14.010 - Skateboarding and roller-skating prohibited in certain areas. 
Skateboarding, roller-skating, in-line skating and similar activities are prohibited in city parks and recreational facilities unless specifically authorized in areas designated by this chapter. The skateboard park located at Little League Park, the boundaries of which shall be defined by a fence and the signs required by this chapter, is hereby designated and authorized for skateboarding and in-line skating. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.14.020 - Prohibitions and regulations at skateboard park. 
Within the skateboard park it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Ride, operate or use a skateboard or in-line skates unless that person is wearing a properly fitted helmet designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use fastened with a chin strap that meets the standards established for bicycle helmets as defined in the California Vehicle Code, specifically Section 21212; elbow pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use with plastic elbow caps; wrist pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use; and knee pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use with plastic knee caps. 
B.  Ride, operate or use a skateboard or in-line skates unless such equipment is in good repair at all times during use. 
C.  Enter or use any amenity within the skateboard park while another person is using it, unless said amenity was designed for multiple use. 
D.  Place or use additional obstacles or other materials, including but not limited to ramps or jumps, within the skateboard park that have not been authorized or erected by the city. 
E.  Use the skateboard park amenities when the surface of the amenities is wet or other conditions exist that could adversely affect the safety of skateboarders or skaters. 
F.  Enter the skateboard park unless actively skateboarding or in-line skating in accordance with these regulations. 
G.  Use, consume or have within his or her custody or control alcoholic beverages, tobacco or illegal or controlled drugs within the skateboard park. 
H.  Enter or be within the skateboard park while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal or controlled drugs. 
I.  Use or possess glass containers, bottles or other breakable glass products within the skateboard park. 
J.  Use or engage in profanity, reckless or boisterous behavior, including but not limited to tandem rising, pushing, "horseplay," and "bullying," or any other activity that could endanger the safety of persons using the skateboard park or spectators. 
K.  Engage in graffiti, "tagging," or other defacing of any city property or the property of others. 
L.  Bring any pet, including dogs and cats, secured or otherwise, into the skateboard park. 
M.  Enter or be upon the skateboard park at any time except during its normal hours of operation. The city council, by resolution, shall determine the hours during which the skateboard park is open for use by the public. Signs stating the hours during which the skateboard park is open shall be posted at the park entrance. 
N.  Ride, operate or use any device other than a skateboard or in-line skates. Prohibited devices include but are not limited to "BMX" bicycles and other types of bicycles or motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.14.030 - Posting of signs. 
The skateboard park shall be posted with signs at the following locations: 
At each entrance to the skateboard park: 
On the fences of the skateboard park, facing the interior of the park, and at intervals of not less than twenty-five feet. The signs shall be not less than two feet by three feet in size and shall use black letters on a white background. The signs may, but shall not be required to, summarize the regulations governing the use of the skateboard park. Each sign shall contain, in letters not less than one inch in height, the following language: 
WARNING 
Skateboarding and in-line skating are hazardous recreational activities. Use of this facility may result in serious injury or death. The city of Soledad does not assume any responsibility for injuries or death. Each person entering the skate facility assumes all risk of injury or death. (California Health and Safety Code Sections 115800 and 115800.1.) 
It is unlawful for any person to ride, operate, or use a skateboard or in-line skates unless that person is wearing a helmet designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use fastened with a chin strap that meets the standards established for bicycle helmets as defined in the California Vehicle Code, specifically Section 21212; elbow pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use with plastic elbow caps; wrist pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use; and knee pads designed for skateboard and/or in-line skating use with plastic knee caps. Such equipment must be in good repair at all times during its use. Any person failing to comply with these regulations who is subsequently injured while using this facility shall be considered negligent. Persons failing to comply with these regulations, and all related regulations contained in the Soledad Municipal Code, shall be subject to arrest and/or citation and penalties pursuant to Soledad Municipal Code Chapter 1.04 and Section 12.14.050. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.14.040 - Skateboarding and roller-skating outside the skateboard park. 
As allowed by the California Vehicle Code, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from adopting additional rules and regulations prohibiting or restricting persons from skateboarding, in-line skating, or roller skating on highways, sidewalks, or roadways. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from adopting additional rules and regulations, including but not limited to Chapter 10.10 of the Soledad Municipal Code, prohibiting or restricting persons from skateboarding, in-line skating, or roller skating within the skateboard park or on other city property. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 2002)  
12.14.050 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or an infraction as provided in Chapter 1.04 of the Soledad Municipal Code. 
B.  Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall subject the possessor of the prohibited items to confiscation of those items. 
C.  The parent or legal guardian having control or custody of an unemancipated minor whose conduct violates this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any fines imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Use of the skateboard park is a privilege. In addition to the criminal and civil penalties set forth in this chapter, the city has the right and authority to revoke, either temporarily or permanently, the privilege to use the skateboard park by any person who does not obey the posted rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 593 § 2 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 12.16 - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Findings—Authority. 
The city council finds and declares that smoke from pipes, cigars and cigarettes is a hazard to the health of the general public and therefore enacts this chapter pursuant to Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state, granting the power to a city to make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
(Prior code § 19-4)  
12.16.020 - "Smoke" and "smoking" defined. 
As used in this chapter, " smoke" or "smoking" means the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
(Prior code § 19-5)  
12.16.030 - Posting of signs. 
Every room, building or place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall be posted conspicuously with not less than one "no smoking" sign with letters not less than four inches high. 
(Prior code § 19-6)  
12.16.040 - Prohibition in certain public places. 
No person shall smoke or engage in smoking in any of the following places in the city: 
A.  Within any room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly under the control of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress conducted by: 
1.  The city council, or any city board, committee or commission, or committee thereof, or 
2.  By any city-county or city-district board, committee or commission, or committee thereof; 
B.  Within waiting rooms or public hallways of a private or public health care facility, including but not limited to medical offices and clinics, hospitals and other similar facilities used by the public; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to a separate waiting room in a facility where smoking is permitted as long as there also exists a waiting room in the same facility in which smoking is prohibited; 
C.  Within halls, reading and viewing rooms of libraries and buildings used for public displays or exhibitions, when open to the public. 
(Prior code § 19-7)  
12.16.050 - Right to prohibit in other public places. 
No person shall smoke or engage in smoking within any elevator, corridor or other public area of a public or private building not otherwise covered by the provisions of Section 12.16.040, while open for public use, if the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of the public area has posted therein at least one "no smoking" sign as provided in Section 12.16.030. "Public area," as used in this section, includes each public area of the building as a whole, as well as each public area of any separately occupied portion of the building, such as an office or other quarters occupied by a tenant. 
(Prior code § 19-8)  
12.16.060 - Violations—Designated. 
It is unlawful for any person to smoke or engage in smoking in any place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. It also is unlawful: 
A.  For any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any place described in Section 12.16.040 to knowningly permit a violation of that section by failure to properly post signs as required by Section 12.16.030; 
B.  For any person to wilfully remove, deface or destroy any sign posted within the city pursuant to Section 12.16.030. 
(Prior code § 19-9)  
12.16.070 - Violations—Penalty. 
Violation of any provisions of this chapter constitutes an infraction. Each such infraction is punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars. 
(Prior code § 19-10)  
Chapter 12.20 - TREES 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Owner" includes the legal owner of real property fronting on any street of the city and any lessee of the owner. 
B.  "Public streets" or "streets" includes all roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, parkways and the public rights of way, or any portion thereof, of the city. 
(Prior code § 24-1)  
12.20.020 - Purpose of chapter. 
It is for the best interest of the city and of the citizens and public thereof that a comprehensive plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in or which may overhang public streets within the city should be developed and established and this chapter is adopted, therefore, for the purpose of developing and providing for such a plan and program, and for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations relating to the planting, care and maintenance of such trees. 
(Prior code § 24-2)  
12.20.030 - Enforcement of chapter. 
The park superintendent, or his duly authorized representative, is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 24-3)  
12.20.040 - Master tree list. 
A.  The park superintendent is charged with the duty of promptly determining the types and species of trees suitable and desirable for planting and the areas in which and conditions under which such trees are planted in or which may overhang the public streets within the city. Such determination shall be made by the park superintendent who shall first consult with the park and beautification commission of the city. When such determination has been made the park superintendent shall report his findings in writing to the city council. When approved by the city council the report shall be known as the master tree list, shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, and shall thereafter be the official determination of the superintendent. Revisions or changes in the master tree list may be made from time to time by the park superintendent, in the manner described in this section for the development, approval and filing of the original master tree list. 
B.  All trees planted in or which may overhang the public streets of the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must be on the master tree list, unless a written permit from the park superintendent has first been obtained to plant a tree not on the list. Such permit may be granted by the superintendent only upon his obtaining approval therefor from the city council. 
(Prior code § 24-4)  
12.20.050 - Park superintendent to control and supervise. 
The park superintendent has jurisdiction and control of the planting, setting out, location and placement of all trees in the public streets of the city and likewise has supervision, direction and control of the care, trimming, removal, relocation and replacement of the trees. 
(Prior code § 24-5)  
12.20.060 - Prohibited trees. 
Some types of trees, upon maturing, instead of becoming assets to the community, become liabilities due to structural weaknesses, disease or insect susceptibility, short life, destructive root systems and rank growing branches requiring excessive maintenance. Due to one or more of these characteristics, it is unlawful to plant the following trees in or where they may overhang any public street: 
All species of: 
A.  Acacias; 
B.  Black walnuts; 
C.  Eucalyptus; 
D.  Elm; 
E.  Palm; 
F.  Tree of heaven; 
G.  Conifers; 
H.  Locusts; 
I.  Pepper; 
J.  Willow; 
K.  Cottonwood; 
L.  Poplar. 
(Prior code § 24-6)  
12.20.070 - Permit to trim, remove or maintain. 
It is unlawful and it is prohibited for any person other than the park superintendent or his duly authorized agency or deputy to cut, trim, prune, spray, brace, plant, move, remove or replace any tree in any public street within the city, or to cause those acts to be done, unless and until a written permit so to do has first been obtained from the park superintendent. Any such permit may be declared void by the superintendent if its terms are violated. 
(Prior code § 24-7)  
12.20.080 - Annual permit for public utilities. 
Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission of the state and any constituted public agency authorized to provide and providing utility service, shall be given a permit from the superintendent, valid for one year from the date of issuance, permitting such person to trim, brace, remove or perform such other acts with respect to trees growing adjacent to the public streets of the city or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon the public streets as may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of the public utilities commission and as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business. 
(Prior code § 24-8)  
12.20.090 - Annual permit for tree surgeons, trimmers and maintenance. 
No person other than an owner or public utility may do any act for which a permit is required under Section 12.20.070 except a person whose principal business is tree surgery, trimming or maintenance and who, in the opinion of the park superintendent, is qualified for such business, and who has obtained a permit to carry on the business in the city from the park superintendent. Permits issued pursuant to this section may be granted for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code § 24-9)  
12.20.100 - Tampering with trees. 
It is unlawful for any person to break, injure, deface, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree in any public street in the city, nor shall any person place, apply, attach or keep attached to any such tree or to the guard and stake intended for the protection thereof any wire or rope, other than one used to support a young or broken tree, sign, paint or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever, without having first obtained a written permit from the park superintendent to do so. 
(Prior code § 24-10)  
12.20.110 - Overhanging trees becoming nuisances. 
A.  The park superintendent may inspect any tree adjacent to or overhanging any public street in the city to determine whether the tree or any portion of the tree is in such a condition as to constitute a hazard or impediment to the progress of vision of any person traveling on such public street. Any tree or part of a tree growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street that in the opinion of the park superintendent endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public is a public nuisance. If the owner of the private property does not correct or remove the nuisance within ten days after receipt of written notice thereof from the park superintendent, the superintendent shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost shall be assessed to the owner. 
B.  Nothing contained in this section imposes any liability upon the city, its officers or employees nor relieves the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree upon his property or under his control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 24-11)  
12.20.120 - Appeals from park superintendent. 
Any person aggrieved by any act or determination of the park superintendent in the exercise of the authority granted in this chapter has the right of appeal to the city council of the city, whose decision, after public hearing of the matter, is final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 24-12)  
Chapter 12.24 - PUBLIC TELEPHONES 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Placement on sidewalks declared to be in public interest. 
It is declared to be in the public interest that public telephones be placed on the public sidewalks of the city. Such telephones will aid fire protection, the prevention and detection of crime and the reporting of accidents and other emergencies. Such telephones will also be a convenience to the public. Such telephones will not unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public to use the sidewalks and will be consistent with their dedication to the public. 
(Prior code § 19A-1)  
12.24.020 - Permit issuance and approval. 
The city manager or his authorized representative is authorized to issue permits from time to time to the serving telephone company for the installation and maintenance of public telephones on the public sidewalks of the city. The number and location of such public telephones and the design of the telephone booths shall be subject to the approval of the city manager so as to best serve the public interest. 
(Prior code § 19A-2)  
12.24.030 - Terms and conditions of permit. 
Permits issued pursuant to Section 12.24.020 shall include the following provisions: 
A.  The permittee shall maintain the public telephones and any associated booths in good repair and safe and sightly condition at the permittee's expense and to the satisfaction of the city manager. All necessary electrical and telephone connections, cables, wires and associated appurtenances shall be installed underground in appropriate conduits and in accordance with applicable codes. 
B.  The permittee shall save the city harmless from any and all losses, claims or judgments for damages to any person or property arising from the installation or maintenance of the public telephones. 
C.  The permit shall be revocable on thirty days' prior written notice to the permittee from the city manager, in which event the permittee shall of its own expense remove the public telephone or telephones installed pursuant to the permit and shall restore the sidewalk as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such installation. 
D.  The permit shall require that the city receive an amount equal to at least fifteen percent of the receipts in lawful currency of the United States (exclusive of federal communications excise taxes) from the coin receptacles of the public telephones installed under authority of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19A-3)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Division I. - Garbage  
Chapter 13.04 - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "At the curb" means located adjacent to the premises to be served, positioned as near to the curb or shoulder of the roadway as possible so as not to obstruct the traveled way of vehicles or obstruct pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk, and not in a gutter, street or highway. 
B.  "Bundled" means tied securely in a bundle not exceeding four feet in length, three feet in width or diameter, and weighing not more than fifty pounds. 
C.  "Can" or "receptacle" means a watertight metal or plastic garbage can or container with a tight-fitting lid, or a sealed bag made of heavy plastic, which has a capacity of thirty-two gallons or less and which, when full, weighs no more than seventy-five pounds; provided, that receptacles for commercial or industrial establishments may be of such specifications as meet with the approval of the city official assigned to supervise the work of garbage collection and disposal, or of the contractor if the work is being done under contract with the city. 
D.  "Garbage" means all putrescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable matter, including all refuse accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
E.  "Garden refuse" means trimmings from lawns, shrubs, trees, and flower and vegetable gardens. 
F.  "Premises" means any dwelling, place of residence, roominghouse, hotel, motel, apartment, court, trailer camp, labor camp, club, restaurant, tavern, bar, boardinghouse, eating place, shop and place of business, or any other housing accommodation, building, grounds or location, where garbage or rubbish is or may be produced or accumulated, including all sidewalk, curb, gutter and street and alley areas adjacent thereto. 
G.  "Rubbish" means all articles, objects and materials not defined as garbage but which are rejected by the owners or producers thereof as useless. Without limiting the generality of the preceding sentence, the definition includes crockery, bottles, appliances, paper or plastic bags, aluminum or tin cans, metal or plastic vessels or containers, wooden boxes or containers, paper or plastic packaging materials, paper or plastic packing or insulating materials, rags, paper, plastic, straw, sawdust, ashes, metals and boards. 
(Prior code § 26-1)  
13.04.020 - Keeping of garbage and rubbish. 
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, keep or bury any garbage or rubbish on, in or under any premises in the city except in cans or receptacles as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage in any city sewer or plumbing fixture or pipe connected thereto, except through a mechanical device which shreds and grinds garbage. 
(Prior code § 26-2)  
13.04.030 - Receptacles required. 
It is the duty of every occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any premises, and every other person having garbage or rubbish in the city, to provide or cause to be provided, and at all times to keep or cause to be kept in sanitary condition, suitable and sufficient cans or receptacles (as those terms are defined in this chapter) adequate to contain, without leakage or odors, the amount of garbage and rubbish ordinarily accumulated at such place during the interval of collection made under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26-3)  
13.04.040 - Garden refuse. 
Garden refuse and similar waste materials (other than grass clippings, leaves and twigs) shall be securely tied in bundles not more than four feet in length, or three feet in width, weighing not more than fifty pounds. Grass clippings, leaves and twigs shall be stored in securely tied plastic bags or in cardboard boxes or similar receptacles secured tightly with tape or twine. 
(Prior code § 26-4)  
13.04.050 - Receptacles to be placed at curb—Removal after pick-up. 
Garbage and rubbish cans and receptacles, and garden refuse bags and containers, shall be placed at the curb in front of the premises where their contents were produced or accumulated. In no event shall any such items be placed in any gutter, street or highway. 
Garbage and rubbish cans and receptacles and approved commercial dumpsters and carts shall be placed at the curb in the manner, and at the time, required by the contractor. Such placement shall not be made prior to twenty-four hours before pick-up time, and shall be removed from the curb within twenty-four hours after pick-up to an appropriate location away from any public street. 
(Ord. 587 § 2, 2001: Prior code § 26-5)  
13.04.060 - Marking of receptacles at multiple dwellings. 
All persons occupying multiple dwellings must plainly mark their cans or receptacles, other than bags, so that their ownership will be known. 
(Prior code § 26-6)  
13.04.070 - Unlawful accumulations. 
It is unlawful for the occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any premises to allow the accumulation of any garbage or rubbish in, on or under any premises at any time which is, or may become, a menace to health and sanitation or a fire hazard. It is unlawful for the occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any premises ever to suffer, permit or allow any garbage or rubbish to remain in, on, or under such premises for a period in excess of seven days. 
(Prior code § 26-7)  
13.04.080 - Burning. 
A.  Garbage. No garbage shall be burned in the open air within the city. 
B.  Rubbish and Garden Refuse. No rubbish or garden refuse shall be burned in, on or under any business, commercial or industrial establishment or premises, nor upon any street, gutter, alley or highway within the city. No rubbish or garden refuse shall be burned anywhere within the city which causes or creates dense or offensive smoke or odor, or which is a menace to health or a fire hazard. 
(Prior code § 26-8)  
13.04.090 - Unauthorized collection and removal. 
Except as specifically otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to collect or remove, or cause or permit to be collected or removed, any garbage, rubbish or garden refuse within the city, or to transport or cause the same to be transported on or along any public street or alley or other public place in the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to any person in the employ of the city who is specifically assigned to such work, nor to any person with whom the city has contracted for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and garden refuse, nor to the employees of any such contractor; provided further, that the provisions of this section do not preclude the removal and disposal of rubbish or garden refuse from premises by the occupant or person in possession, charge or control thereof. 
(Prior code § 26-9)  
13.04.091 - Unauthorized collection of recyclables and other items for collection. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the city or its authorized franchisee, to remove or take any items left for collection, including but not limited to recyclable materials, placed in containers for collection. 
B.  Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a new and separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, city shall retain the discretion to prosecute violations of this chapter as infractions. 
(Ord. 626 § 2, 2006)  
13.04.100 - Weekly collection at all occupied premises. 
All occupied premises within the city shall have garbage and rubbish service as provided by this chapter. Garbage and rubbish shall be removed from all such premises not less often than once every seven days. 
(Prior code § 26-10)  
13.04.110 - Sanitation inspections. 
The city manager or a person designated by him to represent the city shall have the right to visit all premises within the city from time to time and examine the sanitary condition of the premises to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Upon notification by the city manager or by the designated city representative, all persons, including the contractor, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26-11)  
13.04.120 - Interference with contractor or city. 
It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection, removal or disposal of garbage or rubbish by the city, or by a contractor working under contract with the city. 
(Prior code § 26-12)  
13.04.130 - Time for collection—Regulations. 
The city council may, by resolution, make such regulations as it deems necessary concerning garbage, rubbish and garden refuse, including their collection and charges for that collection, not inconsistent with this chapter, but in no case shall collection services less often than once every seven days be permitted. The time for collections shall be between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m. in the residential district and before ten a.m. in the business district. 
(Prior code § 26-13)  
13.04.140 - Transportation of garbage and rubbish. 
A.  Garbage. If garbage service is provided by a contractor, the contractor shall remove garbage or carry it through the streets of the city only in vehicles having a metallic or metal-lined bed, with proper covers, to protect against the garbage being offensive. The garbage must be protected from the wind and rain and be loaded in such a manner that none of it drops or spills upon the ground. Such conveyance shall be so constructed as to be absolutely dustproof and so arranged as not to permit dust or other matter to sift through or fall upon streets, alleys, or adjacent property. Such vehicles must comply with all health and sanitary laws of the city and of the state. 
B.  Rubbish. It is unlawful for any rubbish or garden refuse to be removed and carried on or along the streets and alleys of the city unless it is carried, conveyed or hauled in a conveyance so constructed as to prevent dust or other matter from sifting through or falling upon the streets, alleys and adjacent lands. The contents of such conveyance must be further protected so as to prevent the same from being blown upon the streets, alleys and adjacent lands. 
(Prior code § 26-14)  
13.04.150 - Contract for collection and disposal. 
The city may contract for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and garden refuse for a period of not to exceed ten years, subject to the provisions of this chapter. A notice calling for sealed proposals therefor shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city at least ten days prior to the date fixed for opening bids. A contract shall be awarded to the responsible bidder who bids therefor the lowest rate to the people of the city and the highest consideration to the city. The city council may reject any and all bids and to readvertise for bids or negotiate a contract for such work. Such contract shall: 
A.  Contain a schedule of monthly rates in accordance with the rates stated in the bid; 
B.  Provide that the contractor shall collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish and garden refuse in the city in the manner prescribed by this chapter; that, except as otherwise specifically provided in Section 13.04.100, the contractor has the sole and exclusive right to collect garbage, rubbish and garden refuse in the city and to transport the same through the public ways and streets of the city; 
C.  Provide that the contractor is required to dispose of all such garbage, rubbish and refuse so collected at such disposal sites outside the city as the contractor may arrange for; 
D.  Require that the contractor procure, for the term of the contract, worker's compensation insurance in accordance with the provisions of the Labor Code of the state; 
E.  Require the contractor to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and servants, from liability for loss or damage to the person or property of any person from any cause, arising out of the contractor's operations under the contract; require the contractor to obtain public liability and property damage insurance protecting the contractor and the city, its officers, employees and servants, against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury, including death resulting therefrom, or on account of damage to any property, resulting directly or indirectly from the contractor's operations under the contract, with limits not less than one million dollars for bodily injury nor less than fifty thousand dollars for property damage; and require that the contractor furnish to the city a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage, which shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not be cancelled or amended by the insurer without at least thirty days' prior written notice to the city. 
(Prior code § 26-15)  
13.04.160 - Dumping. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit any garbage, rubbish, garden refuse, dead animals, offensive animal or vegetable matter, or waste materials of any kind upon the surface of the ground on any premises, or in any building, or in any public street or alley or public place, within the city. It is unlawful for any person having control thereof to permit any of the materials mentioned in this section to remain in places wherein placing or depositing of the same is prohibited by this section. Violation of the provisions of this section is declared to be an infraction. 
(Prior code § 26-16)  
Chapter 13.05 - DECONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL RECOVERY AND DIVERSION FROM LANDFILLS 
Sections: 
 
13.05.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the city of Soledad, hereinafter referred to as jurisdiction, finds and determines that the city is committed to protecting the public health, safety, welfare and environment; that in order to meet these goals it is necessary that the city promote the reduction of solid waste and reduce the stream of solid waste going to landfills; that under California law as embodied in the California Waste Management Act (California Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq.), this jurisdiction is required to prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling elements to reach reduction goals, and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to landfills, under the threat of penalties of ten thousand dollars per day; that debris from demolition and construction of buildings represents a large portion of the volume presently coming from this jurisdiction, and that much of said debris is particularly suitable for reuse; that this jurisdiction's commitment to the reduction of waste in compliance with state law requires the establishment of programs for recycling and salvaging construction and demolition materials; the city council recognizes that requiring demolition and construction debris to be diverted from landfills and reused may in some respects add modestly to the cost of demolition and in other respects may make possible some cost recovery and cost reduction; and that it is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare that the following material recovery plan be implemented. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Bonafide processor" means a recycling, composting, materials recovery or re-use facility for which a permit has been issued by a chosen member of the Monterey County Regional Integrated Waste Management Task Force. 
A facility may be certified if the owner or operator of the facility submits documentation satisfactorily illustrating: 
1.  That the facility has obtained all applicable federal, state, and local permits and licenses, and is in full compliance with all applicable regulations; 
2.  The percentage of incoming waste from construction, demolition and alteration activities that is diverted from landfill disposal meets the required minimum percentage as set forth; and 
3.  All loads are weighed by scale(s) certified as accurate by the county of Monterey, Division of Weights and Measures. 
"Construction" means all building, landscaping, remodeling, and addition, involving the use or disposal of designated recovered and reusable materials as defined below. 
"Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the state of California, or who performs (whether as applicant, contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in Monterey County. 
"Demolition and construction debris" means: 
1.  Discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the deconstruction, demolition and construction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project, or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project; 
2.  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project; 
3.  Nonconstruction and demolition debris wood scraps; 
4.  Nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry; 
5.  Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will be classified as other than material recovery for construction and demolition debris and charged as waste. 
"Demolition/deconstruction" means removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of designated recovered and reusable materials as defined below. 
"Designated recovered and reusable materials" means: 
1.  Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and brick; 
2.  Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated or painted; 
3.  Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use; 
4.  Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames, slate and fences; 
5.  Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material; 
6.  Salvageable materials includes, but is not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs, architectural remnants, and appliances. 
"Franchised hauler" means the business or entity that has an approved franchise agreement with a city or county for any of the following collection services: refuse, solid waste, recyclables, green waste, construction and demolition materials or yard waste. 
"Inert solids" means concrete, fully cured asphalt, asphalt roofing shingles, brick, ceramics, clay and clay products. 
"Jurisdiction" means the permitting city or county which receives and approves a building or demolition permit application (in cases of Federal property, before building or demolition is to commence) in accordance with the codes and ordinances applicable to that jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.030 - Diversion requirements. 
One hundred percent of inert solids, and at least fifty percent of the remaining demolition and construction debris shall be diverted. 
For each covered project, the diversion requirements of this chapter shall be met by submitting and following a waste reduction and recycling plan that includes the following: 
1.  Deconstructing and salvaging all or part of the structure as practicable; 
2.  Directing one hundred percent of inert solids to bonafide facilities for reuse or recycling; and 
3.  Either: 
a.  Taking all mixed demolition and construction debris to a bonafide processor approved by the jurisdiction, or 
b.  Source separating non-inert materials, such as cardboard and paper, wood, metals, green waste, new gypsum wallboard, tile, porcelain fixtures, and other easily recycled materials, and directing them to recycling facilities approved by the jurisdiction and taking the remainder (but no more than fifty percent by weight) to a facility for disposal. In this option, calculations must be provided to show that fifty percent of demolition and construction debris (in addition to one hundred percent of inert solids) has been diverted. 
Determination of acceptability and designation as demolition and construction debris is solely the responsibility of the bonafide processor, landfill or transfer station representative. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.040 - Information required before issuance of permit. 
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit (in cases of federal property, before building or demolition is to commence) for a construction or a demolition permit that involves the production of solid waste, the applicant shall be informed that a letter of intent must be submitted to the jurisdiction. 
The letter of intent is a description of the proposed plan of diversion of solid waste materials from the landfill. 
The jurisdiction shall provide to each permit applicant a current list of bonafide processors. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.050 - On-site practices. 
During the term of the demolition or construction project, the permittee shall recycle or divert the said percentages of materials, and keep records thereof in tonnage. The jurisdiction will evaluate and monitor each project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed from the project based on information provided by the permittee. 
Permittees are encouraged to make every structure planned for demolition available for deconstruction, salvage, and recovery; and to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recovered and reusable materials prior to demolition. 
Recovered and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall be counted towards the diversion requirements of this chapter. 
The use of debris boxes and/or the collection and removal of demolition and construction material by a hauler or business other than the franchised hauler must be consistent and allowed by the jurisdiction's franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.060 - Reporting. 
The permittee shall submit documentation to the jurisdiction which proves compliance with the requirements of this chapter before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the final inspection. The documentation shall consist of a complete and final waste reduction and recycling plan showing actual data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted or salvaged, supported by legible receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.070 - Diversion exemptions. 
Neither a waste reduction and recycling plan nor an administrative charge shall be required for the following: 
A.  Work for which a building permit is not required. 
B.  Residential construction of less than twenty thousand dollars in value. 
C.  Commercial construction of less than forty thousand dollars in value. 
D.  Residential demolition or deconstruction of less than five thousand dollars in value. 
E.  Commercial demolition or deconstruction of less than ten thousand dollars in value. 
F.  Roofing projects only. (See Section 13.05.090 below) 
G.  Work for which only a plumbing, electrical or mechanical permit is required. 
H.  Seismic tie-down projects. 
I.  The installation or replacement of shelves. 
J.  Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers where no foundation or other structural building modifications are required. 
K.  Installation of swimming pools and spas excavation that does not exceed sixteen square feet, and any related construction or alterations necessary for pool or spa equipment or accessories, not to any other portion of the project. 
L.  Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or antennas where no structural building modifications are required. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.080 - Voluntary compliance for roofing permits. 
Applicants for roofing permits are requested to voluntarily complete the waste reduction and recycling plan and return it to the permitting jurisdiction when the project is complete. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.090 - Administrative charge. 
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit (in cases of federal property, before building or demolition is to commence) for a building, roofing, or demolition that involves the production of solid waste, the applicant shall pay a sufficient charge to compensate the jurisdiction for expenses incurred in ensuring compliance with these provisions. The charged amount shall be determined in accordance with the then current resolution of the city council determining the same. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
13.05.100 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be in full force and effect commencing thirty days after its final passage and a summary hereof shall be published once within fifteen days in the Soledad Bee, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the county of Monterey and circulated in the city of Soledad. 
(Ord. 639 § 2 (part), 2006)  
Division II. - Water  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Consumer" means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public corporation, political subdivision, city, county, district, the state, the United States of America, or any department or agent thereof, billed for water furnished by the municipal water system. 
B.  "Municipal water system" means the enterprise described as a waterworks system for the production, transmission and distribution of water, including lands, easements, water rights, reservoirs, water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, water supply, storage and distribution facilities and equipment, and other works, including any existing facilities used or useful in obtaining, conserving, treating and disposing of water for the city. 
C.  "Premises" means any lot, piece or parcel of land, any building or other structure, or any part of any building or structure, having a connection with the municipal water system. 
D.  "Superintendent" means the superintendent of public works of the city. 
E.  "Water" means water furnished by the municipal water system. 
F.  "Water service" means the service, facilities and water furnished or made available to premises by the municipal water system. 
G.  "Water superintendent" means the superintendent of public works of the city. 
(Prior code § 26-51)  
13.08.020 - Connection permits—Connections and service generally. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall connect any premises or cause any premises to be connected with the municipal water system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the water superintendent. 
B.  Statement Upon Applying for Permit. The water superintendent may require any person who applies for any connection permit or any consumer to file a statement or declaration under penalty of perjury for the purpose of determining the amount of connection fees and charges payable by such person or consumer under Chapter 13.40. Each such statement or declaration shall contain the information required by the water superintendent. Failure by any person or consumer to file the statement or declaration is a violation of this chapter. No such statement or declaration shall be conclusive as to the matters therein set forth, nor shall the filing of any statement or declaration preclude the city from collecting from the person or consumer responsible for payment such sum as is actually due and payable to the city under Chapter 13.40. 
C.  Notice of Change in Use of Water. Any person or consumer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the utilizing equipment or operation for which water is furnished shall immediately give the water superintendent written notice of the extent and nature of such change. 
D.  Contract for Large Amounts of Water. The city may require a written contract with any person or consumer as a condition precedent to providing service in any case where unusual quantities of water or the construction of special facilities is or will be required. 
E.  Method of Connecting. Upon payment of the connection charge specified in Chapter 13.40, the city will furnish and install a service connection of suitable capacity from its water main to the curbline of the property line of the premises to be served, provided the premises abut upon a public street or existing water main right-of-way. As to any nonabutting premises, the person requesting connection must pay the cost of furnishing and installing that portion of the service connection from the curbline of the nearest street or from the nearest existing water main right-of-way. Only duly authorized employees or agents of the city shall install a service connection from any water main to any consumer's premises. 
F.  Water Main Extensions. 
1.  By City. Any owner of one or more lots or parcels, or any subdivider of a tract of land where one or more main extensions is required, who desires regular water service to serve such property, shall make written application therefor to the city. The application shall contain a full legal description of the property to be served and any additional information which is required by the city, and shall be accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed connection. Upon receiving the application, the water superintendent shall make an investigation and survey of the proposed main extension or extensions and shall report his findings to the city council, together with a recommendation as to the facilities required and an estimate of the cost of the proposed extension or extensions. The applicant shall advance to the city a sum equal to one hundred twenty-five percent of the estimated cost, including main lines, valves, service connections, fire hydrants, costs of investigation, inspection, and legal and consulting engineer's fees, which sum must be paid to the city prior to approval of the application. Adjustments of any difference between the estimated and actual cost of the main extension or extensions shall be made as soon as the actual cost has been determined. Any excess shall be refunded to the applicant and any shortage shall be forthwith paid by the applicant to the city. All such facilities shall be the property of the city and shall be conveyed to the city by a proper instrument in writing at or before the time the facilities are completed and before they are accepted by the city. In granting an application, the city council may impose whatever further requirements or conditions it deems necessary or desirable. 
2.  By Owner. In lieu of construction of any main extension or extensions by the city, as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection, the city council may authorize construction of the main extension or extensions by the owner of the premises to be served, or his duly authorized agents, provided the property owner has made the required application. The applicant shall deposit with the city an amount equal to the estimated cost for preparation of detailed plans, specifications, legal costs, engineering costs, and other expenses incurred or anticipated to be incurred by the city in connection with the extension or extensions. If the amount deposited is insufficient to pay all costs actually incurred by the city, the property owner shall pay the deficiency to the city upon demand and prior to acceptance of the extension or extensions by the city; if the amount deposited exceeds the actual costs so incurred by the city, the excess shall be refunded to the applicant. 
G.  Installation of Meters. All meters shall be installed by the city. No rent or other charge shall be paid by the city for any meter or other facilities located on a consumer's premises. All meters shall be sealed by or under the supervision of the water superintendent at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by an authorized employee or agent of the city. 
H.  Connection with Other Water Supplies. No water pipe on any consumer's premises shall cross-connect the municipal water system with any other source of water supply. 
I.  Equipment to Remain Property of City. All service connections, meters and other facilities furnished by the city and located wholly or partially upon any premises shall be and remain the property of the city, which may repair, replace and remove the facilities upon discontinuance of service. 
J.  Limit of City's Responsibility. The city is not responsible for the installation or maintenance of any water pipelines beyond the end of the city's service connection or beyond its meter. 
K.  City's Right of Entry. The water superintendent or any other authorized agent of the city has the right of ingress to and egress from any consumer's premises at all reasonable times for any purpose properly relating to the furnishing of water to the consumer. 
L.  Nonresponsibility of City for Damage by Consumer. The city is not responsible for any loss or damage to any person or to any property caused by the negligence or wilful act of any consumer or any person installing, maintaining, operating or using any appliances, facilities or equipment for which water or water service is furnished by the city. Each consumer shall be held responsible for damage to the city's meters and other property comprising any part of the municipal water system resulting from the use or operation of any appliances or facilities on the consumer's premises. 
(Prior code § 26-52)  
13.08.030 - Water shortages and service interruptions. 
A.  The city shall exercise reasonable diligence to provide continuous and adequate water service to consumers and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of water; provided, that the city may suspend water service temporarily to make necessary repairs and improvements to the municipal water system. In each case of temporary suspension of service the city shall notify the consumers affected as soon as circumstances permit and shall prosecute the work of repair and improvement with due diligence and with the least possible inconvenience to consumers. 
B.  During any period of threatened or actual water shortage, the city may apportion its available water among consumers in such manner as appears most equitable under the circumstances then prevailing and with due regard to public health and safety. 
(Prior code § 26-53)  
Chapter 13.09 - MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.09.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to increase public awareness of the need for water conservation, and to provide regulations and restrictions on the delivery of water and the consumption within the city limits of water supplied for public use as will (1) conserve the water supply for the greatest public benefit with particular regard to domestic use, sanitation and fire protection, and (2) ensure compliance with water regulations of other governmental agencies of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Agency. "Agency" means the Monterey County Water Resources Agency. 
B.  "Automatic shutoff nozzle" means a water release mechanism securely affixed to the end of a water hose that requires the person using the hose to apply and maintain the flow of water, and that shuts off immediately when pressure is released. 
C.  "Change of ownership" means a transfer of the right to beneficial use thereof, regardless of whether such transfer is voluntary, involuntary, or by operation of law, court order, grant, gift, devise, inheritance, trust, contract of sale, addition or deletion of an owner, property settlement or by any other means. 
D.  "Change of use" means a change from one use of a structure to another use that is identified as a different use under the zoning ordinance, Title 17, of the Municipal Code of the city of Soledad. 
E.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Soledad. 
F.  "New construction" means a completely new structure, a new addition to a previously existing structure or the portion of a previously existing structure that is newly remodeled or renovated. 
G.  "Overdraft" means the condition of a groundwater basin where the amount of water withdrawn by pumping exceeds the amount of water replenishing the basin over an extended period of time, or where the amount of water withdrawn by pumping results in an unacceptable degradation of groundwater quality within the basin. 
H.  "Person" means any individual person and any firm, partnership, corporation, business entity, association, district, agency, city, county and any other entity or organization. 
I.  "Public works director" means the superintendent of public works of the city of Soledad. 
J.  A "shutoff nozzle" means a water release mechanism ("nozzle") securely affixed to the end of a water hose which enables the user of the hose to control the flow of water in the hose, including stopping the flow of water completely and securely, by a lever or mechanical device in the nozzle. 
K.  "Superintendent of utilities" means the superintendent of utilities of the city of Soledad. 
L.  "Water recirculating system" means a system approved by the city that recirculates water between hot water and cold water lines, so that substantially all the cold water standing in the pipes will be returned to the water heater and reheated before the faucet is turned on. The system may be turned on and off by a manually operated switch, by a timer-operated switch, or otherwise, or may be left on permanently. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.030 - Enforcement. 
The city manager and all officers and employees of the city, including all ex officio officers and employees, shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter by the issuance of citations, including warning citations, and taking all other necessary action, including bringing civil action to abate a nuisance as set forth herein, through the city attorney's office. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.040 - Mandatory restrictions on water waste. 
A.  Repair of Plumbing, Sprinkler and Irrigation Systems. Any person who is the owner, manager or person responsible for the day-to-day operation of any premises shall take caution to initiate steps to repair any leaking, broken or defective water pipes, faucets, plumbing fixtures, other water service appliances, sprinklers, water or irrigation systems, or distribution systems within a reasonable time after such person learns of such leaks, breaks or defects, and shall thereafter diligently and promptly pursue such repair work to completion. In any event, such action initiating steps for repair shall take place within seventy-two hours after such person first learns of the problem, unless a variance is obtained from the city of Soledad. 
B.  Washing of Vehicles. No person shall use a water hose to wash any car, truck, boat, trailer, bus, recreational vehicle, camper, aircraft, tractor or any other vehicle, or any portion thereof, with potable water, unless the hose is equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. 
C.  Cleaning of Structures. No person shall use potable water through a hose to clean the exterior of any building or structure unless such hose is equipped with a shutoff nozzle. 
D.  Cleaning of Surfaces. No person shall use potable water through a hose to clean any sidewalk, driveway, roadway, parking lot, or any other outdoor paved or hard-surfaced area, except where necessary to protect public health and safety. The use of a bucket is not prohibited at any time for cleaning food, grease, oil, or other stains or spillage from surfaces. 
E.  Water Spillage. No person shall cause, suffer or permit water to spill into streets, curbs or gutters. No person shall use any water in any manner which results in runoff beyond the immediate area of use, unless the contour of the premises is such that avoidance of some minimum spillage is impossible. 
F.  Swimming Pools and Spas. No person shall empty and refill a swimming pool or spa except to prevent or repair structural damage or to comply with public health regulations. 
G.  Fountains. No person shall use water to operate or maintain levels in decorative fountains, unless such water is recycled in the fountain. 
H.  Visitor-Serving Facilities. The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, restaurant, convention and other visitor-serving facility shall ensure that such facility displays, in places visible to all customers, placards or decals approved by the agency, promoting public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that waste of water is prohibited. 
I.  Public and Quasi-Public Entities. All public and quasi-public entities shall display, in visible locations in all rostrums, kitchens and dining areas, placards or decals approved by the agency, promoting public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that waste of water is prohibited. "Quasi-public entities" include educational institutions, churches, recreational facilities open to the public, and other such entities designated by the superintendent of utilities. Placement of placards or decals by a quasi-public entity of a type not specifically mentioned in this chapter shall not be required unless the superintendent of utilities gives written notice to the entity that this chapter is applicable to the entity so notified and that placement of placards or decals is required. 
J.  Commercial Car Washes. No person in charge of the operation of any commercial car wash facility shall suffer or permit the washing of any boat, trailer, recreational vehicle or other vehicle in such facility or on its premises, other than by the following methods: 
1.  Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities utilizing water recycling equipment; 
2.  Use of a hose that operates on a timer for limited time periods and shuts off automatically at the expiration of the time period; 
3.  Use of a hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle; 
4.  Use of bucket and hand washing. 
K.  Construction. 
1.  No potable water may be used for compaction or dust control purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably available source of reclaimed or other subpotable water approved by Monterey County health department and appropriate for such use. 
2.  All hoses used in connection with any construction activity shall be equipped with a shutoff nozzle. When an automatic shutoff nozzle can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size or type of hose in use, the nozzle shall be an automatic shutoff nozzle. 
L.  Use of Hydrants. No person, other than a member of the fire department of the city of Soledad, the fire department of any other jurisdiction giving assistance to the Soledad fire department in emergencies, the city of Soledad department of public works, or the city of Soledad water and sewer utilities department may use water from a fire hydrant, without first obtaining a permit from the planning department of the city of Soledad. 
M.  Leakage and Repair Program. The public works director shall maintain in effect a distribution system leakage detection and repair program. This program shall be reviewed on an annual basis and a report analyzing the results of the program shall be prepared by the director and submitted to the city council. 
N.  New Construction. 
1.  In all new construction, all toilets shall be ultra low-flow toilets with a maximum tank size or flush capacity of one and one-half gallons. 
2.  All shower heads shall have a maximum flow capacity of two and one-half gallons per minute. 
3.  All hot water faucets that have more than ten feet of pipe between the faucet and the hot water heater serving such faucet shall be equipped with a water recirculating system. 
4.  All new construction requiring a discretionary permit from the city of Soledad shall apply xeriscape principles throughout the exterior landscape development, associated with such new construction, including such techniques and materials as native or low water use plants and low precipitation sprinkler heads, bubblers, drip irrigation systems and timing devices. 
O.  Retrofitting Existing Hotels and Motels. All existing hotels and motels shall, within six months following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be retrofitted with shower heads with a maximum flow capacity of two and one-half gallons per minute. 
P.  Retrofitting Upon Change of Ownership or Use. 
1.  All existing residential structures shall, at the time of change of ownership, be retrofitted, if not already so modified, with ultra low-flow toilets with a maximum tank size or flush capacity of one and one- half gallons, and shower heads with a maximum flow capacity of two and one-half gallons per minute. 
2.  All existing commercial and industrial structures shall, at the time of change of ownership or change of use, be retrofitted, if not already so modified, with ultra low-flow toilets with a maximum tank size or flush capacity of two and one-half gallons per minute. 
Q.  Indiscriminate Use. No person shall cause, suffer or permit the indiscriminate running of water not otherwise prohibited by the provisions set forth above which is wasteful and without reasonable purpose. 
R.  Use in Excess of Eighty-Five Percent of 1991 Use. No person shall consume water in excess of eighty-five percent of 1991 use. Water fees charged by the city shall be reviewed November, 1994, and in November every other year thereafter to determine if rates need to be changed to: 
1.  Address excessive use by any person(s); and 
2.  Provide sufficient revenue for the city to meet obligations and provide water services consistent with its policies. 
S.  Use of Water to Irrigate. No person shall use water to irrigate lawns, landscape or other turf areas which is not in accordance with local city and county ordinances. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.050 - Warnings. 
In order to encourage cooperative efforts to achieve water conservation, it shall be the policy of the city of Soledad to issue a written warning notice when an alleged violation is first noted. Such warning shall include an explanation of the alleged violation. Any individual provided with such notice will then be given an opportunity to correct the identified problem. However, if an infraction citation is issued and a prosecution commenced for the alleged violation, in no case shall proof of a violation depend upon the showing that a warning was previously given, nor shall failure to give a warning be a defense. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.060 - Penalties. 
A.  Each violation of this chapter is an infraction. 
B.  Any violation that occurs or continues from one day to the next shall be deemed a separate violation, for each day during which such violation occurs or continues to occur. 
C.  The fine for a first violation of this chapter shall be fifty dollars. The fine for a second violation and each subsequent violation of this chapter within a period of twelve months, regardless of the specific section or subsection violated, shall be one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.070 - Nuisance. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.04 of the Soledad Municipal Code, the city may, upon order of the city council, abate an identified public nuisance and/or bring civil action to enjoin or abate the nuisance and make the costs of nuisance abatement a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is located or originates. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section limits the city to the prescribed remedy, or prevents the city from initiating and prosecuting any other remedy available to it for the abatement of a public nuisance, or for recovery of the cost of abatement, under the civil or criminal statutes of the state or under other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.080 - Variances. 
A.  Any person may, at any time, apply in writing for a variance from strict application of this chapter. The application for the variance shall be filed with the city of Soledad. 
The planning director may, in his discretion, temporarily dispense with the requirement to file a written application, if he finds that an emergency condition exists requiring immediate action on the variance request. 
B.  The city manager may grant a temporary variance of up to one year to come into compliance with the terms of this chapter upon making both of the following findings: 
1.  The strict application of the chapter would create an undue hardship, or an emergency condition exists which requires that the variance be granted; and 
2.  Granting the variance will not cause a significant adverse effect on the water supply or on service to other water consumers. 
C.  In granting a variance, the city manager may impose any conditions in order to ensure that the variance is consistent with the overall goal of water conservation. The granting of a variance and any conditions imposed upon such variance shall be set forth in writing. 
D.  Any decision of the city manager with respect to an application for a variance may be appealed in writing to the city council. The city council shall schedule the matter for hearing within thirty days of receipt. The city council may confirm, modify or rescind any decision of the city manager in this regard. The city council's decision on all variance appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.090 - Revenues received from enforcement. 
A.  All revenues received by the city from enforcement of this chapter shall be used exclusively for city water conservation programs, including but not limited to administrative, monitoring and enforcement costs of mandatory water conservation. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
13.09.100 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any other part thereof be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 534 § 2 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 13.11 - RECYCLED WATER SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
13.11.010 - Statement of policy and declaration of purpose. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures, specifications, and limitations for the safe use and operation of recycled water facilities and systems within the city's service area, and adopt rules and regulations controlling such use. 
B.  Policy. It is the policy of the city that the use of recycled water shall be encouraged for any and all purposes approved by state regulations for recycled water use. Recycled water will be the primary source of supply for commercial and industrial uses, whenever the city determines that such use is available and/or feasible. Use of potable water for commercial and industrial uses shall be contrary to the city's policy, shall not be considered the most beneficial use of a natural resource, and shall be avoided to the maximum extent feasible. 
1.  The people of the state of California have a primary interest in the development of facilities to recycle water containing waste to supplement existing surface and underground water supplies and to assist in meeting the future water requirements of the State (Water Code Section 13510 et seq.). Conservation of all available water resources requires the maximum reuse of recycled water for beneficial use (Water Code Section 461). The state of California has declared that continued use of potable water for irrigation and for certain other uses may be an unreasonable use of such water where recycled water is available (Government Code Section 65602(e); Water Code Section 13550 et seq.; California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 60301 et seq.). 
2.  It is the policy of the city that recycled water shall be used within the jurisdiction of the city whenever and wherever: (a) there is not an alternative higher or better use for the recycled water; and (b) its use is consistent with legal requirements, preservation of public health, the safety and welfare of the public, and protection of the environment. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.020 - Statutory authority. 
Recycled water use is regulated by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region (RWQCB). In accordance with waste discharge requirements for water reclamation projects, the RWQCB requires control mechanisms to regulate facilities distributing recycled water. Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Division 7 of the California Water Code establishes a state policy to encourage the use of recycled water. Permission to use recycled water is based on the city's ability to adequately treat domestic wastewater to the point that the recycled water (effluent) meets the requirements of existing Title 22, Chapter 3 regulations of the California Code of Regulations. These regulations were adopted to ensure proper health protection and specify the treatment degree to meet the needs of the intended applications. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.030 - Priorities and goals. 
A.  Priority. Connection to the recycled water system shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, as long as infrastructure and recycled water supplies are available. 
B.  Goals. The goals of this chapter are as follows: 
1.  Achieve conservation of potable water supplies by using recycled water for current and future demands. Recycled water uses may include: 
a.  Agricultural irrigation, 
b.  Commercial uses (including flushing toilets and urinals), 
c.  Construction use, 
d.  Industrial processes, 
e.  Landscape irrigation, 
f.  Landscape and/or recreational impoundments (ponds, reservoirs, tanks and/or similar structures that confine water), 
g.  Wildlife habitat, 
h.  Groundwater recharge; 
2.  Maintain recycled water quality through a stringent pretreatment program for industrial wastewater; 
3.  Prevent direct human consumption of recycled water through: 
a.  Adherence to all applicable rules and regulations, 
b.  Posting of warning signs by the user, 
c.  Cross-connection/backflow prevention program; 
4.  Control runoff of recycled water through monitoring of the installation and operation of all recycled water facilities and use areas; 
5.  Monitor recycled water quality. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.040 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, in addition to the definitions set forth in Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3, Regulations of the California Code of Regulations, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
"Administrator" means the city manager of the city of Soledad or his or her authorized representative. 
"Agricultural use" means water used for the production of crops and/or livestock. Agricultural uses include, but are not limited to, the growing of field and nursery crops, row crops, trees and vines and the feeding of fowl and livestock. 
"Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically from the flood rim of the receiving vessel to the supply pipe; however, in no case shall this separation be less than one inch. 
"Applicant" means any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or agency that applies for recycled water service. 
"Application rate" means the rate at which irrigation water is applied to a design or use area, expressed in gallons per minute. 
"Approved use" means an application of recycled water in a manner, and for a purpose, designated in a recycled water use agreement in compliance with applicable state and local rules and regulations and the provisions of this chapter. 
"Approved use area" means a site with well-defined boundaries designated in a recycled water use agreement in compliance with applicable rules and regulations. 
"As-built drawings" means the record drawings that show the completed facilities as constructed or modified. 
"Automatic system" means the electronically actuated controllers, valves, and associated equipment used to program and operate irrigation systems for the efficient application of recycled water. 
"Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's potable water. 
"AWWA" means the American Water Works Association. 
"City" means the city of Soledad. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Soledad. 
"Commercial/industrial use" means the water used for non-body contact uses such as toilets, urinals, decorative fountains, decorative indoor and outdoor landscape, industrial process such as rinsing, washing, cooling, flushing, circulation, or construction; and other uses approved by the city. 
"Cross-connection" means any unapproved and/or unprotected, actual or potential, connection between any part of a potable water system and any equipment, source, or system containing water or other substances not approved as safe and potable for human consumption. 
"DHS" means the California Department of Health Services. 
"Direct beneficial use" means the use of recycled water which has been transported from the point of production to the point of use, without an intervening discharge to waters of the state. 
"Discharge" means any release or distribution of recycled water to a use area or disposal site/mechanism. Such discharges are subject to approval by the city. 
"Double check valve assembly" means a double check valve (DC) that, as a minimum, conforms to the AWWA Standard C506-78 (R83) adopted on January 28, 1978, for double check valve type backflow prevention devices which is herein incorporated by reference. 
"Greenbelt areas" means those areas including, but not limited to, golf courses, cemeteries, parkways, parks, rights-of-way, and landscaping within and/or surrounding a community. 
"HCF" means a unit of measure equaling one hundred cubic feet or seven hundred forty-eight gallons. 
"Industrial process water" means the water used in industrial facilities for blending, rinsing, washing or cooling. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate at which water penetrates the soil surface and enters the soil profile. 
"Landscape impoundment" means a body of water containing recycled water, which is used for aesthetic or irrigation purposes and which is not intended for public contact or ingestion. 
"Landscape irrigation/use" means recycled water used for the propagation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, ground cover and turf used for erosion control and aesthetic value, not for resale/profit purposes. 
"Nonpotable water" means water that has not been treated for, or is not acceptable for human consumption, in conformance with federal, state and local water standards. Nonpotable water includes recycled water. 
"Off-site facilities" means all existing or proposed facilities under the control of the city, from the source of supply to the point of connection with the customer's on-site facilities, up to and including the city's recycled water meter and meter box. Such facilities shall include, without limitation, recycled water transmission mains, recycled water pipelines, reservoirs, pumping stations, treatment plants and other appurtenances and property. 
"On-site facilities" means all existing or proposed facilities within property under the control of the customer, normally downstream of the city's recycled water meter and meter box. 
"On-site recycled water supervisor" means a qualified person designated by a recycled water user and approved by the city to be responsible for the safe and efficient operation of the user's recycled water system. This person shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the recycled water system and in the application of federal, state and local guidelines, criteria, standards, and rules and regulations governing the use of recycled water. 
"Open space" means land that has been designated to remain undeveloped. These areas may receive recycled water service for agricultural or landscape irrigation, or other approved uses. 
"POC" means the point of connection at the recycled water service meter. 
"Ponding" means the retention of recycled water on the ground surface or human-made surface for a period of time following the cessation of an approved recycled water use activity, such that potential hazard to the public health may result, as determined by regulatory agencies. 
"Potable water" means water which conforms to the latest federal, state and local drinking water standards. 
"PSI" means pounds per square inch. This is a common unit expression of pressure measurement. 
"Recreational impoundment" means a body of recycled water used for recreational activities including, but not limited to, fishing, boating, and/or swimming. Allowable uses will depend on treatment level of the recycled water. 
"Recycled water" means water, which as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that otherwise would not occur. The treatment of wastewater is accomplished in accordance with the criteria set forth in Title 22, Division 4, of the California Code of Regulations. 
"Recycled water commodity rate" means a charge imposed by the city for all metered, recycled water used. 
"Recycled water facilities" means the systems, structures, etc, used in the treatment, storage, pumping, transmission and distribution of recycled water. 
"Recycled water use agreement" means an agreement between the user and the city to use recycled water in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations. 
"Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP) that as a minimum, conform to the AWWA Standard C506-78 (R83) adopted on January 28, 1978 for reduced pressure principle type backflow prevention devices which is herein incorporated by reference. 
"Regulatory agency" means any public entity legally constituted by federal, state and local statutes to protect health and water quality. 
"Runoff" means the flow of water along natural or human-made surfaces away from the designated use area. 
"RWQCB" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region. 
"Secondary effluent" means any oxidized wastewater that has been treated by gravity sedimentation to remove settled solids remaining after the primary biological treatment process. 
"Service" means the delivery of recycled water to a user. 
"Service connection" means facilities between the city recycled water distribution system and the customer's meter, including, but not limited to, the meter, meter box, valves, and piping equipment. 
"Standard specifications" means the specifications approved by the city for construction of recycled water facilities. 
"Tertiary effluent" means any secondary effluent which has been filtered and disinfected, and meets all applicable requirements under Title 22. Allowable uses for tertiary effluent shall include body contact and irrigation of human food crops. 
"Unauthorized discharge" means any release of recycled water that violates any applicable federal, state, or local statutes, regulations, ordinances, contracts or other requirements. 
"Use area" means the specific area designated to be served with recycled water through on-site recycled water facilities. 
"User" means any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association or agency accepting recycled water from the city's recycled water facilities for use in accordance with this chapter. "Applicant," "owner," or "customer" are terms that are to be considered as users. 
"Windblown spray" means any dispersed, airborne particles of recycled water capable of being transmitted through the air to a location other than that for which the direct application of recycled water is approved. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.050 - Administrator. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may, at his or her discretion, delegate any or all of these powers and duties. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.060 - Service area. 
A.  The rules and regulations contained in this chapter apply to recycled water service to lands and/or improvements lying within the legal boundaries of the city, and to properties contiguous to the city under the same ownership as abutting lands within the city or its designated service boundary. Recycled water service shall be provided to a specific service area when related distribution facilities are completed and service becomes available. Recycled water may also be provided to other agencies outside the city's service area in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  Determination of Recycled Use Area. 
1.  General. 
a.  The city council may adopt and periodically review the city's recycled water master plan and recommend where water service should be made with recycled water in place of potable water. The master plan shall be in accordance with the requirements of DHS and RWQCB. Where it is determined recycled water is, or will be available within five years, the city is authorized to request modifications to existing on-site water facilities and require construction of recycled water systems in new developments. 
b.  The city council may enter into agreements with surrounding cities and/or other agencies to provide recycled water to those areas. 
2.  Existing Potable Water Service. 
a.  The city council may make determinations of areas where existing potable water use should be replaced with recycled water use. 
b.  A notice of the determination to use recycled water shall be mailed to the current owner, explaining the reasons for use and resultant procedures needed to facilitate recycled water use as well as the proposed conditions and schedule for the proposed conversion. Partial or full conversion of existing customers to recycled water use may be mandated only as allowed or required by law. 
c.  If a current customer would like to enter into a recycled water use agreement to receive recycled water, he or she or it must submit an application for a recycled water permit to the city for review, along with any required application fee. The city shall then review the application for completeness and contact the customer regarding the potential provision of service and the recycled water use agreement. The application and agreement shall conform to requirements of the applicable rules and regulations. If the customer does not agree to the terms for the provision of recycled water service under a recycled water use agreement, or if the city determines that recycled water is not available for the proposed use, the city may, in its sole and absolute discretion, refuse to provide such service. 
3.  New Recycled Water Service. 
a.  On submittal by applicant of a tentative map, land use permit, other proposed land development/land use, or request for recycled water service, the administrator shall make preliminary determinations if recycled water service can be provided to the area in question. Based upon such determinations, use of recycled water and construction of recycled water distribution systems or other facilities within a new development for the use of recycled water, and the application for a service, may be required as conditions of approval of any development application, in addition to any other conditions of the new industrial, commercial or residential development. 
b.  Upon submittal by applicant of a proposed alteration or remodeling of multifamily, commercial or industrial structures which substantially increase a facility's area, volume or size, or upon request for recycled water service, the administrator shall make preliminary determinations if recycled water service can be provided to the area in question. Based upon such determinations, use of recycled water and construction of recycled water distribution systems or other facilities, and the application for such use, may be required as conditions of approval of any application, in addition to other conditions of approval for the alteration or remodel. 
c.  The administrator may require the use of recycled water for approved uses, and refuse or otherwise restrict potable water service when recycled water is available and approved for use. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.070 - Authorized uses and conditions of service. 
A.  Authorized Uses. Uses of recycled water include only those uses approved by the California State Department of Health Services (DHS) and for which Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations provides treatment requirements. Each such use will be considered for approval on case-by-case basis. Prior to approval, the user must comply with the requirements established by this chapter and any other requirements imposed by the city, DHS, or any other regulatory agencies that have jurisdiction over such use. 
B.  Conditions of Service. Prior to obtaining recycled water service, the user must enter into a recycled water use agreement with the city. Recycled water use shall be subject to terms and conditions established in the agreement, and in accordance with this chapter and other applicable codes, rules and regulations. If any of the conditions of service are not satisfied at all times, the recycled water use agreement may be revoked by the administrator after which all recycled water service shall cease. 
1.  The city shall not be liable for any damage by recycled water or resulting from: 
a.  Defective plumbing; 
b.  Broken or faulty services or recycled water mains; 
c.  On-site facilities failures; 
d.  High or low pressure conditions; 
e.  Interruptions of service; 
f.  Any inappropriate or illegal use or management practices. 
2.  All recycled water will be provided to the user in the conditions and quantity specified in the recycled water use agreement. 
3.  Recycled water use will not be subject to the same restrictions as potable water during drought conditions and will be supplied as available. 
4.  Recycled water service may be terminated whenever the quality of the recycled water does not comply with the requirements of the regulatory agencies, or at any time the provisions of this chapter, or the conditions specified in the recycled water use agreement are violated. 
C.  Other Applicable Rules and Codes. Other guidelines, rules and regulations, ordinances, specifications that may be applied by the administrator to govern the use of recycled water within the city include: 
1.  Regulations that deal with backflow prevention, billing, deposits, penalties, delinquencies, and metering for potable water as established in Chapters 8.20 and 13.08 of this code; 
2.  Water reclamation (Title 22, Division 4 of the California Code of Regulations); 
3.  Regulations relating to cross-connections (Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations); 
4.  Guidelines for distribution of nonpotable water (California-Nevada Section (AWWA)); 
5.  City of Soledad recycled water systems procedural guidelines and general design standards; 
6.  City of Soledad recycled water systems installation in nonresidential buildings; 
7.  City of Soledad recycled water systems interior use in nonresidential buildings; 
8.  City of Soledad recycled water systems full yard irrigation for residential lots; 
9.  City of Soledad recycled water systems application and permit procedure summary; 
10.  City of Soledad water recycled water systems summary of guidelines for recycled water use. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.080 - Recycled water service application. 
A.  Application for Service Connection. An application for a service connection must be made on a form furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the city with the anticipated recycled water demand (maximum gallons per minute) and shall specify the size of the water meter that is desired; however the city ultimately reserves the right to determine the size of the service connection and meter. The applicant shall also specify the property to be served. The information supplied by the applicant shall be considered as authoritative and final. If any error in such application shall cause installation of a service connection that is improper, either in size or location, the cost of all changes required shall be borne by the applicant. The steps for obtaining recycled water service are as follows: 
1.  The user completes and submits a recycled water service application, including existing facility "as-built" drawings or proposed facility plans as appropriate, description of where and how recycled water use is proposed, and any other information pertinent to the use of recycled water as requested by the administrator; 
2.  An engineering report prepared by a properly qualified engineer registered in California and experienced in the field of wastewater treatment describing proposed/requested recycled water use(s) must be submitted to DHS for approval. The city may prepare the report on behalf of the user, provided that the user pays all costs associated with the preparation of the report. The report shall contain: 
a.  A description of the design of the proposed reclamation system, 
b.  A means for compliance with these regulations and any other features specified by the regulatory agency, 
c.  A contingency plan which will assure that no untreated or inadequately treated wastewater will be delivered to the use area; 
3.  The user and the city will address any concerns that the DHS may have regarding the engineering report and revise the report accordingly; 
4.  Once the DHS approves the engineering report, the applicant will enter into a recycled water use agreement with the city, and pay any applicable fees; 
5.  The administrator will schedule a start-up test of on-site recycled water system to ensure that cross-connections do not exist; 
6.  Upon the successful completion of the test, the administrator may authorize recycled water service to begin. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.090 - Recycled water use agreement. 
A.  Recycled Water Use Agreement. Every applicant agreeing to receive recycled water shall sign a recycled water use agreement and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant shall pay any specified connection fees, service line charges and other charges, and adhere to the requirements prescribed by this chapter and to any additional requirements required by other agencies governing recycled water use; 
2.  In order to maintain acceptable operating conditions throughout the recycled water system, the administrator may schedule recycled water use for specific applications. Such scheduling may involve programming deliveries to different users and/or to various portions of a single user's on-site system. Any scheduling shall consider the operating constraints of the affected users; 
3.  The administrator may temporarily terminate recycled water service at any time recycled water produced by the city's reclamation plant does not meet the requirements of the regulatory agencies. Recycled water service would, in such case, be restored when the recycled water meets the governing requirements; 
4.  At a minimum, the recycled water use agreement shall include the following: 
a.  Names and addresses of owner the property and user of the recycled water, 
b.  A statement that no changes in the proposed system will be undertaken without amending the agreement, 
c.  A statement that the applicant recognizes potential penalties for violation of this chapter and any regulatory agencies, 
d.  A copy of the DHS approved engineering report, 
e.  Specific quantity of recycled water to be used, including estimated average annual use in acre-feet and the maximum gallons per minutes (GPM) needed at the point of connection (POC) as shown on the plans, 
f.  Approved uses, 
g.  A statement that the agreement shall be cancelled or amended if: 
i.  A change of recycled water use occurs, 
ii.  A change in the piping system has been implemented without prior approval, 
iii.  A violation of these rules and regulations occurs and results in a system turn-off. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.100 - Rates, fees, charges and deposits. 
A.  Rates and Charges. All rates and charges regarding recycled water service and their administrative costs shall be established, and periodically modified as necessary, by the city council by resolution, and by this reference, shall be considered a part of this chapter. 
B.  Fees. Applicants for recycled water service shall pay their fair share for the construction of facilities needed to deliver recycled water to the applicant's property. All fees and estimated construction costs shall be paid prior to construction. Under certain circumstances, such as where facilities are being designed to serve more than a single applicant's property, the city may contribute to the cost of designing and/or constructing the facilities needed to deliver recycled water to an applicant's property. The city shall reimburse an applicant for costs incurred to install oversized facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.110 - Recycled water service. 
A.  Size, Location, and Installation of Service Line. Recycled water service lines shall be extended by the property owner/developer to a curb line or property line of the customer's property, abutting on the city's public street, highway, road or city's easement in which recycled water mains are installed. The size and location and/or type of recycled water service lines, service connections, meters, backflow protection devices, and any/all other appurtenances are subject to review and approval by the city. 
B.  Service Connection Limitations. Recycled water service shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A recycled water service connection and its corresponding meter shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply property of the same owner across a road, street or other public right-of-way. When a property provided with a recycled water connection and a corresponding meter is subdivided, such connection and meter shall be considered as serving the lot or parcel of land on which the meter is located. Additional recycled water mains and/or recycled water service lines will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with this chapter; 
2.  Private irrigation systems for homeowner's associations and other developments where landscaping around homes and in common areas are served with one meter, shall not be allowed to cross public roads, easements, or other public rights-of-way without city approval; 
3.  All recycled water used on any property where a meter is installed must pass through the meter. Customers shall be held responsible and charged for all recycled water passing through their meters. 
C.  Service Pressure. According to AWWA "Guidelines for Distribution of Nonpotable Water (1992)," it is desirable that a pressure differential of ten psi or greater be maintained with the potable water supply having the higher pressure. Site-specific conditions may result in pressure differentials being impractical. In such cases, other design and operational measures may provide the necessary degree of protection including proper pipe identification practices, ensuring adequate horizontal and vertical separation distances between potable and nonpotable systems and maintaining accurate "as-built" maps, implementing comprehensive recycled water program elements into the existing cross-connection control program, and development of employee training/awareness programs. 
D.  Relocation of Recycled Water Service Lines. Should a recycled water service line installed according to the directions of the owner or user be of the wrong size, or installed at a wrong location or depth, the cost of relocation or removal shall be paid for by the user. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.120 - System protection. 
A.  Protective Measures. The following provisions are intended to protect the city's potable water supplies against actual, undiscovered, unauthorized, or potential cross-connections to the user's recycled water system. These provisions are in addition to, not in lieu of, the controls and requirements of other regulatory agencies. These provisions are in accordance with Title 17 (Public Health) of the California Code of Regulations. 
1.  Approved backflow prevention devices on the city's potable water services to the property as required in these provisions, shall be provided, installed, tested, and maintained according to Chapter 8.20. These devices shall be located at the property line served immediately downstream of the meter. All devices shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and no device shall be submerged at any time. 
2.  When a request for recycled water service is initiated, the applicant must provide sufficient information, including plumbing and building plans, to enable the administrator and other regulatory agencies to determine the level of backflow protection required. The proper backflow protection, as determined by the administrator and other regulatory agencies, shall then be installed and tested according to Chapter 8.20 before recycled water service is provided. 
3.  Each time there is a change of tenant on any commercial or industrial premise, the owner or user shall notify the administrator immediately. The administrator will then reassess the level of protection required. In addition, any alterations to existing on-site facilities that may affect required protection level must be reported immediately to the administrator. 
4.  At their discretion, representatives of any health agency having jurisdiction, and the administrator, may inspect any property provided recycled water service by the city. The inspection shall serve to determine if any actual or potential cross-connections exist. The owner or user shall provide full cooperation in facilitating the inspection. 
5.  Where protection is required, an approved backflow protection device for potable water supplies shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Each city water service connection that supplies potable water to a premise having an auxiliary water supply (including recycled water) that is not accepted as a potable source by the administrator, and/or is not approved for potable use by DHS, shall be protected against backflow from the premises into the city's potable water system. 
b.  Each city water service connection supplying potable or recycled water to a premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into the city water systems (potable or recycled) from the premises shall be protected against backflow. This shall include, but not be limited to, the handling of fertilizers, process waters, waters originating from any of the city water systems that have been subject to deterioration in quality and agricultural use. 
c.  Approved backflow devices shall be installed where premises have intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where not all portions of the premises are readily accessible for inspection. 
d.  Appropriate backflow protection may be required at premises where there has been a history of cross-connections being re-established. 
6.  Other Measures. 
a.  Water meters used for recycled water service shall be tagged or color-coded purple, color pantone 512 or 522, or otherwise distinguished as such per AWWA standards. These meters shall not be interchanged or used for potable water service after repairs and/or meter testing has been performed. 
b.  Periodic inspection by the city of the recycled water facilities will determine if all identifying items are still clearly discernable. If not, they shall be replaced, repaired or refurbished as needed, by the user. These items include: 
i.  Warning tags; 
ii.  Painted surfaces; 
iii.  Warning tape; 
iv.  Identification tape; 
v.  Covers, caps, signs; 
vi.  Other items that indicate recycled water is being used. 
c.  To determine the existence of any cross-connections or backflow conditions into the potable water system, periodic testing by DHS approved methods will be performed by the administrator and/or other regulatory agencies. 
d.  In the event of contamination or pollution of a city potable water system due to a cross-connection or other failure, the DHS and the administrator shall be promptly notified by telephone so that appropriate and immediate measures may be taken to correct the problem. 
e.  The state and county health departments and the administrator shall be kept informed by written document of the identity of the person responsible for the user's recycled water system on all premises concerned with these rules and regulations. At each authorized use area, an "on-site" recycled water supervisor shall be designated. This supervisor shall be responsible for: 
i.  The installation and use of all components of the on-site recycled water system(s); 
ii.  Prevention of cross-connections; 
iii.  Change in use of recycled water. 
7.  When the recycled water uses or conditions, as determined by the administrator or other regulatory agency, represent a clear and immediate hazard to the city potable and/or recycled water supply that cannot be immediately removed or corrected, the administrator shall terminate recycled water use. Conditions or uses that create a basis for termination include, but are not limited to, refusal to install, test or repair a required backflow prevention device. 
B.  Types of Protection. The level of protection required shall be related to the degree of potential hazard that exists on the premises served, and will be determined by the administrator. 
C.  Testing and Maintenance of Backflow Prevention Devices. The user is responsible for testing all backflow prevention devices and maintaining these devices in a satisfactory operating condition. Testing shall be performed at least once a year by a Monterey County certified backflow prevention tester. More frequent testing may be required if successive inspections indicate repeated failures. The backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled and/or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. These devices shall also be tested immediately after they are installed, relocated or repaired. All inspections, tests and repairs shall be performed at the user's expense. The user shall maintain records of all such tests, repairs and overhauls. These records shall be submitted to the administrator, annually, and made available to the DHS, on request. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.130 - Facilities design. 
A.  Off-site Facilities. 
1.  Any off-site recycled water distribution facilities required to serve existing or new developments of the property within the city, as determined by the administrator, shall be provided (designed, constructed) by the applicant, owner, or customer at their expense. 
2.  The design of off-site facilities, including the preparation of plans and construction specifications shall be under the responsibility of an engineer registered in the state of California. 
3.  All off-site recycled water facilities shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements, conditions, and standards as adopted in the city standard specifications to ensure that such systems are in full compliance with this chapter. On-site recycled water systems shall be separate and independent of any potable water systems. 
4.  Before the administrator grants final acceptance of any system using recycled water, as-built drawings of the system shall be provided. The installed system shall be tested in accordance with the city standard specifications to ensure that the system is in full compliance with these rules and regulations. 
5.  Plans and specifications for all recycled water distribution facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the administrator, and other regulatory agencies, in advance of construction. 
6.  The city will assume responsibility for providing recycled water service to the point of connection of such development on transfer, to the city, of the title to all off-site recycled water systems and any necessary easements. All easements shall be in a form acceptable to the administrator, and not subject to outstanding obligations to relocate such facilities or any deeds of trust, except in instances where such is determined by the administrator to be in the best interest of the city. 
7.  The city and the property owner or developer may enter into a reimbursement agreement for the portions of a recycled water system that are required to be oversized with capacity to supply more recycled water than the property owner or developer requires. The determination to enter into a reimbursement agreement, and the specific items that are the subject of reimbursement, will be made by the city. 
B.  On-site Facilities. 
1.  All on-site recycled water facilities shall be provided by the owner, applicant or customer at their expense. 
2.  The design of on-site facilities, including the preparation of plans and construction specifications shall be under the responsibility of an engineer registered in the state of California. The design of customer (on-site) facilities that will use recycled water, and preparation of plans and construction specifications, shall be stamped and signed by a state of California registered landscape architect or civil engineer, unless otherwise approved by the administrator. When city standards and specifications require a higher quality material, equipment, design or construction method than that required by other governing codes, rules and regulations, the city standards and specifications shall take precedence. 
3.  All on-site recycled water facilities shall be designed and constructed according to requirements, conditions, and standards as adopted in the city standard specifications to ensure that such systems are in full compliance with this chapter. Recycled on-site water systems shall be separate and independent of any potable water systems. 
4.  Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be identified at sufficient intervals. 
5.  Areas irrigated with recycled water must be kept completely separated from domestic water wells and reservoirs. Recycled water shall not be applied or allowed to migrate to within fifty feet of any well used for domestic supply. No impoundment of recycled water shall be located within hundred feet of any domestic water well, unless it can be demonstrated that special circumstances justify lesser distances to be acceptable. 
6.  In areas where recycled water is not immediately available when the use area is ready for construction, and if the city has determined that recycled water will be supplied in the future, on-site facilities shall be designed to use recycled water. Provisions shall be made to allow for connection to the city off-site recycled water facilities, when available. In the interim, potable or other suitable water may be supplied to the on-site facilities through an "interim service connection." 
When the switch over from potable water to recycled water is made, the potable water line will be properly physically separated and blind-flanged to protect the domestic supply and avoid any future reconnection. In such cases, besides an initial cross-connection inspection, the city shall conduct appropriate shutdown tests at both water lines prior to the use of recycled water. The report of the inspection and shutdown tests shall be maintained on file and summary of the findings shall be submitted to DHS within two weeks of the beginning of the recycled water use. Shutdown tests shall be performed and repeated as required by DHS. 
Conditions of interim service are: 
a.  The city anticipates recycled water will be available to the site within five years of the time interim service is initiated; 
b.  The user or the owner of the property must sign a recycled water use agreement; 
c.  The user or the owner of the property must agree to perform or pay for all work necessary to remove the interim connection and make connections to the permanent recycled water system at the time the recycled water system is installed; 
d.  An approved backflow prevention device is required on the interim service. The backflow prevention device shall be at the point of connection with the interim supply system and a part of the on-site recycled water facilities; 
e.  Future recycled water users will pay for the following: 
i.  Cost of constructing and abandoning the interim service and cost of constructing the recycled water service, 
ii.  Applicable recycled water fees at the time service becomes available, 
iii.  Applicable interim water rates for the type of water delivered through the interim service; 
f.  When recycled water is available to the site, an inspection of the on-site facilities will be conducted by the administrator to verify that the facilities are still in compliance with the recycled water use agreement. Recycled water service shall be provided on verification of compliance. If the facilities are not in compliance, the administrator shall notify the user to make any necessary corrections. 
C.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  Adequate means of notification should be provided to inform the public, employees and others that recycled water is being used. Conspicuous signs with appropriate wording that can be clearly read should be placed at adequate intervals around the authorized use area. 
2.  Golf courses should print messages on score cards in a different color indicating recycled water is being used. Water hazards containing recycled water should be posted with appropriate signs. 
3.  Languages in addition to English should be used on signs where appropriate. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.140 - Construction. 
A.  New Facilities. Construction of all new recycled water facilities will follow city standards and specifications and the American Water Works Association construction guidelines for recycled water facilities. 
B.  Conversion to Recycled System. Where it is planned that an existing nonrecycled water system shall be converted to a recycled water facility, the facilities to be converted to recycled water shall be investigated in detail at the user's expense, to determine the measures required to bring the system into full compliance with this chapter. No existing potable water facilities shall be connected to or incorporated into the recycled water system without city and DHS approvals. 
C.  Recycled System Failure. If, due to on-site failure of the recycled water system, the administrator determines that it is necessary to convert on-site facilities from a recycled water supply to a potable water supply, it shall be the responsibility of the user to pay all costs for such conversion. Conversion costs may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Isolation of the Recycled Water Supply. Service shall be removed and plugged at the city's main or abandoned in a manner approved by the administrator; 
2.  Installation of approved backflow prevention devices, as determined by the administrator, on all potable, and/or other water meter connections; 
3.  Removal of any/all special recycled water quick couplers. The user shall be responsible for replacement with quick couplers approved for potable water systems; 
4.  Notification to all on-site personnel involved; 
5.  Removal of all warning labels/signs; 
6.  Installation of any/all potable water facilities and payment of any associated capacity fees, as established by resolution; 
7.  System flushing, disinfecting, decontamination, and water quality analyses, as required by the city and/or other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.150 - Operation and maintenance of facilities. 
A.  Off-site Facilities. The city shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and surveillance of all off-site recycled water systems. This includes, but is not limited to, recycled water pipelines, valves, connections, storage facilities, and other related equipment and property up to and including the meter. Only the city's personnel and their representatives shall operate, adjust, change, alter, move or relocate any portion of their respective off-site recycled water facilities. 
B.  On-site Facilities. The operation, surveillance, repair, and maintenance of all customer recycled water facilities are the responsibility of the user or owner and his designated "on-site" recycled water supervisor. The user or owner is responsible for maintaining all on-site facilities that are under ownership of parties other than the city and shall have the following responsibilities pertaining to operation of on-site facilities: 
1.  Ensure that all operations personnel are trained and familiarized with the use of recycled water; 
2.  Furnish their operations personnel with maintenance instructions, irrigation schedules, controller charts, and as-built drawings to ensure proper operation in accordance with the on-site facilities design and these rules and regulations; 
3.  Prepare and submit to the administrator one reproducible set of as-built drawings; 
4.  Notify the administrator of all updates or proposed changes, modifications, or additions to the on-site facilities and operations for review and approval prior to construction or implementation. All updates and proposed changes shall comply with this chapter, the recycled water use agreement and any other applicable rules and regulations; 
5.  Ensure that the operation and maintenance of all recycled water facilities remain in accordance with this chapter, the recycled water use agreement and any other applicable rules and regulations; 
6.  Operate and control the system in order to prevent direct human consumption, as defined by the California Department of Health Services, of recycled water and to control and limit runoff. The user or the owner of the property shall be responsible for any and all subsequent uses of the recycled water. Operation and control measures to be utilized in this regard shall include where appropriate, but not limited to: 
a.  Minimizing discharge onto areas not under control of the user so as to minimize public contact. Full circle sprinklers shall not be used adjacent to sidewalks, roadways, and property lines in order to confine the discharge to the use area, 
b.  Operating the on-site recycled water facilities during periods of minimal human use of the service area, and allowing a maximum dry-out time before the irrigated area will be used by the public, 
c.  Providing adequate first aid kits on the premises, and promptly treating all cuts and abrasions to prevent infection. If infection is likely, a physician should be consulted, 
d.  Taking any other precautionary measures to minimize direct contact with recycled water. User's employees, residents, and the public should not be subjected to recycled water sprays, 
e.  Applying recycled water at a rate that does not exceed the infiltration rate of the soil. Where varying soil types are present, the design and operation of the recycled water facilities shall be compatible with the lowest infiltration rate of the soils present, 
f.  Reporting to the administrator any/all failures in the recycled water system that cause an unauthorized discharge of recycled water, 
g.  Protecting all drinking fountains located within the approved use area, by location and/or a structure from contact with recycled water to the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct application through irrigation or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water. Protection shall be by design, construction practice, or system operation, 
h.  Protecting facilities that may be used by the public, including but not limited to, eating surfaces and playground equipment located within the approved use areas, by seating and/or structure from contact with recycled water to the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct contact by irrigation application, or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water. Protection shall be by design, construction practice, or system operation; 
7.  The user shall enforce the following prohibitions: 
a.  Cross-connections, as defined by the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, resulting from the use of recycled water or from the physical presence of a recycled water service, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited, 
b.  Discharge of recycled water for any purposes, in areas other than those specifically approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without the prior approval of the administrator, is prohibited, 
c.  Use or installation of permanent hose bibs on any customer water system that presently operates or is designed to operate with recycled water is prohibited, 
d.  Conditions that directly or indirectly cause recycled water to pond either within or outside of the approved use area, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation are prohibited, unless designed specifically for ponding and approved by administrator, 
e.  Conditions that directly or indirectly cause runoff of recycled water onto areas outside of approved use areas, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited, 
f.  Use of recycled water for any purposes other than those specifically approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without the prior approval of the administrator, is prohibited, 
g.  Conditions that directly or indirectly permit windblown spray to pass outside of the approved use area, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.160 - Monitoring and inspection. 
The administrator will monitor and inspect the entire recycled distribution facility, including both off-site and on-site facilities. The administrator will conduct monitoring programs, maintain records as deemed necessary, inspect on-site facilities to verify that the user's irrigation practices conform to this chapter and the recycled water use agreement, and provide reports as requested by DHS. For these purposes, the administrator will have the right to enter the user's premises to monitor and inspect all on-site recycled water facilities. Where necessary, keys and/or lock combinations shall be issued to the administrator to provide such access during hours of recycled water system operation. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.170 - Emergency connection. 
Temporary Connection. If the administrator determines an emergency exists where all or parts of the recycled water system are unable to provide recycled water, the administrator may approve an emergency temporary connection to the potable water system. Before such emergency temporary connection is made, the portion without recycled water shall be isolated by a physical or air gap separation from the remainder of the recycled water system. This isolation shall occur at either individual services or on the off-site system, as determined by the administrator. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on the potable water lines in accordance with this chapter. The recycled water system shall be disinfected in accordance with DHS regulations prior to any use of potable water through the system. The emergency temporary connection shall be removed before connection to the recycled water system is re-established. Re-establishment of recycled water service must be inspected and approved by the administrator prior to resuming delivery of recycled water. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.180 - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Noncompliance with Chapter. The recital of specified instances in this chapter wherein the city is authorized to discontinue service to the customer is not to be construed as limiting the authority of said city to the instances specified. The city shall have the general right to discontinue service to any customer upon failure of compliance with, or violation or infraction of the chapter, or any amendments or additions thereto, or any rules and regulations adopted by the city in amplification hereof, which may then be in force, after notice has been given where the noncompliance with, or violation or infraction of this chapter by the customer results, or is likely to result, in a dangerous or unsanitary condition on the customer's premises, or in the city's water system or elsewhere, or where discontinuance of service is necessary to protect the city from fraud, imposition, loss or abuse. 
B.  Penalties. 
1.  Each violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. 
2.  Any violation that occurs or continues from one day to the next shall be deemed a separate violation, for each day during which such violation occurs or continues to occur. 
3.  The fine for the first violation of this chapter shall be one hundred dollars. The fine for a second violation and each subsequent violation of this chapter within a period of twelve months, regardless of the specific section or subsection violated, shall be one hundred and fifty dollars. 
C.  Nuisance. 
1.  Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. 
2.  In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.04 of this code, the city may, upon order of the city council, abate an identified public nuisance and/or bring civil action to enjoin or abate the nuisance and make the costs of nuisance abatement a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is located or originates. 
3.  Nothing contained in this section limits the city to the prescribed remedy, or prevents the city from initiating and prosecuting any other remedy available to it for the abatement of a public nuisance, or for recovery of the cost of abatement, under the civil or criminal statutes of the state or under other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
13.11.190 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter establishing rules and regulations for the use of recycled water is for any reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have approved this chapter by section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 645 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Division III. - Sewers  
Chapter 13.12 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose and policy. 
This division sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system and enables the city to comply with the administrative provisions of the Clean Water Grant Regulations, the water quality requirements set by the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the applicable effluent limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or Federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into the city sewer system. This division provides a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuance of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of this division shall be used to defray the city's cost of operating and maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements, and depreciation. 
(Prior code § 26-36-10)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this division, terms shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be measured by Standard Methods unless expressly stated, or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
A.  "Building sewer" means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a community sewer. 
B.  "Beneficial uses" means uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation, including domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses , both tangible or intangible as specified by Federal or state law. 
C.  "City" means the city of Soledad. 
D.  "City manager" or "manager" means the manager of the city or his designated representative. 
E.  "Community sewer" means a sewer owned and operated by the city tributary to a treatment facility operated by the city. 
F.  "Compatible pollutant" means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit if the city's treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
G.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state are affected. 
H.  "Federal Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act. 
I.  "Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
J.  "Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined in this section. 
K.  "Major contributing industry" means any wastewater contributor identified in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual in any of Divisions A, B, D, E and I that: 
1.  Has a discharge flow of twenty thousand gallons or more per average work day (if seasonal, the average shall be computed on the period of use); or 
2.  Has a flow or pollutant loading greater than five percent of the design capacity of the city's treatment works; or 
3.  Has in its wastes toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in the standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972; or 
4.  Is found by the city's authorized representative to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works. 
L.  "Mass emission rate" means the weight of material discharged to the community sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
M.  "Person" means any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, private or public corporation, districts and all political subdivisions, governmental agencies and mandatories thereof. 
N.  "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or affects the facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination. 
O.  "Premises" means a parcel of real estate or portion thereof including any improvements thereon which is determined by the city to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using and paying for service. 
P.  "Reclaimed water" means water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur. 
Q.  "Treatment works" means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the useful life of the works, including intercepter sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste, including stormwater runoff, or industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems. 
R.  "Unpolluted water" means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters. 
S.  "User" means any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of, wastewater into a community sewer. 
T.  "User classification" means a classification of user based on the 1972 edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the Executive Office of Management and Budget, as it may be amended from time to time. 
U.  "Waste" means and includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
V.  "Wastewater" means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a community sewer. 
W.  "Wastewater constituents and characteristics" means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater. 
X.  "Waters of the state" means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state. 
(Prior code § 26-36-11)  
13.12.030 - Toilet facilities required. 
Toilet and other sanitary sewage facilities must be installed and maintained in every house or building within the city in which any plumbing arrangements are constructed, and in every place of work within the city which operates for more than thirty days in a calendar year and in which one or more persons are employed. For purposes of this division, "place of work" includes premises which are not enclosed within a building, as well as premises which are wholly or partially so enclosed. 
(Prior code § 26-36-12)  
13.12.040 - Sewer connection required. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in Section 13.08.050: 
A.  Every house, building, and place of work within the city which under Section 13.08.030 is required to have toilets and other sanitary sewage facilities must be separately and independently connected with an accepted community sewer when such sewer is constructed in the street, alley or sewer right-of-way on which the property on which the house, building or place of work is situated, fronts or abuts. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or persons, after thirty days' notice as provided in Section 13.08.050, to use or occupy any house, building or place of work not having toilets and other sanitary sewage facilities therein properly connected with an accepted community sewer, as required by this division. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to maintain or use, or permit or cause to be maintained or used, a cesspool, septic tank, privy, privy vault or outhouse (including portable toilet facilities) on any premises within the city which are required to be connected to a community sewer under the provisions of subsection A of this section. 
D.  The use or occupancy of any house, building or place of work not having toilets and other sanitary sewage facilities therein properly connected to an accepted community sewer, as required by this division, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(Prior code § 26-36-13)  
13.12.050 - Denial of sewer connection in certain cases. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.08.040, whenever the city manager, after consulting with the city engineer and receiving his report and recommendation, and after considering the report and recommendation and such other information and evidence as may be available, finds and determines that the discharge of wastewater from a particular premises would not be in the best interests of the city, or that it would be inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare, he may deny the issuance of a permit and order that such waste not be discharged into a community sewer. The findings and order of the city manager shall be in written form and a copy thereof shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises, either personally or by mail at the last-known address of such owner or occupant as disclosed by city records. Reasons justifying such a finding and order include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  That such discharge is prohibited by Chapter 13.16 of this title; 
B.  That the volume or mass emission rate of such discharge would exceed the designed or available capacity of the community sewer or the treatment facility to which it is connected; or 
C.  That a particular constituent or combination of constituents of such discharge would be harmful to the community sewer or to the treatment works to which the sewer is connected, or would exceed one or more of the limitations contained in Chapter 13.16, or would adversely affect the ability of the community sewer or of the treatment works to meet required standards of performance; or 
D.  That an industrial user has or will provide adequate on-premises facilities for the treatment and disposal of wastewater in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, and it is determined that the introduction of such discharge into the community sewer would substantially increase the load upon the sewer and the treatment works to which it is connected; or 
E.  That in a particular case there are unusual circumstances relating to the location, character, or use of the property or improvements thereon, not generally applicable to other properties in the city, which make it impracticable to connect to the community sewer, and that a waiver of the connection requirement in such case would be in the best interests of the city and not detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code § 26-36-14)  
13.12.060 - Notice to occupant to plumb and connect. 
It is the duty of the building inspector to notify every person using or occupying any house, building or place of work not having sanitary plumbing facilities therein properly connected with an accepted public sewer in accordance with the requirements of this division, that such person must, within thirty days after the date of service of such notice, install sanitary plumbing in such house, building, or place of work and connect the plumbing with the accepted public sewer in the street, alley or sewer right-of-way, on which the property on which the house, building or place of work is situated, fronts or abuts. 
(Prior code § 26-36-15)  
13.12.070 - Permit to connect. 
A.  No connection shall be made with any public sewer in the city until a permit therefor is first obtained from the building inspector, and no connection shall be made with any public sewer in the city except as provided in this division. An application for such permit shall be made on blanks furnished by the building inspector to the owner of the premises sought to be served by the connection, or to his duly authorized agent, and it shall certify the location of the premises, by lot and block or other accurate description, the character of the building with which the connection is desired, and its condition as to plumbing. 
B.  It is the duty of the building inspector to satisfy himself that the plumbing of the building to be served by the proposed connection conforms to the requirements of this code or other ordinances of the city and to all applicable laws of the state, and he shall then issue the permit. If the plumbing does not substantially conform to the requirements , the applicant for the permit shall be notified wherein it is defective, and upon the defects being corrected, the permit for the sewer connection shall be issued. 
C.  Permits for sewer connections shall be granted only upon conditions to be inserted therein that the drainage and plumbing connections therewith shall be installed, and at all times maintained and used, strictly in accordance with the provisions of this code, and amendments to this code, and upon the further condition that the permit may be revoked and forfeited by the city council at any time after due notice given upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the owner or any tenant or occupant of the premises to observe the provisions of this division, including amendments to this division. 
(Prior code § 26-36-16)  
Chapter 13.16 - USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Prohibitions on discharges. 
No person shall discharge wastes to a community sewer which cause, threaten to cause, or are capable of causing either alone or by interaction with other substances: 
A.  A fire or explosion; 
B.  Obstruction of flow or injury to the treatment works; 
C.  Danger to life or safety of personnel; 
D.  A strong, offensive odor or prevention of the effective maintenance or operation of the treatment works; 
E.  Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or malodorous, gas-producing substances; 
F.  Interference with the wastewater treatment process; 
G.  The city's effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process; 
H.  A detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters of the state or a condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the city; 
I.  Discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the city's treatment works effluent such that receiving water quality requirements established by law cannot be met; 
J.  Conditions at or near the city's treatment works which violate any statute or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal regulatory body; 
K.  The city's treatment works to be overloaded or cause excessive city collection or treatment costs, or may use a disproportionate share of the city facilities. 
(Prior code § 26-36-20)  
13.16.020 - Prohibitions on storm drainage and groundwater. 
A.  Stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer unless a permit is issued by the city. The city may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
B.  If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-21)  
13.16.030 - Prohibition on unpolluted water. 
A.  Unpolluted water, including but not limited to cooling water, process water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to a community sewer unless a permit is issued by the city. The city may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
B.  If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-22)  
13.16.040 - Limitations on radioactive wastes. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any radioactive waste into a community sewer except: 
A.  When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials; and 
B.  When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17) and the Atomic Energy Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal; and 
C.  When the person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies. 
(Prior code § 26-36-23)  
13.16.050 - Limitations on the use of garbage grinders. 
A.  Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a community sewer except: 
1.  Wastes generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises; or 
2.  Where the user has obtained a permit for that specific use from the city, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the city to equitably determine the charges and fees based on the waste constituents and characteristics. 
B.  Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the community sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse. 
(Prior code § 26-36-24)  
13.16.060 - Limitations on point of discharge. 
No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless he has been issued a permit by the city. If a permit is issued for such direct discharge, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-25)  
13.16.070 - Holding tank waste. 
No person shall discharge any holding tank waste into a community sewer unless he has been issued a permit by the city. Unless otherwise allowed by the city under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge and the wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. An exception to the above is that no permit will be required for discharge of domestic wastes from mobile home holding tanks; provided, that such discharges are made into a city-approved facility designed to receive such wastes. 
(Prior code § 26-36-26)  
13.16.080 - Limitations on wastewater strength. 
A.  No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
0.1 milligrams per liter arsenic; 
0.2 milligrams per liter cadmium; 
2.0 milligrams per liter copper; 
1.0 milligrams per liter cyanide; 
1.0 milligrams per liter lead; 
0.01 milligrams per liter mercury; 
1.0 milligrams per liter nickel; 
0.2 milligrams per liter silver; 
0.5 milligrams per liter total chromium; 
3.0 milligrams per liter zinc. 
B.  No person shall discharge any wastewater: 
1.  Having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (65.5* Celsius); 
2.  Containing more than three hundred milligrams per liter of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; 
3.  Containing more than one hundred milligrams per liter oil or grease of mineral or petroleum origin; 
4.  Having a pH lower than 6.0; 
5.  Containing in excess of 0.02 milligrams per liter total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons which cannot be removed by the city's wastewater treatment process; 
6.  Containing in excess of 1.0 milligrams per liter phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city's wastewater treatment process. 
C.  Effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply in any instance where they are more stringent than those in this division. Under Section 307 (b) of the Act, federal pretreatment standards are designed to achieve two purposes: (1) to protect the operation of publicly owned treatment works, and (2) to prevent the discharge of pollutants which pass through such works inadequately treated. Users in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued under Section 304 (b) of the Act, which are discharging incompatible pollutants to publicly owned treatment works, are required to adopt best practicable control technology currently available, as defined by the Administrator pursuant to Section 304 (b) of the Act. Where the city's treatment works was designed to and does achieve substantial removal of pollutants other than the four pollutants listed in the definition for compatible pollutants in Section 1.02f of the Act (BOD, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria) , the city may, at its discretion, not require the user to achieve best practicable control technology currently available, since this would lead to an uneconomical duplication of treatment facilities. While the term "substantial removal" is not subject to precise definition, it generally contemplates removals in the order of eighty percent or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of ten to thirty percent are not considered "substantial." For some industrial categories it may be necessary to define pretreatment guidelines for problems that may arise as a result of the discharges into the city's treatment works. However, any adjustments required for particular industrial categories should be considered in connection with the city's requirements rather than in the national pretreatment standard. Limitations on wastewater strength in subsections A and B of this section may be supplemented with more stringent limitations pursuant to Section 13.24.020: 
a.  If the city determines that the limitations in subsections A and B of this section may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the city's treatment works; or 
b.  If the city determines that the limitations in subsections A and B of this section may not be sufficient to enable the city's treatment works to comply with water quality standards for effluent limitations specified in the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
(Prior code § 26-36-27)  
13.16.090 - Disposal of unacceptable waste. 
Waste not permitted to be discharged into the community sewer must be transported to a state-approved disposal site. The required "Waste Haulers Report" must be completed and a copy furnished within thirty days to the city by the discharger. 
(Prior code § 26-36-28)  
Chapter 13.20 - WASTEWATER VOLUME DETERMINATION 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Metered water supply. 
When charges and fees are based upon the water usage, such charges and fees shall be applied against the total amount of water used from all sources unless, in the opinion of the city, significant portions of water received are not discharged to a community sewer. The total amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by means of public meters or private meters installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-30)  
13.20.020 - Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions. 
When charges and fees are based upon water usage, and where, in the opinion of the city, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the community sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means, the charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the community sewer. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user, and approved by the city, if the user is to avoid the application of the charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the city and at the user's expense. Such meters shall measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be maintained at the expense of the user and be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 26-36-31)  
13.20.030 - Estimated wastewater volume. 
A.  For users where, in the opinion of the city, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, the charges and fees may be based upon an estimate of the volume to be discharged, prepared by the city. A rational method will be used to estimate the quantity of wastewater discharged and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of goods and services or such other determinations of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged. 
B.  For users who, in the opinion of the city, divert a significant portion of their flow from a community sewer, the charges and fees may be based upon an estimate of the flow and volume to be discharged, prepared by the user and approved by the city, provided the user obtains a wastewater discharge permit and pays the applicable charges and fees. The estimate must include the method and calculations used to determine the wastewater volume and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalents, annual production of goods and services, or such other determinations of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged. 
(Prior code § 26-36-32)  
Chapter 13.24 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Discharge reports. 
The city may require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater into a community sewer file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on-site even though they are not normally discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require information in the form of wastewater-discharge-permit applications and self-monitoring reports. 
(Prior code § 26-36-40)  
13.24.020 - Wastewater discharge permits. 
A.  Mandatory Permits. Each "major contributing industry" as defined in Section 13.08.020 or other users with a discharge equivalent to that of a major contributing industry, if not connected to a community sewer, must obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into a community sewer. Each currently connected "major contributing industry" or equivalent user must obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division. 
B.  Optional Permits. The city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user, upon application in accordance with the terms of this section, in the following categories: 
1.  A user who requests charges and fees to be based on an estimate of wastewater flow; or 
2.  Any user whose wastewater strength is less than the normal range for the user classification to which he is assigned because of pretreatment, process changes or other reasons. 
C.  Permit Application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city manager an application, in the form prescribed by the city manager and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
1.  Name, address and SIC number of applicant; 
2.  Volume of wastewater to be discharged; 
3.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in Section 13.16.080, as determined by a laboratory approved by the city; 
4.  Time and duration of discharge; 
5.  Average and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any ; 
6.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
7.  Description of activities, facilities and plant process on the premises, including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged; 
8.  Each product produced, by type, amount and rate of production; 
9.  Any other information deemed by the city manager to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
D.  Permit Issuance. The city manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and approval of all the data required, the city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
E.  Permit Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other ordinances, regulations, charges and fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the city manager in accordance with this division, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits may contain the following: 
1.  The unit charge or schedule of charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
2.  The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
3.  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
4.  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities; 
5.  Pretreatment requirements; 
6.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
7.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
8.  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
9.  Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants (as defined by Section 13.08.020) are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge; 
10.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
F.  Duration of Permits. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the city thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the city during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Section 13.16.080 are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
G.  Transfer of a Permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
H.  Revocation of a Permit. Any user who violates the conditions of the wastewater discharge permit, any provisions of this division or applicable state and federal regulations, or does any of the following, is subject to having his/her permit revoked: 
1.  Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his/her discharge; 
2.  Fails to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
3.  Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(Prior code § 26-36-41)  
13.24.030 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  Users who propose to discharge, or who in the judgment of the city could now or in the future discharge, wastewater with constituents and characteristics different from that produced by a domestic premises (see Section 13.28.040) will be required to install a monitoring facility. 
B.  When more than one user can discharge into a common building sewer, the city may require installation of a separate monitoring facility for each user. Also, when, in the judgment of the city, there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the city may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge. 
C.  Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be constructed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow measurement of wastewaters produced by a user. If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the city, it shall be provided, installed and operated at the user's expense. The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the user's premises outside of the building. The city may, however, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction over that street or sidewalk, and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
D.  If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow safe and immediate access to city personnel, such as a gate secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The entire facility and the sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by and at the expense of the user. 
E.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards and specifications. 
F.  When, in the judgment of the city, an existing user requires a monitoring facility, the user will be so notified in writing. Construction must be completed within ninety days following written notification unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-42)  
13.24.040 - Inspection and sampling. 
The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The city may set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Prior code § 26-36-43)  
13.24.050 - Pretreatment. 
Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in this division before discharging into any community sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to, and be approved by, the city. 
(Prior code § 26-36-44)  
13.24.060 - Protection from accidental discharge. 
A.  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. 
B.  The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(Prior code § 26-36-45)  
13.24.070 - Confidential information. 
A.  All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or any other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods which would be detrimental to the user's competitive position. 
B.  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
C.  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to the user. 
(Prior code § 26-36-46)  
13.24.080 - Special agreements. 
Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the city, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. 
(Prior code § 26-36-47)  
Chapter 13.28 - WASTEWATER CHARGES AND FEES 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Schedule of charges and fees. 
The city council shall from time to time, by resolution, establish a schedule of charges and fees which will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of the State Clean Water Grant Program and such charges and fees shall be determined in a manner consistent with regulations of the program. 
(Prior code § 26-36-50)  
13.28.020 - Classifications of users. 
All users are to be classified by the city either by assigning each one to a "user classification" category according to the principal activity conducted on the user's premises, by individual user analyzation, or by a combination thereof. The purpose of such collective and/or individual classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to provide an effective means of source control, and to establish a system of charges and fees which will ensure an equitable recovery of the city's cost. 
(Prior code § 26-36-51)  
13.28.030 - Types of charges and fees. 
The charges and fees as established in the schedule of fees and charges may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  User classification charges; 
B.  Fees for monitoring; 
C.  Fees for permit applications; 
D.  Sewer connection fees; 
E.  Appeal fees; 
F.  Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and characteristics, to include industrial cost recovery provisions of the Federal Act. 
(Prior code § 26-36-52)  
13.28.040 - Basis for determination of charges. 
A.  Charges and fees shall be based upon a minimum basic charge for each premises, computed on the basis of wastewater from a domestic premises with the following characteristics: 
1.  BOD, two hundred fifty milligrams per liter; 
2.  COD, three hundred seventy-five milligrams per liter; 
3.  Suspended solids, two hundred fifty milligrams per liter; 
4.  Oil and grease, forty milligrams per liter; 
5.  Volume, two hundred twenty-four gallons per day per domestic premises. 
B.  The charges and fees for all classifications of users other than the basic domestic premises shall be based upon the relative difference between the average wastewater constituents and characteristics of that classification as related to those of a domestic premises. 
C.  The charges and fees established for permit users shall be based upon the measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge of that user which may include, but are not limited to, BOD, COD, suspended solids, oil and grease, chlorine demand and volume. 
(Prior code § 26-36-53)  
Chapter 13.32 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Accidental discharge. 
A.  Notification of Discharge. 
1.  Users shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this division, to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment facility, treatment processes and the receiving waters. 
2.  This notification shall be followed, within fifteen days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. 
3.  Notification under this subsection will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code. 
B.  Preventive Measures. Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the user's plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such action is impracticable or unreasonable, the user shall appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in violation of this division. 
(Prior code § 26-36-60)  
13.32.020 - Issuance of cease-and-desist order. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this division, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the city manager may issue an order to cease and desist, and direct that those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions to: 
A.  Comply forthwith; 
B.  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the city; or 
C.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(Prior code § 26-36-61)  
13.32.030 - Submission of time schedule. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this division, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the city may require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as the city deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements. 
(Prior code § 26-36-62)  
13.32.040 - Notices. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in Section 13.36.080, notices required to be given under this division shall be in writing and may be served upon the party to whom the notice is addressed either personally or by mail. Service by mail is complete when the notice is deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such party at his or her last known address as disclosed by city records. 
(Prior code § 26-36-63)  
13.32.050 - Appeals. 
A.  Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease-and-desist orders, made by the city manager, interpreting or implementing this division or in any permit issued under this division, may file with the city manager a written request for reconsideration within ten days of the decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. Whenever in this division it is provided that notice of a decision, action or determination be given to any affected party, the ten-day period shall commence upon the service of the notice. 
B.  If the ruling made by the city manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notification of city action, file a written appeal to the city council. The written appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty days from the date of filing. The city council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within fifteen days of the close of the meeting. The city manager's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during the period of reconsideration. 
(Prior code § 26-36-64)  
Chapter 13.36 - ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.36.010 - Public nuisance. 
Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of this division or of any order issued by the city manager as authorized by this division is a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. Any person creating a public nuisance is subject to provisions of city codes or ordinances governing such nuisance. 
(Prior code § 26-36-70)  
13.36.020 - Injunction. 
Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of this division, or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the city may petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of the discharge. 
(Prior code § 26-36-71)  
13.36.030 - Damage to facilities. 
When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to city facilities, the city may assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user's sewer service charge. 
(Prior code § 26-36-72)  
13.36.040 - Correction of violations—Collection of costs—Injunction. 
In order to enforce this division, the city may correct any violation of division. The cost of the correction may be added to any sewer service charge payable by the person so violating this division or the owner or tenant of the property upon which the violation occurred, and the city shall have such remedies for the collection of such costs as it has for the collection of sewer service charges. The city may also petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate, restraining any person from the continued violation of this division. 
(Prior code § 26-36-73)  
13.36.050 - Civil liability for violations. 
Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this division (consisting of Chapters 13.12, 13.16, 13.20, 13.24, 13.28, 13.32 and this chapter) or any of the requirements or conditions set forth in any permit duly issued, or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, is liable to the city for all expense, loss or damage it incurs by reason of the violation, including costs of engineering and technical services, and attorneys fees and other legal expenses. (Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 26-36-74)  
13.36.060 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating this division is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26-36-75)  
13.36.070 - Falsifying of information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the city or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, is declared to be in violation of this division, and subject to the civil liabilities imposed under Section 13.36.050, or subject to prosecution and punishment under Section 13.36.060. 
(Prior code § 26-36-76)  
13.36.080 - Termination of service. 
A.  In order to effect its powers, the city may enter upon private property for the purpose of inspection and maintenance of sanitary and waste disposal facilities and may terminate service to property in which a violation of any rule, regulation or this division is found to exist. 
B.  Prior to termination of service, however, the city council shall notify, in writing, the owner and tenant, if any, of such property that service is intended to be so terminated and conduct a hearing thereon as herein provided. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address shown on the records of the county assessor, or as known to the city clerk, and a copy shall be delivered to the tenant or posted conspicuously on the property. The notice shall state the date of proposed termination of service and the reasons therefor and the date the city council shall hold a hearing upon such intended termination. Such hearing shall not be held less than ten days subsequent to the giving of notice as required in this division. 
(Prior code § 26-36-77)  
Division IV. - Utility Charges  
Chapter 13.40 - UTILITY CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "BOD," denoting biochemical oxygen demand, means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. 
B.  "Contractor" means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association who contracts with the city to perform utility services within the city, such as the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
C.  "Fixture" means any sink, tub, shower, water closet or other facility connected by drain to a sewer. 
D.  "Industrial waste" means all liquid or solid waste substances not sewage, emanating from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature. 
E.  "Living unit" means any residence, apartment, habitation or other structure to be occupied by a single person or family requiring utility services. 
F.  "Permit" means any written authorization required pursuant to this division, or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, for the installation of any utility service. 
G.  "Person" means any human being, individual, firm, company, partnership, association, private or public or municipal corporation, the United States of America, the state of California, a district, a political subdivision, or a governmental agency. 
H.  "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in gram equivalents per liter of solution. 
I.  "Sewage" means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, public buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
J.  "Sewerage system" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage, including major interceptors. 
K.  "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
L.  "User" means any person to whom utility services are being furnished by the city. 
M.  "User charge" means a charge imposed upon a user by the city for utility service. 
N.  "Utility" or "utilities" means one or more of the following public services provided by the city: garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, sewer service, water service and sanitation services. 
O.  "Utility service" means the furnishing of a utility or utilities to a user by the city. 
(Ord. 588 § 1, 2002; Prior code § 26-71)  
13.40.020 - Garbage rates and charges. 
The rates for garbage and rubbish collection in the city shall be such as are established by resolution of the city council or, if the work is being done by a contractor, by contract between the city and the contractor. 
(Prior code § 26-72)  
13.40.030 - Water connection fees. 
The city council shall from time to time by resolution establish a schedule of fees to be charged for the issuance of water connection permits and the installation of water service to premises within the city. In the event the city council elects to provide water service to premises outside the city, the connection and installation fee in each case shall be stated in the resolution authorizing such service to the particular premises. 
(Prior code § 26-76)  
13.40.040 - Water user charges. 
A water user charge may be imposed for each user or user category, based upon and applied against the volume of water taken from the municipal water system. The charges provided for in this section shall be established annually by ordinance or by resolution of the city council and shall be set forth in a schedule of rates and charges. 
(Prior code § 26-77)  
13.40.050 - Rate distinctions. 
A.  Intrinsic Distinctions. It is recognized that there are natural, intrinsic and fundamental distinctions in the uses of, and in the properties to be served by, the municipal sewerage system and the municipal water system, which are reasonable in their relation to the objects of user charges and fees imposed pursuant to Section 13.40.040 of this chapter; therefore, the user charges prescribed in that section may be variable for different classes of uses for different parts of the sewerage or of the water system, as the case may be, or where portions of the works have been previously installed and financed so that variable rates may be equitable and just to all concerned. 
B.  Special Circumstances. When any person, by reason of special circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this division is unjust or inequitable as applied to his premises, he may make written application to the city council stating the special circumstances, citing the provision complained of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to his premises. 
C.  Relief on Application. If any application made under subsection B of this section is approved, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, suspend or modify the provision complained of, as applied to the applicant's premises, to be effective as of the date of the application and to continue during the period of the special circumstances. 
D.  Relief by Council on Own Motion. The city council may, on its own motion, find that by reason of special circumstances any provision of Section 13.40.030 of this chapter should be suspended or modified as applied to particular premises and may by ordinance order such suspension or modification for the premises during the period that the special circumstances continue to exist. 
E.  Waiver for Certain Soledad Housing Authority Projects. Effective April 1, 2006, the water, sewer and sanitation service charges for vacant units in the existing Soledad Housing Authority Benito Street and Monterey Street Projects, occurring because of new affordable housing construction at said projects, are waived. This waiver shall terminate for each particular site when the certificate of occupancy is issued to the Soledad Housing Authority for the completion of housing construction at that site. 
(Ord. 629 § 1, 2006: prior code § 26-78)  
13.40.060 - Billing of charges. 
A.  In the case of single-family dwelling units, utility user charges shall be billed to the occupant or to the person who makes application for such service; provided, that if such occupant or service applicant fails to pay any such charge when due, the city may take any and all action authorized by statute or ordinance against said occupant or other person to whom services are being provided to collect outstanding utility users charges. 
As a condition to the furnishing of utility service to any user who is not the owner of the premises to which such services are to be provided, the user shall make a reasonable cash deposit with the city, in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, to secure the payment of all rates and charges imposed pursuant to the provisions of Sections 13.40.020 and 13.40.040; such deposit is to be held by the city until such time as utility services to the user are discontinued, at which time the deposit shall first be applied to the payment of any utility rates and charges due to the city from the user and any amount not so applied to be returned to the user. 
As a condition to the furnishing of utility services to premises where the owner is responsible for payment under the foregoing provisions of this section, the owner may be required to execute and deliver to the city a written agreement to pay all utility rates and charges for service to the premises. 
B.  Multiple Services from One Meter. When there are two or more services on one curb stop meter, either: 
1.  The owner shall agree to be responsible for payment of all utility services furnished to the living units until separate meters are installed to each living unit; or 
2.  The owner of a premises having utility services which do not have separate meters and boxes to each living unit or which otherwise do not conform to the requirements in this chapter at the time of its passage or amendment may be required to put in such meters or make such other changes as are necessary to conform to these requirements, when directed by the city. 
(Ord. 588 § 2, 2002: Prior code § 26-79)  
13.40.070 - Date payment due—Delinquency. 
All utility services charges shall be due and payable on the date of billing and shall become delinquent if payment is not received by five p.m. on the twentieth day after the date of billing. A ten percent penalty shall be added to the delinquent utility service charges. Delinquency, as set forth above, will be determined by the city on the basis of the date of the city's receipt of payment, or the date of a verified deposit of payment with an authorized city agent. 
(Ord. 588 § 3, 2002: Ord. 507 §1, 1991: Prior code § 26-80) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 2, 10-12-2016)  
13.40.080 - Charges deemed debt to city—Action to collect. 
The amount of any utility fee or charge provided for by this division is a debt to the city and the person or persons upon whom such charge is imposed shall be liable in an action in the name of the city brought in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided, that in those cases where the charges are billed to the occupants or to a user who is not the owner of the premises served, no action shall be brought against the owner until the expiration of ten days after the owner has been given written notice of the delinquency by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at the address appearing upon the assessment rolls of the city, or at the premises being served, or at such other address as the owner may have designated in writing for the service of such notice. 
(Prior code § 26-81)  
13.40.090 - Discontinuance of service upon failure to pay—Reconnection costs. 
A.  Discontinuance of Service—Notice. Where utility service charges are delinquent, water service shall be discontinued on the third Wednesday of the month next following the month in which the owner or occupant of the premises is given notification by the city of the time and date on which service will be discontinued for delinquency of utility service charges. Such notification shall be stamped on the billing sent to the owner or occupant in the month in which utility service charges became delinquent. Such notification shall read substantially as follows: 
PAST DUE, IF NOT PAID BY ___________. SERVICE WILL BE DISCONTINUED AND A $50 PENALTY WILL BE CHARGED. 
B.  Discontinuance of Service—Reconnections. The city shall not resume discontinued service until all delinquent service charges, penalties and a fifty dollar charge for the disconnection and reconnection of water services to the premises have been paid. 
C.  After Office Hour Services. In addition to subsection 13.40.090 B, any customer requiring utility services after the time stated in Section 13.40.070 (five p.m.), will be subject to an additional charge, at a minimum equal to the value of two call-out hours billed at the pay rate applicable to a utility operator, to cover the city's real costs in providing such service. Fees must be paid prior to commencement of services. 
D.  Utility Charge—Waiver. A waiver of fees and penalties is generally not permitted, however the finance officer and/or his or her designee has the authority to waive up to two hundred dollars per occurrence. In making a waiver determination, the finance officer and/or his/her designee may considered all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Charges for garbage are waived by the contractor and therefore not charged to the city; 
2.  Payment was applied to the incorrect service account; 
3.  Incorrect information was provided to the customer by city staff and can be verified by customer; 
4.  A customer has not received a penalty charge and has had utility services discontinued in the last six months; 
5.  A customer has never issued a check to the city which was returned due to non sufficient funds (NSF); 
6.  A customer does not have any utility services outstanding at prior residence(s) in the city; 
7.  Utility charges are not due to leaks within the resident's personal property; 
8.  Staff can verify that services have not been utilized; 
9.  A penalty is charged against a penalty and is under five dollars in total. 
The decision of the finance officer and/or his/her designee to waive fees or penalties may be appealed to the city manager by the party on whom such penalties or fees have been imposed filing a letter with the city manager within five business days of the finance officer's/designee decision. The city manage may affirm, affirm in part or reverse the waiver decision, based upon the relevant circumstances, considerations and monetary restrictions set forth in this subsection. The city manager's decision on a requested waiver shall be considered final. 
(Ord. 588 § 4, 2002: Ord. 507 §2, 1991: prior code § 26-82) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3, 10-12-2016)  
13.40.100 - Terminations and transfers. 
A.  A request for termination of service by the current customer shall be by advance written notice on a form provided by the finance officer and signed by the account holder. The completed form should specify the date service is/was to be discontinued and the forwarding address for the closing bill. In the event no termination notice is provided, said customer shall be held responsible for utility services provided to the service location until the finance department receives a written request for termination. 
B.  Temporary disconnection of service at the request of the customer requires an advanced notice as in paragraph A above. 
C.  Any customer request for service at another location when accompanied with a request for termination at a previous service location, shall be processed as a new account. If the customer remains as the account holder on both the old and new service locations, the second account will be treated as a new separate account. In the case where a customer's account, prior to the transfer, is delinquent, all past due amounts will be due in full, and a new deposit required, prior to the activation of service at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 10-12-2016)  
Division V. - Underground Utility Districts  
Chapter 13.44 - PROCEDURES FOR UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.44.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
B.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
C.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070. 
D.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Prior code § 25-1)  
13.44.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
Proceedings for a conversion of existing overhead electric and communication facilities to underground locations shall be initiated by either a petition or by a determination of the city council. 
A.  In order to initiate proceedings, a petition shall: 
1.  Describe the proposed assessment district, as provided in Section 5181 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state; 
2.  Generally describe the proposed conversion; and 
3.  Request that proceedings for such conversion be taken pursuant to the provisions of Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 28 (commencing with Section 5896.1) of the Streets and Highways Code. 
B.  In order to initiate proceedings, the city council shall determine that the city or a public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent of all costs of conversion, excluding costs of users' connections to underground electric or communication facilities. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
13.44.030 - Petition—Signatures required. 
A petition for proceedings for conversion shall be signed by not less than five owners of assessable land in the proposed assessment district, as shown by the last equalized assessment roll used by the city, owning lands constituting more than one-half of the area of all assessable lands within the proposed assessment district. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
13.44.040 - Filing of petition—Certificate of sufficiency. 
A petition for conversion shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall thereupon check the petition, or cause the same to be checked. If the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified signers, the clerk shall execute a certificate of sufficiency and present said petition and certificate to the city council. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
13.44.050 - Resolution of intention. 
Upon the presentation of a petition for conversion and a certificate of sufficiency, or upon a determination pursuant to subsection B of Section 13.44.020, the city council may adopt a resolution declaring its intention to order the conversion. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
13.44.060 - Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of the hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearings. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 25-2)  
13.44.070 - Designation by resolution of council. 
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 25-3)  
13.44.080 - Continued use of overhead facilities prohibited. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.44.070, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.44.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 25-4)  
13.44.090 - Exceptions—Emergencies, unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council deems appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Prior code § 25-5)  
13.44.100 - Exceptions—Specialized facilities. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code § 25-6)  
13.44.110 - Notice to utilities and property owners of district's creation. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 25-7)  
13.44.120 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Prior code § 25-8)  
13.44.130 - Responsibility of property owners—Disconnection of service upon failure to perform. 
A.  Subject to applicable rules, regulations, tariffs or ordinances, all electric or communication facilities, including connections to the owner's premises, located upon any lot or parcel of land within the assessment district shall be contructed, reconstructed, relocated or converted by the owner of the lot or parcel at his own expense. The work may be done by the contractor performing the conversion work, and the cost of the work shall be included in the assessment to be levied upon the lot or parcel, provided that the owner shall execute a written request therefor and file the request with the city clerk. Any such request shall expressly authorize the contractor, the public utility, the city, and their respective officers, agents and employees, to enter upon the lot or parcel for that purpose, and shall waive any right of protest or objection in respect of the doing of the work and the inclusion of the cost of the work in the assessment. The provisions of this chapter do not diminish any right of any owner of a lot or parcel of land to contract any portion of work on his premises. 
B.  In the event the owner of any such lot or parcel of land does not comply with the provisions of subdsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.44.070, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 25-9)  
13.44.140 - Removal of city-owned equipment. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of the poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.44.070. 
(Prior code § 25-10)  
13.44.150 - Extension of time limits for contingencies. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.44.070 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitation. 
(Prior code § 25-11)  
13.44.160 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code § 25-12)  
Division VI. - User Fees and Charges for Sanitation Services  
Chapter 13.48 - USER FEES AND CHARGES FOR SANITATION SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
13.48.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a charge for street sweeping, graffiti removal, animal control, litter maintenance, and other environmental sanitation services provided by the city, and it is not intended either as a general revenue measure or as a regulation. 
(Ord. 522 (part), 1993)  
13.48.020 - Establishment of service charge. 
The city shall make a monthly charge to each residential, commercial, industrial, manufacturing or other unit which is located within the city for services provided pursuant to this division and other environmental sanitation services. Such charge shall be in such amount as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 522 (part), 1993)  
13.48.030 - Persons obligated. 
The customer of record or occupant of each place or premises shall be liable for payment of all charges as set forth in this division. Should the customer of record or occupant of any place or premises fail to pay all such charges before such sum becomes delinquent, then in either of such events, the property owner of record of such place or premises shall be liable for the payment of all such charges. 
(Ord. 522 (part), 1993)  
13.48.040 - Payment of bills—Penalties. 
A.  Date Payment Due. Bills for the charges made pursuant to this division and penalties, if any, are due and payable at Soledad city hall on the date of billing and become delinquent twenty-one days after the date of such billing. 
B.  Penalties. A penalty of ten percent shall be assessed on all unpaid bills twenty-one days after the billing date. No penalty, however, will accrue until twenty-one days after the date that the bill has been deposited with the United States Postal Service, properly addressed with prepaid postage affixed thereto. If delinquent for a second consecutive twenty-one days after the penalty is imposed, an additional penalty of one and one-half percent per month shall be assessed on the unpaid balance and basic penalty. 
(Ord. 522 (part), 1993)  
Division VII. - Stormwater Quality Requirements and Compliance  
Chapter 13.52 - STORMWATER QUALITY 
Sections: 
 
13.52.010 - Interpretation. 
A.  This chapter sets forth the administrative procedures, standards, and enforcement remedies which shall be used by the city in meeting the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) General Permit as promulgated by the California State Water Resources Control Board. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, general welfare and environment. This chapter shall therefore be regarded as remedial and shall be liberally construed to further its underlying purpose. 
C.  This chapter is not intended to interfere or conflict with, abrogate, or annul any other regulation, ordinance, statute or provision of law. 
D.  Whenever a provision of this chapter and a provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, including any other provision of this chapter, contains any restrictions covering the same subject matter, the more restrictive shall govern. 
E.  The foregoing principles notwithstanding, the city directs those city officials responsible for enforcement of this chapter to utilize a reasonable common sense approach in the interpretation and application of the specific provisions of this chapter. To this end, city officials charged with the responsibility for enforcement and administration of provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to utilize discretion in waiving specific application requirements, provided that such discretion shall be exercised in a manner to preserve the purposes and intention of this chapter and to not jeopardize the health, safety, or general welfare of the public or the environment. When exercising discretion to waive or modify any specific application requirements, the city official shall consider: 
1.  The scope and nature of the proposed project; 
2.  The impact of the project on the properties in the general vicinity of the project; 
3.  The impact of the project on municipal facilities and services, including without limitation, streets, water, sewer, drainage, police and fire protection services; and 
4.  Whether the information contained in a requirement sought to be waived is reasonable and readily available from other materials submitted in conjunction with the application. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.020 - Intent and objectives. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this chapter is to prevent the pollution, impairment, or destruction of a natural resource or the public trust in the city unless (1) there is no feasible and prudent alternative, and (2) the activity is consistent with the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare rather than the public's paramount concern for protection of its natural resources. 
B.  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are protecting the quality of water in the city's drainage ways and subsequent receiving waters in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.030 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city manager, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon the city manager, may be delegated to an appointed representative. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.040 - Severability. 
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.050 - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall mean the following: 
BMP 	Best management 
practice 
CGP 	Construction General Permit 
MS4 	Municipal separate storm sewer system 
NOTC 	Notice of termination of construction 
NOV 	Notice of violation 
SWO 	Stop work order 
SWPPP 	Stormwater pollution prevention plan 
SWRCB 	California state water resources control board 
NPDES 	National pollution 
discharge elimination 
system 
 
(Ord. No. 690, § 3, 7-1-2015; Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.060 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section: 
"Affidavit" means a sworn statement in writing, submitted by a person, or persons, to the city manager, that is to be used as a legal document committing the person to a long-term maintenance agreement with the city for maintenance of post-construction control measures. 
"Animal waste" includes, but is not limited to, animal fecal material. 
"Applicant" means any person that submits an application for a stormwater permit and is (1) the owner of the property upon which construction is proposed or is taking place; or (2) the lessee if the lessee undertakes development of the property under the terms of the lease. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the storm drain system and waters of the United States and to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. Best management practices include but are not limited to: treatment requirements; operating and maintenance practices to control runoff, sludge, waste disposal, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices and procedures and other such provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
"CASQA" means California Stormwater Quality Association. 
"City manager" means a person appointed to the position of city manager, or his or her duly appointed representative. 
"Clean Water Act (Act)" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Closure activities" mean activities, or the process thereof, that result in the final stabilization of a construction site and leave the site in good repair. 
"Commencement of construction" means the first disturbance of soils associated with or caused by move-in of equipment, installation of access roads or trails, storage of materials or equipment, clearing, grading, demolition, building, excavation or similar activities at a construction site. 
"Compliance order" means an order issued by the city manager requiring a discharger to comply with this chapter by means specified in the order. 
"Consent order" means an order issued by the city manager to which a discharger agrees to bring the discharge into compliance to this chapter. 
"Construction activity" means activities involving clearing, grading, demolition, excavation, filling, or building of above and below ground structures and buildings, support and auxiliary facilities, transportation facilities, container and containment structures, above and below ground utilities and associated auxiliary facilities, pipelines and conveyances, and similar activities undertaken for public purposes or needs; for preparation of land, structures, or facilities for commercial purposes, use or sale; or for preparation of land, structures, or facilities for industrial purposes, use or sale. 
"Construction site" means the entire location where any construction or construction related activities occur which is part of a common plan of development or project. 
"Construction stormwater permit" means authorization issued by the city to conduct construction activities. 
"Discharge" means the release or placement, either directly or indirectly, of any substance into or from the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, stormwater, wastewater, solid materials, liquids, hazardous material, raw materials, debris, litter or any other substance. 
"Discharger" means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site. 
"Emergency cease and desist order" means an order issued by the city manager requiring immediate cessation of a discharge because of imminent endangerment to the public or the environment. 
"Final stabilization" means the condition, or the activities leading thereto, of a construction site wherein all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover, or equivalent permanent erosion prevention measures, has been established over all areas not paved or covered by permanent structures or impervious surfaces. 
"General permit" means the waste discharge requirements for small municipal separate storm sewer systems (Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit No. CAS000004, including any amendments thereto or successor permit, issued by the state board under which the city must enroll as a permittee. 
"Hazardous materials or hazardous substances" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, those specified in California Health and Safety Code, Section 25117 and in 40 C.F.R. part 116. 
"Illicit connection" means any of the following: 
1.  Any conveyance system, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. 
2.  Any connection to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks. 
3.  Any unpermitted connection of a stormwater system to the publicly owned treatment works or POTW as defined in Chapter 14.08 of the Municipal Code. 
4.  Illicit connections include pipes, drains, open channels or other conveyances that have a potential to allow an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term "illicit discharge" includes all non-stormwater discharges not composed entirely of stormwater and discharges that are identified under the discharge prohibitions section of the general permit. 
"Incidental runoff" means the unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence. 
"MS4" means the municipal separate storm sewer system, incorporating the entire system of stormwater conveyances, but not sanitary or industrial wastewater sewers, or a single conveyance in such entire system, natural or man-made, lying within the boundaries of the city. 
"MS4 permit" means the NPDES permit issued to the city for the discharge of stormwaters from the MS4. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means stormwater conveyances lying within the corporate limits of the city, including but not limited to, stormwater sewers, inlets, catch basins, traps, gutters, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, ponds, and other stormwater conveyances, both natural and man-made, designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which are not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit" means a permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC. 1342, and administered by the state under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, permitting the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters of the United States. 
"New development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision on an area that has not been previously developed. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Notice of termination of construction (NOTC)" means a notice provided by a construction site operator to the city notifying the city of intended completion of construction activities. 
"Notice of violation (NOV)" means a legal notice issued by the city manager indicating a discharge is in violation of this chapter and that the violator must eliminate such discharge. 
"NPDES permitting authority" means the environmental agency that is responsible for the oversight and enforcement of the NPDES Phase II MS4 stormwater permit. 
"Open space design" means a low impact site design technique that concentrates dwellings in a compact area in one portion of the development in exchange for open space and natural areas elsewhere on the site. Open space designs are used to reduce impervious surfaces, stormwater pollutants, and the loss of natural areas on a site. 
"Operator of a construction site" means the person or persons who either individually or taken together, 
(1)  Have by virtue of ownership or lease, operational control over the construction specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications): 
(2)  Have by virtue of ownership, lease or contract, the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the construction site sufficient to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions; or 
(3)  Have financial control of construction and authority to direct, either directly or indirectly, the construction activities to be undertaken at the site. 
"Outfall" means the outlet of a body of water, in particularly, the point where a storm conveyance reaches its receiving water. 
"Owner" means the person who owns a facility, property on which a facility occurs, part of a facility, or part of the property on which a facility occurs; in the case of a mortgaged facility or property, the person who has a mortgage on the property and who will obtain, upon proper payment to a financial institution, ownership of the property; in the case of a facility or property for which a person has an option to purchase and such person acts, in effect, as an owner. Also, the person who owns a site or facility and who has ultimate financial responsibility for activities conducted at the site or facility. 
"Performance bond" means bonds issued by commercial institution on behalf of contractors, such as construction companies, to protect project owners from the consequences the contractors' failure to complete contracts in accord with plans and specifications. Performance bonds can be particularly helpful in the case of especially environmentally risky or complex projects. 
"Person" means any individual as well as any corporation, partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above. 
"Petition for reconsideration" means a written document submitted by a person to the city manager requesting reconsideration of a previously issued SWO; compliance order; remediation, abatement, and restoration order; or emergency cease and desist order. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete residuals; and noxious or offensive matter or of any kind, dredged spoil, waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste. 
"Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects the beneficial uses of the water or facilities which serve those beneficial uses. 
"Premises" means any building, lot parcel or land, or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"Prohibited discharge" means any direct or indirect discharge to the storm drain system or to natural creeks and small streams, which is not otherwise specifically authorized by this chapter, the state or regional board, state or federal law, or an NPDES permit. 
"Receiving waters" means surface water that receives regulated and unregulated discharges from activities on land. 
"Redevelopment" means land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of exterior impervious surface area on a site on which some past development has occurred. 
"Regional board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region. 
"Remediation, abatement, and restoration order" means a legally issued order by the city manager to correct or repair damage; stop, or otherwise control pollutant discharge; and/or to rehabilitate and return to original quality some condition in the environment. 
"Responsible person" means any person who owns, operates, leases, or has control over the day-to-day activities of a premises and any person who facilitates, causes or permits any discharge. 
"Runoff coefficient" means a measurement of the amount of the precipitation that falls on a specific surface actually ends up as stormwater runoff. 
"Scour velocity" means the velocity, measured in feet per second, at which water has the ability to cause erosion. Scour velocities depend on topography, soils and runoff rates. 
"Show cause hearing" means a hearing for which a violator of this chapter must provide reason why a proposed enforcement action by the city manager should not be undertaken. 
"Source control" means land use or site planning practices, or structural or nonstructural measures, that aim to prevent runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contact with rainfall runoff at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and urban runoff. 
"State board" means the state water resources control board. 
"Stop work order (SWO)" means a legal order issued by the city manager to stop construction because of noncompliance to this chapter. 
"Storm drain system" means the infrastructure in a municipal separate storm sewer system that collects and conveys stormwater runoff, whether publically or privately owned, and includes but is not limited to roads, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels and swales, reservoirs, creeks, waters of the United States and other drainage structures which are within the city's jurisdiction and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in Title 40 Section 122.2, of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation. Stormwater runoff is generated when precipitation flows overland and does not percolate into the ground. 
"Stormwater control plan" means a plan, developed by the regulated project applicant, detailing how the project will achieve the applicable post-construction stormwater management requirements (for both onsite and offsite systems) as defined in the most recent edition of the city's department of public works, standard details and specifications and the most recent post construction requirements adopted by the State Water Resource Control Board and/or the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board (i.e. Resolution No. R3-2013-0032, Attachment 1: Post-construction stormwater management requirements for development projects in the central coast region, dated July 12, 2013, or revisions thereafter). 
"Stormwater permit" means authorization issued by the city to conduct construction activities. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a plan that describes the practices, and the procedures for their implementation, that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at a facility. 
"Threatened prohibited discharge" means any condition or activity which does not currently result in a prohibited discharge but is nevertheless determined by the city manager to be a condition which results in a substantial likelihood of a future prohibited discharge. 
"Urban forestry" means a low impact site design technique that utilizes environmentally sensitive practices and promotes the planting of trees and other vegetation to help control erosion and improve the quality of stormwater runoff from construction sites within urbanized areas. 
"Warning notice" means a notice issued by the city manager stating that a discharge is in violation of this chapter and requesting that the cause of discharge be investigated and that any violations be stopped. 
"Watercourse" means a natural or artificial channel, above or below ground, through which water may flow, excluding pipelines. 
"Waters of the state" means any surface water or ground water, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state. 
"Waters of the United States" means the surface watercourses and water bodies as defined in 40 CFR § 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
"Wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
"Working day" means any calendar day, eight a.m. to five p.m., but not including Saturday, Sunday, any legal holiday recognized by the city or any day for which the city manager's offices are closed for ordinary and general business. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015; Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.070 - Illicit discharges. 
A.  Discharge Prohibitions. 
1.  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause and/or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: 
1.  Water line flushing; 
2.  Individual residential car washing; 
3.  Diverted stream flows; 
4.  Rising ground waters; 
5.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers; 
6.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
7.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
8.  Foundation drains; 
9.  Air conditioning condensation; 
10.  springs; 
11.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
12.  Footing drains; 
13.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
14.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
15.  Incidental runoff from landscaped areas (as defined and in accordance with subsection B.4 of this section). Discharges in excess of an amount deemed to be incidental runoff shall be controlled. Regulated small MS4s shall require parties responsible for such to implement subsections B.4.a - d below. Incidental runoff is defined as unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence. Parties responsible for controlling runoff in excess of incidental runoff shall: 
a.  Detect leaks (for example, from broken sprinkler heads) and correct the leaks within seventy two hours of learning of the leak; 
b.  Properly design and aim sprinkler heads; 
c.  Not irrigate during precipitation events; and 
d.  Manage pond containing recycled water such that no discharge occurs unless the discharge is a result of a twenty-five year, twenty four hour storm event or greater, and the appropriate regional water board is notified by email no later than twenty four hours after the discharge. The notification is to include identifying information, including the pond owner's name and permit identification number. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test. 
d.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the NPDES permitting authority, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
2.  Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
a.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain are prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
B.  Suspension of MS4 Access. 
1.  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. 
a.  The city manager may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
b.  If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to the public. 
2.  Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. 
a.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city manager will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing pursuant to the provision of Section 13.57.120 of this chapter. 
b.  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015; Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.075 - Responsibility to obtain permits and implement BMPS. 
A.  Any person engaged in commercial or industrial activities or operations, or owning commercial or industrial facilities or property which will, or may, result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or receiving waters, shall first obtain any required NPDES stormwater permit and shall install and maintain BMPs consistent with the CASQA industrial/commercial BMP handbook or equivalent. BMPs must be designed to implement the requirements of this chapter and any applicable permit. 
B.  The city manager may require documentation demonstrating coverage by and compliance with any applicable permit, including copies of any notice of intent, stormwater pollution prevention plans, inspection reports, monitoring results, and other information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter or any NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015)  
13.52.080 - During construction stormwater management. 
This section pertains to the requirements of implementing temporary BMPs during construction for erosion and sediment control during construction activities. All discharges are prohibited except for the stormwater and non-stormwater discharges specifically authorized by the state construction general permit (CGP), this chapter or any other NPDES permit. 
Any construction or demolition activity that results in a land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or less than one acre if the construction activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is subject to the statewide construction general permit (CGP) and shall comply with all provisions of such permit in addition to the provisions of this chapter (i.e. a stormwater pollution prevention plan, SWPPP, will be required). Proof of compliance with the CGP is required prior to obtaining a grading or building permit. 
All other construction or demolition activity (i.e. those not subject to the CGP and requirements to develop a SWPPP) shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall prepare an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of subsection E.10 of the state water resources control board waste discharge requirements for stormwater discharge from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) (Order 2013-0001-DWQ, or subsequent versions). 
The following shall be considered construction related violations: 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Construction Related Violations. 
a.  Construction not conducted in accord with the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
b.  Construction not initiated or terminated within the time frame authorized by the city manager by notice, permit or license when such authorization is required by this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter. 
c.  It is a violation of this chapter to not comply with requirements for timely application for a construction stormwater permit, requirements for an erosion and sediment control plan and a notice of termination of construction (NOTC). 
2.  Pollution Prevention Requirements. 
a.  Any and all owners and/or operators of a construction site and any and all other persons undertaking construction activities as a contractor or subcontractor at a construction site shall use best management practices to control, reduce, and prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 and/or waters of the United States. 
b.  The discharge of pollutants to the MS4 and/or waters of the United States from activities conducted by the operator, contractor, or subcontractor include but is not limited to: sediment, silt, earth, soil, dirt, sand and gravel; lime, liquids, solids, and semi-solids used for soil treatment, preparation, or amendment; concrete, slurries, grout, tar, and asphalt; construction vehicle cleaning and wash waters; construction vehicle maintenance fluids such as hydraulic fluids, lubricants, fuels, brake fluids, and coolants; hazardous or extremely hazardous materials; materials resulting from repair, renovation, or demolition such as concrete, reinforcing bar, steel, wire, tar paper, roofing materials, sheet rock, plaster, wood, cellar dirt and carpeting; residual and surplus construction materials; paint, paint thinner, paint equipment cleaner and wastewater from the cleaning of painting equipment and supplies; waste construction material packaging and containers; and construction trash, debris and waste. 
3.  Stop Work Order (SWO). 
a.  Whenever the city manager determines that the operation of a construction site has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, as it may pertain to the operation of the construction site, the city manager may order that a SWO be issued. 
b.  When a SWO is issued, it shall be issued to the operator of the construction site for which construction is to stop, be posted at the site, and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. 
c.  Unless express written exception is made by the city manager, the SWO shall prohibit any and all further construction activity at the site, and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city of any work associated with a building permit, construction stormwater permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence construction or to assume occupancy at the site. 
d.  Issuance of a SWO shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the construction site operator. 
B.  Construction Site. 
1.  Site Limits. A construction site is the location and all the areas wherein construction activity, which is all or part of a common development or project, are occurring, proposed to occur, or have occurred, irrespective of whether that construction is in compliance with this chapter, irrespective of whether that construction activity is ongoing or temporarily suspended for any purpose, and irrespective of whether the city manager has granted authorization to undertake the construction activity. For purposes of this chapter, a construction site shall encompass: 
a.  All land and surface water areas where the construction activities of any type, including all areas of land surface disturbed by or as a consequence of the construction activities or other activities in support of the construction activities, are undertaken as part of a common plan of development or project; 
b.  All areas of land to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken in one phase or stage or different phases or stages and irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken at different, separate or simultaneous times; 
c.  All areas of land where the land is to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether untaken at contiguous or separate locations within the general area encompassed by the common plan of development or project, provided such boundary lies on or is within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more parties undertaking any or all of the construction activities; and 
d.  All areas of ongoing, temporarily suspended, yet-to-be undertaken, and completed construction encompassing the totality of the construction activities, irrespective of whether any or all the construction activities are within compliance with this chapter. 
2.  Redefining of Construction Site Limits. The city manager shall have the right to redefine, for purposes of compliance with this chapter, the limits of a construction site in an extent and amount necessary and sufficient in the judgment of the city manager to prevent the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the construction site to the MS4 or waters of the United States to the maximum extent practicable, provided the limits so defined lies on or within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more operators undertaking any or all of the construction activities at the site. 
3.  Cessation of Construction Site. A construction site shall, for the purposes of this chapter, cease to be a construction site only at such time that all requirements for closure of the construction site as specified by this chapter have been met. 
C.  Operators, Owners and Applicants. 
1.  Definition of Owner and/or Operator. A construction owner/operator, as defined by and for the purposes of this chapter, is the person or persons who, individually or collectively, own or lease the property upon which the construction activity is proposed to, or does, take place; has legal, financial, and operational control over construction specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); has control over activities at the construction site sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this chapter either directly, by delegation, by authorized representative, or by contract; and has the authority for undertaking or directing the undertaking of any or all construction activities at a construction site in accord with plans and specifications. 
a.  Owner and/or Operator Responsibility. A construction owner and/or operator shall be fully responsible for compliance with all requirements of this chapter for construction activities, as may be applicable to the type of construction activities being conducted, proposed to be conducted, or that have been conducted by the owner and/or operator at a construction site, including but not limited to making application for a construction stormwater permit, preparing a erosion and sediment control plan, performing closure of the construction site, and filing a notice of termination of construction. 
b.  Change in Owner and/or Operator. In the event that the owner and/or operator of the construction site changes, all or in part, any and all construction stormwater permits, erosion and sediment control plans, and notices of termination of construction for construction yet to be completed must name the new and continuing owners' and/or operators' names. Any permits, plans, or notices that have been issued or approved by the city for the construction to the original owner(s) must be reissued or re-approved, as appropriate, with the name(s) of the new owner(s) and/or operator(s) in the same manner as the original owner and/or operator, such reissuance or re-approval being obtained no later than two working days after such change. 
2.  Applicant. For the purpose of any applications for construction activities that may be required by this chapter, an applicant is the person or persons making such application and is: 
a.  An owner of the property upon which construction is proposed or is taking place; or 
b.  A lessee if the lessee undertakes development of the property under the terms of the lease. 
3.  Division of Responsibility. In the event the owner and/or operator of a construction site is more than one legal entity, the city manager may, but is not required to, define those areas or sub areas of a construction site or those construction activities at a construction site for which each entity shall be considered responsible and held liable for complying to this chapter. 
D.  Construction Activities. 
1.  Types of Construction Activities. 
a.  Construction activities are those activities which result in exposure of raw soil on a temporary or permanent basis and may include, but are not necessarily limited to, one or more of the following activities or practices when such activities are done for the purpose(s) of: smoothing, clearing, removing trees and vegetation, configuring or shaping the land surface or subsurface; modifying drainage, drainage patterns, drainage conveyances, or drainage facilities removing, destroying, or demolishing existing structures, surfaces or facilities; preparing the land for construction of roads, highways, curbs, gutters, drainage devices, vehicle parking, buildings, structures, walls, roofs, floors, pads, foundations, tanks, basements, pipes or utilities. 
b.  For the purposes of this chapter, the city manager may define any activity or practice that is similar to, in support of, or associated with such activities as a construction activity. 
2.  Construction Conduct. 
a.  Any construction at a construction site shall be performed so as to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediments and other pollutants from the construction site. 
b.  An owner and/or operator of a construction site shall maintain on-site and make available for inspection by the city manager, or appointed representative thereof, any notice, permit or license for construction, and any pollution control plan that may be required by this chapter or other state or federal regulation. 
c.  Application for a construction stormwater permit shall be submitted to the city manager at least two working days prior to beginning construction activities of any type, including clearing and leveling activities, for any construction site for which construction activities are not subject to the provisions of the CGP. 
d.  A construction stormwater permit, issued by the city manager prior to commencement of construction activities, shall be obtained for any construction site for which construction activities are not subject to the provisions of the CGP. 
e.  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the city manager prior to commencement of any construction activity at a construction site for which a construction stormwater permit is required. 
f.  A notice of termination of construction (NOTC) shall be submitted to the city manager prior to final completion of construction activities for any construction site for which a construction stormwater permit was required. 
g.  The city manager may require that a construction site of any size conform to any and all conditions of this chapter for construction activities if the city manager determines that such requirements are necessary to prevent a significant discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the United States, or are necessary because of imminent harm to the public or the environment. 
3.  Closure and Final Stabilization of Construction Site. 
a.  Closure Activities. Construction activities at a site, for the purposes of this chapter, shall not be complete until proper closure of the site has been accomplished. Until such time proper closure has been achieved, the owner and/or operator of the site is subject to all applicable requirements for conduct and completion of construction activities at the construction site. Any owner and/or operator of a construction site shall complete all construction activities at a construction site in compliance with the requirements of this chapter for proper closure. 
b.  Proper Closure. Proper closure includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  Final stabilization of the site; 
ii.  Removal of all construction surplus and residual materials, supplies, packaging, drums, cans and containers; 
iii.  Removal of all surplus and residual soaps, cleaners, pastes mastics, solvents, materials for soil amendment or preparation and similar construction materials; 
iv.  Removal of all excess, surplus, and unused construction vehicle maintenance fluids, including lubricants, fuels, brake fluids and coolants; 
v.  Removal of all wastes, trash and debris; 
vi.  Removal of any waste bins, enclosures, drums, or similar containers which are not intended to serve as permanent waste storage containers at the site; 
vii.  Removal of all temporary stormwater pollution control devices, structures and materials; 
viii.  If not intended for removal in city approved plans or specifications for the site, and to the extent a construction owner and/or operator or their activities are responsible for the damage or loss of function or capacity of stormwater conveyances and appurtenances: 
(A)  Repair or replacement of damaged stormwater conveyances and appurtenances, 
(B)  Repair or replacement of damaged drainage works and facilities, and 
(C)  Restoration of proper function and capacity of stormwater conveyances. 
4.  Inactive Construction Sites. A construction site for which active and ongoing on-site construction activities have halted for a period of fourteen continuous calendar days and for which proper closure actions as required by this chapter have not been conducted, shall be considered in violation of this chapter, unless the construction site owner and/or operator has submitted a NOTC for the site, or it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that: 
i.  Such lack of active and ongoing on-site construction activity is a result of only temporary suspension of activities; and 
ii.  Site conditions are and will be maintained in a condition satisfactory to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the United States to the maximum extent possible during the period of temporary suspension of construction activities or until a NOTC is submitted and approved. 
5.  Notice of Termination of Construction (NOTC). A notice of termination of construction (NOTC) shall be submitted by the owner and/or operator at the completion of construction for any site for which a construction stormwater permit is required or issued. No construction activities can take place at a construction site identified in a construction stormwater permit after a NOTC has been submitted to the city manager, unless the construction stormwater permit has been amended, or another construction stormwater permit has been applied for. 
a.  Contents of NOTC. When a NOTC is submitted for a construction site, the following shall be submitted with the NOTC: 
i.  A description of the means, methods and extent of final stabilization of the construction site, including a summary of actions, procedures or practices that the construction owner and/or operator proposes to perform or be performed by agreement with others after issuance of the NOTC; any other information the city manager may deem necessary, whether or not required of all construction owners and/or operators; and 
ii.  Certification by the operator of the construction site that the site has been stabilized or that agreement for stabilization has been accomplished in accordance with an erosion and sediment control plan approved by the city manager. 
b.  Application Timeline. A NOTC must be submitted by the owner and/or operator of a construction no later than fourteen calendar days after the date for termination of construction given in the construction stormwater permit. 
c.  Amendment to NOTC. 
i.  Amendment to a NOTC can be made without penalty by filing application of an amended NOTC at least two working days prior to the date of termination of construction specified in the NOTC. 
ii.  If amendment to a NOTC is filed less than two working days prior to the date of termination of construction specified in the NOTC, such amendment may be rejected or require reasonable additional fee as may be established by the city manager. 
d.  Acceptance, Conditional Acceptance, or Rejection of NOTC. 
i.  Acceptance of NOTC. The city manager shall issue an acceptance of an NOTC by written communication or default (without written communication) when the city manager is satisfied that: 
(A)  Conditions for closure have been met; 
(B)  The site has been adequately stabilized or provision for final stabilization of the site has been accomplished; 
(C)  The person submitting the NOTC is not in violation of this chapter; 
(D)  The submission of the NOTC has been made in a timely fashion and all other conditions that the city manager may specify have been met. 
ii.  Conditional Acceptance. The city manager may issue a conditional acceptance of the NOTC if the city manager determines there is reasonable expectation that the applicant will meet the conditions specified for conditional acceptance and, by doing so, will meet all conditions for acceptance of the NOTC. Conditions for which the city manager may issue a conditional acceptance include but are not limited to the following: 
(A)  Final stabilization of the construction site is not complete, but is progressing satisfactorily and can be reasonably expected to reach a satisfactory level of complete stabilization without further action on the part of the owner and/or operator; 
(B)  Adequate provision has been made by the owner and/or operator to ensure that satisfactory stabilization will be accomplished by others; 
(C)  Deficiencies in meeting closure requirements will be remedied by others; or 
(D)  Site conditions are such that as to not warrant further stabilization activities at the current time but would warrant further stabilization in the future if site conditions were to change. 
iii.  Final Acceptance to Conditional Acceptance. The owner and/or operator receiving the conditional acceptance shall make application to the city manager in a manner specified by the city manager to receive the final acceptance of the NOTC. Means by which the owner and/or operator can demonstrate satisfaction of the terms of the conditional acceptance include but are not limited to the following: 
(A)  All mandatory deadlines for inspection by the city manager of the areas of the construction site for which the conditions established in the conditional acceptance have passed; 
(B)  The owner and/or operator submits a certification to the city manager that the conditions of the conditional acceptance have been met, the owner and/or operator requests in writing to the city manager that such certification be accepted and the city notifies the owner and/or operator that the request for such acceptance of such certification is accepted; or 
(C)  The owner and/or operator submits a certification to the city manager that the conditions of the conditional acceptance have been met, the owner and/or operator requests in writing to the city manager that such certification be accepted and the city does not notify the operator within thirty calendar days of receipt of such written request that the request for such acceptance of such certification is accepted or denied. 
iv.  Rejection of NOTC. The city manager may reject an application for issuance of a NOTC if the city manager determines conditions for issuance of acceptance of the NOTC are not satisfied. 
(A)  Any rejection of a NOTC shall include notice to the owner and/or operator receiving the rejection, with the reasons for the rejection. 
v.  Revocation of NOTC. The city manager shall have the right to revoke a NOTC within three years of issuance if: 
(A)  Acceptance is found to have been based upon false or misleading information submitted by the owner and/or operator; or 
(B)  Conditions specified in the conditional acceptance were not met. 
E.  Construction Stormwater Permit. 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  A construction stormwater permit authorizes a construction owner and/or operator to conduct construction activities. Obtaining a construction stormwater permit does not relieve an owner and/or operator of complying to any and all applicable requirements of this chapter exclusive of those dealing with construction. 
b.  A construction stormwater permit, when required, shall be obtained prior to the start of any construction activity at a site by application to the city manager by the owner and/or operator of the construction site at which construction occurs or is proposed, such application providing such information the city manager may require. 
c.  Application for a construction stormwater permit shall require the submission of an erosion and sediment control plan to the city manager for review, such plan providing the information the city manager shall deem as necessary to judge the sufficiency of the plan, when implemented, to reduce the discharge of pollutants from the site to the maximum extent practicable. 
d.  The construction stormwater permit must be obtained from the city manager at least two working days prior to commencement of construction. Only that construction activity which is described in the construction stormwater permit can be undertaken. 
e.  The construction stormwater permit shall be posted at the construction site, and no construction activity can occur prior to the date of commencement, or after the date of termination, authorized by the construction stormwater permit. 
f.  Construction must be started no later than thirty calendar days after the date of commencement of constructions specified in the construction stormwater permit. Failure to begin construction within the specified time frame will render the construction stormwater permit void. 
g.  Application for a change in the date of commencement of construction or the date of termination of construction specified in a construction stormwater permit, must be made at least two working days prior to: (1) the date of the proposed change for commencement; and/or (2) the date of the originally specified termination date or latest previously approved date of extension. 
h.  If for any reason the construction stormwater permit is suspended, revoked, terminated or voided, construction activity at the site shall immediately cease. 
i.  The city manager will not issue a construction stormwater permit until the construction owner and/or operator has submitted evidence that all permits directly associated with grading activities, including but not limited to, the CGP, State Water Board 401 Water Quality Certification, U.S. Army Corps 404 Permit, and California Department of Fish and Game 1600 Agreement, have been obtained. 
2.  Contents of a Construction Stormwater Permit. 
a.  Address or other description of location of the construction site; 
b.  Name and address of the construction site owner and/or operator, either property owner or lessee, and name and address of general construction contractor, if different from property owner or lessee; 
c.  Name, address, and business telephone number of the construction site owner and/or operator's on-site representative; 
d.  Earliest date of commencement of construction activity; 
e.  Proposed dates of termination of construction activity, completion of final stabilization activities, and closure of the site; 
f.  Practices to be employed for site stabilization during the course of the construction; 
g.  A site plan identifying land areas to be disturbed and types of disturbance proposed, with identification of those areas which will, after completion of all construction activity, be pervious and impervious; 
h.  Description of means by which the site is to be stabilized during suspension of construction activity for periods of fourteen or more days and permanently stabilized by the time of completion of construction activities; 
i.  Any other information the city manager may deem necessary, whether or not required of any other owner and/or operator making application for a construction stormwater permit; and 
j.  Certification by the applicant for the construction stormwater permit that the information provided on the construction stormwater permit application is true and accurate. 
3.  Amendment to Construction Stormwater Permit. 
a.  Application for amendment to a construction stormwater permit can be made at any time two or more working days prior to the time identified in the construction stormwater permit for completion of construction activities, provided the person(s) making application is not in violation of this chapter. 
b.  If the application for amendment to a construction stormwater permit requires a change in the erosion and sediment control plan in order for the erosion and sediment control plan to remain true and accurate should construction be undertaken in accordance with the amendment, an appropriately modified erosion and sediment control plan shall also be provided at the time of application for amendment to the city manager. 
4.  Late Filing of Amendment to a Construction Stormwater Permit. 
a.  If application for amendment to a construction stormwater permit is made less than two working days prior to the time for which the activities or conditions described by the amendment are to occur, exist or come about, and such activities or conditions are not authorized by the construction stormwater permit prior to application for amendment, the application shall be deemed to be a late filing of construction stormwater permit amendment. 
b.  A late filing of construction stormwater permit amendment shall meet all the same conditions and requirements as application submitted more than two working days prior to the time for which the activities or conditions described by the amendment are to occur, exist or come about, and include other such information the city manager may require. 
c.  Construction to be undertaken in accord with a late filing of construction stormwater permit amendment shall not be undertaken until such amendment is approved by the city manager. 
d.  Approval by the city manager of a late filing of construction stormwater permit amendment or payment of any fees for such filing shall not relieve the applicant from any or all administrative enforcement remedies, judicial enforcement remedies, enforcement actions, or other remedies allowed by this chapter. 
5.  Exemptions. Exemptions from requirements for a construction stormwater permit and erosion and sediment control plan shall apply for the following situations or conditions: 
a.  The construction activity is undertaken at a single or multiple family residential property site for the sole purpose of maintenance of the residential property site; 
b.  The city manager determines the construction is necessary on an emergency basis because of imminent harm or endangerment to the public or environment, in which case the construction may be continued only so long as such imminent harm or endangerment or threat of harm or endangerment exists; 
c.  The city manager may provide a waiver to the requirement for a construction stormwater permit upon the request of the owner and/or operator seeking such waiver. The waiver is to be provided only if the construction for which waiver is sought is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager to meet all of the following conditions: 
i.  Will not contribute to a violation of this chapter or any permit or license the city may hold to discharge stormwater, 
ii.  The construction activity is of such size, extent, magnitude, or location as to neither allow, cause, or have potential to cause a significant discharge of sediments or other pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the United States, 
iii.  There is a compelling public interest for issuance of a waiver, 
iv.  It is in the general interest of the health and safety of people in the city or protection of the environment that such waiver be provided, such interest not to be based upon cost or economic considerations as they may apply to or affect the owner and/or operator seeking waiver of the permit, and 
v.  Other such conditions the city manager may deem necessary to ensure that significant discharge of sediment and other pollutants does not occur. 
F.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. An erosion and sediment control plan is required for all projects with ground disturbing activities that are not subject to the provisions of the CGP. A SWPPP developed pursuant to the CGP may be substituted for the erosion and sediment control plan. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared in accordance with good pollution control practices and must meet the requirements of section E.10 of the State Water Resources Control Board Waste Discharge Requirements for Stormwater Discharge from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) (Order 2013-0001-DWQ, or subsequent versions). 
The main objective of the plan is to identify potential sources of pollution, including sediment, which may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges associated with construction and development. The plan must describe the implementation of best management practices (BMPs), which will be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction and post-development runoff. The plan must also include the rationale used for selecting BMPs including supporting soil loss calculations, if necessary. Erosion and sediment control plans shall be retained on-site during the course of construction and shall be available for inspection by the city upon request. 
1.  Contents of Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
a.  Site Description. 
i.  A description of the construction activity; 
ii.  A copy of any development plans; 
iii.  A proposed construction schedule; 
iv.  Total area of the site, and total disturbed area, including off-site staging/storage areas; 
v.  An estimate of the runoff coefficient before and after construction activities are completed, and existing data describing the soil and soil erosion potential; 
vi.  A description of the existing vegetation at the site, including coverage; 
vii.  The location of other sources of pollution, such as vehicle fueling, storage of chemicals, concrete washout areas, etc.; and 
viii.  The name of the receiving water(s) and description of any outfalls (size, type and location), if the discharge is to a MS4, the name of the system, the location of the storm sewer discharge, and the ultimate receiving water(s). 
ix.  List applicable permits directly associated with grading activities, including but not limited to, the CGP, State Water Board 401 Water Quality Certification, U.S. Army Corps 404 Permit, and California Department of Fish and Game 1600 Agreement. 
x.  Include evidence that all permits directly associated with the grading activity have been obtained prior to commencement of soil disturbing activities. 
b.  Best Management Practices (BMPs). The plan should indicate locations for and descriptions of control measures that will be used. The plan should clearly describe the implementation of BMPs relevant to each phase of site development such as: 
i.  Before clearing and grading activities begin; 
ii.  During all phases of construction; and 
iii.  Post-construction/post development. 
c.  Control Measures. 
i.  Construction Phase. Construction phase control measures to be described in the erosion and sediment control plan may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Temporary Sediment Control Measures. 
(1)  Silt fence; 
(2)  Sand bag berms; 
(3)  Hay bales; 
(4)  Check dams; 
(5)  Interceptor swales/dikes. 
(B)  Temporary Stabilization Measures. 
(1)  Temporary seeding; 
(2)  Erosion control blankets/matting; 
(3)  Mulch/compost; 
(4)  Temporary sodding. 
(C)  Final Stabilization Measures. 
(1)  Permanent seeding; 
(2)  Permanent sodding; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces. 
d.  Good Housekeeping. The plan should include inspection and maintenance procedures during the entire construction phase to ensure that BMPs are in good and effective operation condition. 
i.  Inspections. 
(A)  An inspection of the entire construction site should be performed in accordance with the required inspection frequencies determined by the project's priority level. 
(B)  Complete an inspection report (provided by the city) for each inspection performed. 
(C)  Provide a copy of each inspection report to the city. 
(D)  Inspection reports should be retained on-site as part of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
ii.  Maintenance. 
(A)  Maintenance shall be performed on applicable BMPs as soon as possible in areas identified in the inspection reports. 
(B)  Maintenance shall be performed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications or other sources determined by the city manager to be acceptable. 
(C)  Maintenance records shall be retained on-site as part of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
iii.  Non-Stormwater Discharges. The erosion and sediment control plan should include a location and description of non-stormwater discharges and a description of the BMPs for managing non-stormwater discharges from sources including but not limited to: 
(A)  Return flows from landscape irrigation; 
(B)  Ground water; 
(C)  Water line flushing; 
(D)  Discharges from potable water sources. 
(E)  Dewatering 
e.  Revisions to erosion and sediment control plan. 
i.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately reflect site conditions and the construction activities proposed to be undertaken. Revisions necessary to maintain an accurate and up-to-date erosion and sediment control plan shall be made in a timely fashion but in no case later than two working days after the occurrence of conditions or activities requiring such revisions. 
ii.  If the conditions or activities described by a erosion and sediment control plan revision could be reasonably expected to result in an increase in the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the site, such revision must be approved by the city manager prior to implementation of the proposed revision at least two working days prior to the implementation of activities described by the revision. 
iii.  The city manager shall have two working days to approve or reject a revision to a erosion and sediment control plan after submittal of a proposed revision. If the city manager does not issue an approval or rejection of the revision within the acceptable time frame, the revision(s) shall be assumed to be approved. 
C.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). 
1.  For any construction or demolition activity that results in a land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or less than one acre if the construction activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is subject to the State Construction General Permit (CGP) and that is required to have a SWPPP, the SWPPP shall be prepared in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
2.  Any stormwater pollution prevention plan required by federal or state regulation shall be retained on-site during the all phases of construction and made available to inspection by the city upon request. Failure to produce such required SWPPPs shall be grounds for issuance of a SWO. 
3.  The city manager may request and receive in a timely fashion, at the time of, or after application for a construction stormwater permit, a copy of any SWPPP required by federal or state regulation for discharge of stormwaters from a construction site. Failure to provide such requested pollution control plan within a timeframe specified by the city manager shall be grounds for a SWO. 
4.  The city manager may require additional information, plans, or specifications are provided in a SWPPP for a construction site if the city manager determines such additional information, plans, or specifications are necessary to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015; Ord. No. 617, § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.085 - Post construction stormwater management. 
This section pertains to the requirements of implementing permanent stormwater BMPs into a project design and to help manage stormwater runoff throughout the life of the facility (i.e. post construction). These BMPs are not the same as the temporary BMPs used to comply with during construction requirements discussed separately. 
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. These goals are achieved by designing sites that disturb only the smallest area necessary, minimize soil compaction and imperviousness, preserve natural drainages, vegetation and buffer zones, and utilize on-site stormwater treatment techniques. These principles and techniques are collectively known as low impact development (LID). The California Regional Water Resources Control Board has determined that LID techniques are effective, feasible and economically practical, and that they are a component of the maximum extent practicable (MEP) standard. 
Any person engaged in activities, which will, or may result in pollutants entering the city storm drainage system or which may otherwise cause or contribute to pollution shall undertake all feasible measures to reduce the introduction of such pollutants, including the implementation of LID techniques. Where best management practices requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state or regional agency for any activity, operation or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
A.  Authority 
1.  The Federal Clean Water Act, the implementing regulations for the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), and the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act provide for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged to waters of the state and United States by extending NPDES requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharges to and from the storm drain system. 
2.  The city is required to enroll as a permittee under the State of California's Waste Discharge Requirements for Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ) and the NPDES General Permit No. CAS000004 (General Permit). Under the provisions of the general permit, the city is required to possess the necessary legal authority and implement appropriate procedures to regulate the entry of pollutants and non-stormwater discharges into the storm drain system. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code § 13000 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by effectively prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system. 
C.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined in Section 13.52.060 shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act Section 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions in any applicable permit issued by the regional board, as appropriate, as such permits may be amended from time to time. 
D.  Regulatory Consistency. This section shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, any permit issued under these acts, and any applicable regulations. 
E.  Ultimate Responsibility for Discharges. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the state or United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter. 
F.  Post Construction Requirements. Each responsible person for any site, activity, operation, or facility that may discharge any pollutant to the storm drain system shall implement those BMPs as may be designated by the city manager. 
1.  All new development and redevelopment projects must comply with the post-construction stormwater management requirements as defined in the most recent edition of the city's department of public works, standard details and specifications and the most recent post construction requirements adopted by the State Water Resource Control Board and/or the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board (i.e. Resolution No. R3-2013-0032, Attachment 1: Post-Construction Stormwater Management Requirements for Development Projects in the Central Coast Region, dated July 12, 2013, or revisions thereafter). 
2.  For projects determined to be a "regulated project," subject to the post-construction requirements, the project must implement the applicable performance requirements (No. 1 through No. 5, as applicable), and prepare and process through the city a "stormwater control plan" demonstrating the project complies with each applicable set of post construction requirements. 
3.  The responsible person for a new development or redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this section on a new development or redevelopment project. Failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
4.  The city manager may require the responsible person for any new development and redevelopment project to enter into an agreement for the operation and maintenance of any structural control measures and to record such agreement with the county recorder's office. 
G.  Inspection and Monitoring 
1.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to confirm compliance with or enforce any of the provisions of this section, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any premises any condition which may constitute a violation of the provisions of this section, the official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times, with presentation of proper identification, to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the official by this section including but not limited to sampling and record examination. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
2.  The city manager and authorized enforcement officials are authorized to immediately enter any premises, inspect, monitor, sample, and undertake other necessary actions when, in the city manager's opinion, there exists an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015)  
13.52.090 - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, such person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, such person shall notify the city in person or by the designated phone number for reporting spills or the designated electronic transmission address no later than the next working day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager within three working days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015; Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.100 - Citizen reports of violations. 
A.  Report by any Person. Any person shall have the right to report to the city manager or an office designated by the city manager, any spill, release, illicit connection or other instance of anyone (as may be identified by name, title, employing company, legal identity, common place, name, or other description) discharging into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation of this chapter of which the person becomes aware. 
B.  Action Upon Report. The city manager or a designated city office shall receive all such reports by telephone, electronic mail transmission, in writing or in person. A written or electronic record of each such report will be maintained and kept on file for a period of at least five years by the city, and a copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting person upon request at no charge. Also upon request, the city manager will inform the person making such report of any action undertaken by the city in response to such report. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.110 - Enforcement. 
A.  Remediation, Abatement and Restoration Orders. 
1.  When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, and the city manager has reasonable evidence to suspect that such a violation has adversely affected the MS4 or waters of the United States, the city manager may issue a remediation, abatement and restoration order to the violator directing such violator to undertake and implement any appropriate action, the city manager may designate to remediate or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, and to restore any part of the MS4 within the city that has been harmed, provided such ordered actions are limited to actions lying within city boundaries. Such remediation, abatement, and restoration actions must occur within seventy two hours of notification and as soon as possible for high risk spills and may include but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, or restoration actions; 
b.  Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; 
c.  Prevention, minimization, or mitigation of any damage to the public health or the environment that may result from the violation; and 
d.  Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. 
2.  The remediation, abatement, and restoration order may direct that the remediation, abatement, or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and be completed within a specified period of time. Abatement of uncontrolled sources of pollutants that could pose an environmental threat shall occur within thirty days of notification. When all parties agree that clean-up activities cannot be completed within the original compliance schedule, a new compliance schedule shall be implemented and the appropriate regional board shall be notified in writing within five business days of the determination that the compliance. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (exhibit A), 7-1-2015; Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.115 - Citations. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter may be subject to an administrative citation and fee, as set forth in Section 13.52.170. such citations may be levied against parties responsible for violations of any provision of this chapter either immediately at the site or at any time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 2 (Exhibit A), 7-1-2015)  
13.52.120 - Rights to reconsideration, hearing and appeals. 
A.  Reconsideration of and Hearing of Petitions. 
1.  Any person subject to a stop work order; compliance order; a remediation, abatement and restoration order; or an emergency cease and desist order may petition in writing to the city manager to reconsider the basis for the order within ten calendar days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order. 
2.  Failure to submit a written petition for reconsideration within ten calendar days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order. 
3.  In its petition for reconsideration, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition. 
4.  The effect of any compliance order; and any remediation, abatement, and restoration order shall be stayed pending the city manager's consideration of the petition for reconsideration, and any hearing thereon, unless the city manager expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order shall not be stayed pending the city manager's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the city manager expressly and in writing stays the emergency cease and desist order. 
5.  Within ten calendar days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the city manager shall either: (1) grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; (2) deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact is raised; or (3) if a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, schedule a show cause hearing on the petition. 
6.  Written notice of any hearing set by the city manager as a result of a petition for reconsideration shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the petitioning party. 
7.  The city manager may conduct the hearing and take evidence, or may designate any employee of the city or any specially-designated attorney or engineer to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
b.  Take and gather evidence; and 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city manager for action thereon. 
8.  At any hearing held pursuant to a petition for reconsideration, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to legal representation and may present his or her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and may conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. Notwithstanding, the parties thereto shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. A transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
9.  After the city manager has reviewed the evidence, the city manager shall either: (1) grant the petition; (2) deny the petition; or (3) grant the petition in part and deny it in part. The city manager may modify the order giving rise to the petition for reconsideration as may be the appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and the city manager's action on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  If a discharger or operator is penalized as a result of a stop work order; compliance order; a remediation, abatement and restoration order; or an emergency cease and desist order, such discharger or operator may file a written appeal to the city manager. The appeal must include evidence proving that the discharger or operator did not violate this chapter. The appeal must be filed within five working days of the discharger or operator receiving the penalty. 
2.  Failure to submit an appeal within five working days of the discharger or operator receiving the penalty shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.130 - Civil and criminal penalties. 
A.  Civil Remedies. City shall be entitled to seek any and all civil penalties available under applicable law in state or federal court for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Criminal Penalties. 
1.  Any person who has violated any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars per violation, per day. 
2.  Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than four thousand dollars per violation, per day. 
C.  Determination of Fines. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.140 - Right of entry. 
The city manager and/or their appointed representative may, where reasonable cause exists, with or without a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction enter upon any property for examination of the same to ascertain whether a violation of the requirements of this chapter and shall be exempt from any legal action or liability on account thereof. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.150 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisances may be taken. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.160 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the city manager to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.52.170 - Fees. 
A.  Implementation Fees. The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing this chapter, which costs may include, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers; 
2.  Fees for issuance of permits; 
3.  Fees for review of notices and plans for construction, termination of construction, and stormwater pollution prevention control, irrespective of any acceptance or rejection of such notices or plans by the city manager; 
4.  Fees for conduct of site inspections by the city when requested by an operator of a site or facility, irrespective of whether such inspection is required by this chapter; 
5.  Fees for site inspection by the city pursuant to determination of compliance to conditions of a conditional notice of termination of construction; 
6.  Fees for responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances, and other pollutants; and 
7.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
B.  Separation of Fees. The fees described in this section relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
C.  Fee Summary. The fee schedule shall be as determined from time to time by adoption of resolutions by the city council of the city of Soledad. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Title 14 - IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.06 - PUBLIC FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 681, § 2, adopted October 2, 2013, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 14.06, §§ 14.06.010—14.06.111, and adding a new Ch. 14.06. Former Ch. 14.06 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 637 of 2006; Ord. No. 652 of 2007; and Ord. No. 664 of 2009. 
 
14.06.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to impose public facilities development impact mitigation fees on new residential, commercial, industrial and other developments in the city in order to offset the costs of upgrading and expanding public facilities and public services necessitated by such developments. 
B.  General Use Guidelines. In addition to any use identified in a specific section of this chapter, revenues raised by payment of identified public facilities development impact fees may be used within the category of facilities for which they were established for the following purposes: 
1.  To pay for the design, engineering, right of way acquisition and construction of designated facilities and improvements and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related thereto; and 
2.  To reimburse the city for designated improvements constructed with city funds from other sources, together with accrued interest; and 
3.  To reimburse developers who have designed and constructed designated improvements which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity, in an amount established by written contract and approved by the city engineer based on construction costs and/or appraisals prior to the issuance of building permits; and 
4.  To pay for and/or reimburse costs of program development and ongoing administration of the involved public facility development impact fee program. 
C.  Unexplained Funds. Whenever fees collected pursuant to this ordinance remain unexpended or uncommitted for five or more years after the deposit of the fee, the city shall follow the reporting, and if applicable, refund process set forth in Government Code Section 66001(d). 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.030 - Time of payment. 
Fees imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable on the date of final inspection of the development, or on the date the certificate of occupancy for the same is issued, whichever occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.040 - Effective date. 
Fees or charges imposed pursuant to this chapter upon single-family or multi-family residential "development projects," as defined in California Government Code Section 65928, shall be effective no sooner than sixty days following the final action on the adoption of the fee or charge, or increase in the fee or charge. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.050 - Police facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Findings. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of municipal police facilities and equipment, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Imposed. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing police facilities and acquire related vehicles and equipment, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a police facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family unit 	$197.00 per unit. 
Multifamily unit 	$174.00 per unit. 
Commercial use 	$35.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office uses 	$50.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial uses 	$35.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in applicable provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the police facilities development impact fee may be adjusted in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of police capital facilities to meet needs created by the new development (e.g. construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "police facilities development impact fee fund." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of police facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, industrial and other developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land, buildings and other improvements to land, and capital items of police equipment, including vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.060 - Fire protection facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Findings. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of municipal fire protection facilities, vehicles and equipment, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Imposed. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing fire protection facilities and acquire related vehicles and equipment, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a fire protection facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family unit 	$1,077.00 per unit. 
Multifamily unit 	$953.00 per unit. 
Commercial uses 	$425.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office uses 	$610.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial uses 	$425.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in applicable provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the fire protection facilities development impact fee may be adjusted, in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of fire protection facilities to meet needs created by the new development (e.g. Construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "fire protection facilities development impact fee." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of fire protection facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, industrial and other developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land, buildings and other improvements to land, and capital items of fire equipment, including vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.070 - General government facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the City of Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, and industrial projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of general government facilities, vehicles and equipment, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Established. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing government facilities and acquire related vehicles and equipment, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a general government facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family unit 	$1,366.00 per unit. 
Multifamily units 	$1,208.00 per unit 
Commercial uses 	$244.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office uses 	$349.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial uses 	$244.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in the provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the general government facilities development impact fee may be adjusted in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of general government facilities to meet needs created by the new development (e.g. Construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "general government facilities development impact fee." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of general government facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land, buildings and other improvements to land, and capital items of general government facilities equipment, including vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.080 - Traffic facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the City of Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of traffic facilities, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Established. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing traffic facilities, such as but not limited to streets, traffic signals and bridges, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a traffic facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family units 	$2,957.00 per unit. 
Multifamily units 	$2,055.00 per unit. 
Commercial uses 	$1,940.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office uses 	$2,849.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial uses 	$407.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in the provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. 
1.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the traffic facilities development impact fee may be adjusted in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of traffic facilities to meet needs created by the new development. The city may also negotiate with a developer to construct a street or signal improvement (or portion thereof) contained in the city's planned traffic improvement project plan. In such cases, developer will receive a credit based on the cost of said improvements subtracted from the impact fee calculated under this section. Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
2.  The city shall have the discretion to impose a traffic facilities development impact fee based on the actual trip generation rate of a given development, if established by reliable data provided by a project proponent, to ensure that a project pays its fair share of planned traffic facility costs. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "traffic facilities development impact fee fund." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of traffic facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land and other improvements to land, and capital items of circulation facilities equipment. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.090 - Storm drain facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the City of Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of storm drain facilities, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Established. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing storm drainage facilities, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a storm drain facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family units 	$3,526.00 per unit. 
Multifamily units 	$2,328.00 per unit. 
Commercial uses 	$1,658.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office uses 	$1,481.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial uses 	$987.00 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in applicable provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the storm drain facilities development impact fee may be adjusted, in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of storm drain facilities to meet needs created by the new development (e.g. construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "storm drain facilities development impact fee." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of storm drain facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land and other improvements to land, and capital items of storm drain facilities equipment. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.100 - Park facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Findings. The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the city public facilities development impact fee update, prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the acquisition of parkland facilities and equipment, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Imposed. Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential development and the need to acquire parkland and expand park facilities and the estimated capital costs of constructing the same, a park facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single family unit 	$4,982.00 per unit. 
Multifamily unit 	$4,405.00 per unit. 
 
The amount of the fee may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in the provisions of the California Government Code, taking into consideration the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees. Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection B of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the park facilities development impact fee may be adjusted, in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the acquisition of parkland and construction of park facilities to meet needs created by the new development (e.g. Construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "park facilities development impact fee fund." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of parkland and park capital facilities as made necessary by new residential development in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land, buildings and other improvements to land, and capital items related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-2-2013)  
14.06.110 - Wastewater facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Findings: The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the city public facilities development impact fee update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of wastewater facilities, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Imposed: Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing wastewater facilities, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a wastewater facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single Family Units 	$2049 per unit. 
Multifamily Units 	$1803 per unit. 
Commercial Uses 	$1500 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office Uses 	$1500 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial Uses 	$1250 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in applicable provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees: Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit: Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B of this section, the waste water facilities development impact fee may be adjusted, in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of wastewater facilities to meet needs created by the new development. (e.g. construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds: Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "wastewater facilities development impact fee." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of wastewater facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land and other improvements to land, and capital items of wastewater facilities equipment. 
(Ord. No. 684, § 2, 5-7-2014)  
14.06.120 - Water facilities development impact fees. 
A.  Findings: The city council finds, based upon the studies, analyses and projections contained in the general plan, upon the content of the City of Soledad Public Facilities Development Impact Fee Update prepared by Willdan Financial Services in 2013, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by it, that the development of new residential, commercial, industrial and other projects in the city will cause the city to incur substantial capital costs for the construction and acquisition of water facilities, and that the imposition of public facilities development impact fees, in the amounts specified in subsection B of this section, is necessary in order to offset such costs. 
B.  Fee Imposed: Pursuant to the findings contained in subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the relationship between new residential, commercial and industrial development and the need to construct new or expand existing water facilities, and the estimated capital costs of constructing and/or acquiring the same, a water facilities development impact fee is imposed upon each new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city according to the following schedule: 
Single Family Units 	$5408 per unit. 
Multifamily Units 	$2812 per unit. 
Commercial Uses 	$2272 per thousand sq. ft. 
Office Uses 	$2272 per thousand sq. ft. 
Industrial Uses 	$1893 per thousand sq. ft. 
 
The amount of the fees may hereafter be fixed by resolution of the city council in accordance with the process established in applicable provisions of the California Government Code, taking into account the matters set forth in subsection A and any other relevant evidence. 
C.  Annual Adjustment of Fees: Notwithstanding substantive adjustment of impact fees based on reconsideration or updated analyses of those matters set forth in subsection A of this section, the fees established in subsection B shall be adjusted every year on July 1, commencing July 1, 2014, to reflect the annual percentage change in the construction cost index for San Francisco as of December 1 of the previous year as reported in the Engineering News-Record. 
D.  Exceptions; Fee Adjustment, Credit: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the water facilities development impact fee may be adjusted, in those cases where, in a development agreement or other contract between the city and a developer, the city has specifically agreed to said adjustment in consideration of other mitigating actions taken or agreed to by the developer which have a reasonable relationship to the construction or acquisition of water facilities to meet needs created by the new development. (e.g. construction of oversized improvements or off-site improvements; provision of property). Where the development plan provides for the replacement of an existing occupancy covered under this section with another covered occupancy, a credit for fees otherwise payable under this section shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the existing occupancy which is being replaced. 
E.  Deposit and Use of Funds: Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in a special fund which is hereby created and established for such purpose, to be known and designated as the "water facilities development impact fee." Monies deposited in such fund shall not be commingled with the general fund or other revenues of the city, with the exception of short term investments. Monies deposited in said fund, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be used exclusively for the purchase, acquisition or construction of water facilities as made necessary by new residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the city. The term "facilities" as used herein includes land and other improvements to land, and capital items of water facilities equipment. 
(Ord. No. 684, § 2, 5-7-2014)  
Title 15 - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Enforcement. 
A.  The building official and all duly appointed subordinates are authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this title and the referenced technical codes and bulletins. 
B.  The building official and all duly appointed subordinates, pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state, are authorized to arrest a person without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence which is a violation of any of the provisions of this title and the referenced technical codes and bulletins. Upon making such an arrest, the building official or the delegated subordinate shall prepare a citation and release the person arrested pursuant to Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, the provisions of which are adopted by reference as part of this section. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.020 - Administration. 
The administration of the several uniform codes, which are made a part of this title, shall be pursuant to the provisions of the 1997 edition of the Uniform Administrative Code, as adopted with modifications in this title. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.030 - Modifications. 
A.  The building official may, in specific cases, grant modifications not in conflict with state law from any provision of this title or of the uniform codes adopted in this title whenever he finds that both the following exist: 
1.  That special circumstances exist in a particular case, and that practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship would result from strict interpretation and enforcement of any such provision; 
2.  That the granting of a modification would not result in unsafe or unsanitary construction, design or conditions, or public health, safely or welfare; 
3.  Such modification does not lessen any fire-protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity. 
B.  In granting any modifications, the building official may impose such conditions thereon as will, in his opinion, substantially secure the objectives of the regulation or provision to which such modification is granted. 
C.  Application for modifications shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the building official or the equivalent, whose findings and decision thereon shall be in writing and filed in the office of the building official. 
D.  The building official may, in his discretion, decline to decide any application for a modification, and may refer the same decision to the board of appeals, which shall, upon such reference, have the same powers as the building official to grant such modification. 
E.  An applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the building official may appeal to the board of appeals by filing with the clerk or secretary of the board their appeal in writing. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.040 - Appeals board. 
A.  In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of provisions of this title, a board of appeals is created, consisting of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, who shall be appointed by, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. 
B.  The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. 
The board of appeals shall hear appeals from all decisions of the building official, including the denial of a modification from the provisions of this title referred to it by the building official. Upon such reference, or upon appeal, it shall have the same power as the building official to grant such modifications and impose conditions thereon. 
C.  The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this title nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this title. 
D.  Appeals to the board of appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with its secretary within ten days after written notice of the decision of the building official has been mailed to the applicant. The board of appeals shall hear appeals and applications for modifications referred to it by the building official after not less than five days' notice in writing to the building official and the appellant or applicant. 
E.  Members of the board of appeals shall serve without compensation, but shall receive their actual and necessary expenses in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.050 - Exemptions. 
This title shall not apply: 
A.  To any agricultural building or structure that contains an area of less than five hundred square feet and which is less than two stories in height and which is located on a parcel of land which is more than two and one half acres in size and which land is used primarily for agricultural, horticultural, viticulture or animal husbandry purposes; 
B.  To any structure used exclusively as a telephone booth or as an outdoor advertising sign, subject to the permit requirements of the California Outdoor Advertising Act; 
C.  To any building or structure owned by a governmental agency, except local agencies as defined from time to time in Section 53090 of the Government Code, which shall comply with this title to the extent provided in Sections 53090 to 53096, inclusive, of the Government Code, as those sections read as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as they may thereafter be amended; 
D.  To the installation by an appliance dealer, whether licensed by the state as an electrical contractor or not so licensed, to install electrical appliances sold by the dealer when, and only when, the total installation charge does not exceed fifty dollars, and when all work is done in making such installation is inside the exterior walls of the building or structure involved. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.060 - Saving clause. 
The enactment of this title shall not constitute a bar to the prosecution and punishment of any act already committed in violation of the ordinance repealed by this title. No action or proceeding commenced before the ordinances codified in this title take effect, and no right accrued, is affected by this title, but all procedures thereafter taken shall conform to the provisions of this title so far as possible. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.070 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful (a misdemeanor) for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this title and the technical codes adopted herein. Any structure, construction or installation undertaken or permitted to continue in violation of this title or the codes adopted herein is also declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.080 - Liability. 
The building official charged with the enforcement of this title and the technical codes, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or omission in the discharge of the assigned duties. 
This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling a building, structure or building service equipment therein for damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or permits or certificates issued under this code. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.04.090 - Copies of adopted codes to be made available to public for inspection. 
At least one copy of each code adopted by reference under this title shall be kept in the office of the building official at all times while the ordinances codified in this title remain in force and shall be made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2003)  
15.04.100 - Partial invalidity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinances codified in this title and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections are declared invalid. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 15.08 - ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 706, § 2, adopted January 4, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.110, and § 3 of Ord. No. 706 enacted a new Chapter 15.08 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 672, adopted November 3, 2010. 
 
15.08.010 - Findings. 
Pursuant to the authority provided by California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5, amendment of the codes referenced in this Chapter, as set forth below in individual sections, is necessary to serve the public interest by reducing the risk to life and/or property of the citizens of Soledad because of the following conditions: 
A.  The City is located in a seismically active area. The City is in close proximity to the San Andreas Fault, the longest and potentially most devastating earthquake fault in the State of California. The San Andreas Fault is considered to be potentially dangerous to areas which lie within 50 to 100 miles of its trace, and lies a mere 13.4 miles to the northeast of Soledad. Although no active faults are located within the Soledad Planning Area, the loosely consolidated nature of underlying soils is likely to result in severe ground shaking and possible ground failure during strong earthquakes. Such factors also contribute to concerns regarding slope instability in the foothills and mountains surrounding the City. Seismic concerns require modification to the code provisions to ensure public safety and the integrity of existing and new structures. 
B.  Portions of the City are subject to flooding from the Salinas River and major storm water flows from the northeast hillside area of the City. During the 1990s the City incurred damage from flooding on two separate occasions after heavy rainfall. Flooding and drainage concerns require modifications to the code provisions to ensure public safety and prevent or minimize potential property damage from floodwaters. 
C.  The City is subject to fire hazards. The abundance of natural grasses east of the city limits, west of the railroad tracks, and along the Salinas River Basin, when paired with the strong prevailing winds common to this region of Monterey County, presents a special risk to fire hazards. These hazards require modifications to the code provisions to ensure public safety and prevent or minimize fire risks to property within the City. 
Additionally, although not required by regional variations, certain adjustments to the administrative provisions of identified Code provisions are necessary in order to create a workable scheme of code enforcement within the City of Soledad. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.020 - 2016 California Building Code Volumes 1, 2 adopted by reference—Exceptions. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Code Council, entitled "2016 California Building Code Volume 1, 2" including Chapter 1 and appendix I and J and other California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department, but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this Chapter in full and at length, except for the following amendments: 
Amendment No. 1
Section 101.4 Referenced codes 
Sections 101.4.1 to 101.4.7 are deleted. 
Amendment No. 2
Section 105.3.1.1 Action on application 
Section 105.3.1.1 of the California Building Code is hereby added as follows: 
 Section 105.3.1.1 The Building Official shall not issue any permit to any person who has failed to correct any previous violation of any provisions of this Title, or any code adopted by this Title, or any other provision of this Municipal Code relating to the project, after notification of the same, until such time as all previous violations have been satisfactorily corrected; provided, however, the Building Official may issue such permit if the violation is being corrected and will be completed by a time designated by the Building Official. 
Amendment No. 3
Section 109.2.1 Schedule of Permit Fees 
Section 109.2.1 of the California Building Code is hereby added as follows: 
 Section 109.2.1 The fee for each building permit shall be as set forth in Tables Nos. 3-A through 3-H of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code as provided, however, that the fee tables set forth therein (Table 3-A to and including Table No. 3-H) shall be updated and approved by the City Council from time to time and be based upon nationally recognized construction values adjusted to the local region. Where a technical code has been adopted by the City for which no fee schedule is shown in this code, the fee required shall be in accordance with the schedule established by the City Council or a nationally recognized standard adjusted to the local region. 
 The fee for each combination building permit shall be one and one-half times that set forth in Tables Nos. 3-A through 3-H of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code as provided, however, that the fee tables set forth therein (Table 3-A to and including Table No. 3-H) and shall be updated from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
 The fee for each building and/or combination permit shall be as set forth above. An additional fee titled "Office automation/computerization" shall be a minimum of two dollars ($2.00) or one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the amount of the permit. Revenues shall be used for technologies related to permit issuance. 
 An additional fee titled "Building Department Training" shall be a minimum of two dollars ($2.00) or three-tenths percent (0.3%) of the amount of the permit. Revenues shall be used for the mandatory continuing education of department staff that is associated with the enforcement of codes related to permit issuance (AB 717). 
 The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of these codes shall be made by the Building Official. 
Amendment No. 4
Section 109.2.2 Document Storage 
Section 109.2.2 of the California Building Code is hereby added: 
 Section 109.2.2 The fee for each building and/or combination permit shall be as set forth above. An additional fee titled "Document Storage" shall be a minimum of one dollar ($1.00) or one and one-hundred twenty-five thousandths percent (1.125%) of the amount of the permit. Revenues shall be used for the expenses associated with storage of document related to permit issuance 
Amendment No. 5
Section 113 Board of Appeals 
Section 113 Board of Appeals of the California Building Code is deleted. 
Amendment No. 6
Section 202 Definitions. 
Section 202 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to add as follows: 
  Building Department Training is defined as any training, seminars, courses, meetings, certifications, test, equipment, books, videos or memberships that are beneficial to continuing education of department personnel. 
  Building Permit is defined as a permit for the scope of construction work regulated solely by a single model code. 
  Combination Building Permit is defined as a permit for the scope of construction work regulated by two or more of the model codes. 
  Document Storage Fee is defined as the amount associated with the indefinite storage of building department documents. 
  Model Code is defined as California Building Code Volume 1, 2 California Electrical Code, California Mechanical Code, California Plumbing Code, California Residential Code and the California Fire Code. 
  Office Automation/Computerization is defined as a process or means that would allow interaction of persons with the permit process. Customer could inquire about permit status, types of, and completion of inspections, comments, questions and information from the Building Department via the Internet. 
  Amendment No. 7 
Section 406.3.1.1 Ventilation, private garage 
Section 406.3.1.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to add as follows: 
 Section 406.3.1.1 For natural ventilation purposes, the exterior side of the structure shall have a uniform distribution of vented area. The area of such openings shall be equal to 64 square inches for each 180 square feet of floor area or portion thereof. 
Amendment No. 8 
Section 501.2 Address numbers 
Section 501.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
 Section 501.2 Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all buildings as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers or addresses shall contrast with their background and shall be a minimum four (4) inches in height for residential and six (6) inches for commercial buildings with a minimum stroke width of one half (0.5) inch. 
Amendment No. 9 
Section 1705.3 Concrete Special Inspection 
Section 1705.3 Exception 1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
  Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for: 
1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pound per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa). 
Amendment No. 10 
Appendix J Grading 
Delete Appendix J Grading and hereby adopt Appendix Chapter 33 Excavation and Grading as published in the 2001 California Building Code and amended to read follows: 
Excavation and Grading as published in the 2001 California Building Code in its entirety and amended to delete Table A 33A- Grading Plan Review fees and Table A-33-B Grading Permit Fees. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.030 - 2016 California Electrical Code adopted by reference—Exception. 
That certain document in book form published by the National Fire Protection Association "2016 California Electrical Code" including any secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is adopted by reference, except for the following amendments: 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.040 - 2016 California Mechanical Code adopted by reference. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Conference of Building Officials, entitled "2016 California Mechanical Code" including any secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is adopted by reference, except for the following amendments: 
Amendment No. 1 
Section 107.0 Board of Appeals 
Section 107.0 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.050 - 2016 California Plumbing Code adopted by reference—Exceptions. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, entitled "2016 California Plumbing Code" including any secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is adopted by reference except for the following amendments: 
Amendment No. 1 
Section 107.0 Board of Appeals 
Section 107.0 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby deleted. 
Amendment No. 2
Section 707.4 Cleanouts 
Section 707.4.1 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
 Section 707.4.1 In Group R Division 3 Occupancy one Cleanout shall be placed at the upper end of the building drain outside of the buildings footprint and extended to grade and one at the lower end of the building drain outside of the buildings footprint and extended to grade. At no time will cleanouts be placed in driveways. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.060 - 2016 California Energy Code adopted by reference. 
That certain document in book form published by the California Energy Commission entitled "2016 California Energy Standards" including appendices thereto and secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments or updates thereto adopted by the California State Energy Commission is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.070 - 2016 California Building Standards Code Parts 8, 10, 11 and 12 adopted by reference. 
That certain documents in book form published by the International Conference of Building Officials, entitled "2016 California Building Standards Code Parts 8, 10, 11 with Appendix A4, and 12" or its' most recent adopted version, including any secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department, but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.080 - 2016 California Fire Code adopted by reference—Exceptions. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Code Council, and entitled "2016 California Fire Code," including appendices 4, B, C, F, G, H, I, J, and AE thereto and secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments and errata thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is hereby adopted by reference except for the following amendments. 
Amendment No. 1
Section 101.1 Title 
Section 101.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the SOLEDAD FIRE DEPARTMENT, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Amendment No. 2
Section 101.2.1 Appendices 
Section 101.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
 101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in all appendices to this code are hereby adopted in their entirety and shall apply. 
Amendment No. 3
Section 102.1 Construction and design provisions. 
Section 102.1 is amended to read as follows: 
 102.1 Construction and design provisions. The construction and design provisions of this code shall apply to: 
1. Structures, facilities and conditions arising after the adoption of this code. 
2. Existing structures, facilities and conditions not legally in existence at the time of adoption of this code. 
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions where required in Chapter 11 when identified in specific sections of this code. 
4. Existing structures, facilities and conditions that, in the opinion of the fire code official, constitute a distinct hazard to life and property. 
5. Existing structures alterations and repairs. 
5.a. All new work performed in alterations and/or repairs to existing structures shall comply with the current provisions of this Chapter. 
5.b. When alterations and/or repairs result in the removal, alteration, modification, replacement and/or repair of fifty percent or more of the external walls of a building, or result in the removal, alteration, modification, replacement and/or repair of fifty percent or more of the existing internal structural and/or non-structural framework, independently or in combinations thereof, within a five-year period, the entire building shall be made to conform to the current provisions of this Chapter. 
5.c. Calculations of linear wall measurements shall be shown on all plans submitted for building permits, on the cover page in the project description of said plans. 
5.d. The determination under this section of the requirement for upgrading any existing structure to full conformance with the current provisions of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the fire code official. 
Amendment No. 4
Section 102.3 Change of use or occupancy. 
Section 102.3 is amended to read as follows: 
 102.3 Change of use or occupancy. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any structure that would place the structure on a different division of the same group or occupancy or in a different group or occupancy, unless such structure is made to comply with the provisions of this Code. 
Amendment No. 5
Section 103 Responsibility for enforcement. 
Section 103 is added to read as follows: 
 103.0 Responsibility for enforcement. Within the City of Soledad, responsibility for enforcement of this code shall be under the direction of the Fire Chief. 
Amendment No. 6
Section 103.5 Police powers. 
Section 103.5 is added to read as follows: 
 103.5 Police powers. The fire code official and his deputies shall have the powers of police officers in performing their duties under this code. When requested to do so by the fire code official, the chief of police of the City of Soledad is authorized to assign such available police officers as necessary to assist the fire code official in enforcing the provisions of this code. 
Amendment No. 7
Section 105.6.1.5 Agricultural Explosive Devices. 
Section 105.6.1.5 is added to read as follows: 
 105.6.1.5 Agricultural Explosive Devices. An operational permit is required for storage or use of any agricultural explosive device including "bird bombs." 
Amendment No. 8
Section 108 Board of Appeals 
Section 108 is deleted. 
Amendment No. 9
Section 109.2 Owner/Occupant Responsibility. 
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 109.2 Owner/occupant responsibility. Correction and abatement of violations of this code shall be the responsibility of the owner. Where an occupant creates, or allows to be created, hazardous conditions in violation of this code, the occupant shall be held responsible for the correction or abatement of such hazardous conditions. 
Amendment No. 10
Section 109.4 Violation Penalties 
Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows: 
 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Amendment No. 11
Section 111.4 Failure to comply. 
Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows: 
 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of an infraction as specified in Section 109.4 of this code. 
Amendment No. 12
Section 202 General Definitions 
Section 202 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add as follows: 
  ALL WEATHER SURFACE. A road surface constructed to the minimum standards adopted by the jurisdiction. 
  BRIDGE. A structure to carry a roadway over a depression or obstacle. 
  HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Land that is covered with grass, grain, brush, or forest, whether privately or publicly owned, which is so situated or is of such inaccessible location that a fire originating upon such land would present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion. The declaration of a hazardous fire area shall be made by the chief for purposes of this code and shall not contradict with hazardous fire areas as defined by the California Public Resources Code. 
  IDLE PALLET. A pallet or similar product storage and/or lifting device not currently in use and empty of product. 
  PUBLIC NUISANCE. The unreasonable, unwarranted and/or unlawful use of property, which causes inconvenience, danger or damage to others, either to individuals and/or to the general public. Nuisances may include, but not be limited to noxious smells, noise, burning, unauthorized collections or storage of hazardous materials. 
  STAGE. A space within a building utilized for entertainment or presentations, which includes overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound. Stage area shall be measured to include the entire performance area and adjacent backstage and support areas not separated from the performance area by fire-resistance rated construction. Stage height shall be measured from the lowest point on the stage floor to the highest point of the roof or floor deck above the stage. 
Amendment No. 13
Section 307.2 Permit Required 
Section 307.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for any of the following: 
a. Recognized forest management practices. 
b. Range or wildlife management practices. 
c. Prevention or control of disease or pests. 
d. Rural residential maintenance to eliminate large diameter natural vegetative fuels on properties greater than ½ acre when, in the opinion of the fire code official, there exists no other reasonable method for the elimination of such fuels. 
Amendment No. 14
Section 307.2.2 Authority to rescind permit 
Section 307.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
 307.2.2 Authority to rescind permit. The fire code official shall be permitted to rescind the permit and not permit further burning at the location if further burning is deemed to be a nuisance or constitutes a hazardous condition. 
Amendment No. 15
Section 307.2.3 Hours of burning 
Section 307.2.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section 307.2.3 Hours of burning. Open burning shall be permitted only from dawn until noon each day. Fires shall be completely extinguished before dusk each day . 
Amendment No. 16
Section 307.4 Location
Section 307.4 is amended to read as follows: 
 307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15240 mm) from any structure, and provision shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading. 
 Exceptions: 
1. Fires in approved recreational fire or portable outdoor fireplace containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a structure provided that provisions have been made to prevent the spread of fire to nearby fuels. 
2. The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
Amendment No. 17
Section 307.4.2 Recreational Fires 
Section 307.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions that could cause a fire to spread away from its intended location or within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
Amendment No. 18
Section 307.5 Attendance 
Section 307.5 is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires, rural residential maintenance fires and use of outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose, or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
Amendment No. 19
Section 320 Storage of idle pallets 
Section 320 is added to read as follows: 
 320 Storage of idle pallets. 
320.1 General. The requirements of this section apply to all pallets, whether wood or plastic. 
320.2 Storage of idle pallets. 
1. Idle pallets shall be stored outside, except as permitted by Section 320.2(2) of this code. 
2. Idle pallets shall be permitted to be stored in a building if the building is sprinklered in accordance with NFPA 13. 
3. Idle pallets stored outside shall be stored in accordance with Section 320.2 of this code. 
320.3 Physical characteristics of outside storage shall be as follows: 
1. Idle pallet stacks shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
2. Idle pallet stacks shall not cover an area of greater than 400 square feet, except as approved by the fire code official. 
3. Idle pallet stacks shall be arranged to form stable piles. 
4. A distance of not less than 25 feet shall separate stacks. 
5. Stacks shall be no closer than 25 feet to any property line. 
6. Stacks shall be no closer than 25 feet to any other yard storage. 
7. Stacks shall be no closer than the distances shown on Table 320.3 to buildings. 
TABLE 318.3 REQUIRED CLEARANCES BETWEEN OUTSIDE IDLE PALLET STORAGE AND BUILDINGS 
Wall Construction 	Under 50 
Pallets 	51-200 
Pallets 	Over 
200 Pallets 
Masonry with no openings 	No restrictions 	No restrictions 	15 feet 
Masonry with wired glass in openings, outside sprinklers, and one-hour doors 	No restrictions 	10 feet 	20 feet 
Masonry with wired or plain glass, outside sprinklers, and ¾ hour doors 	10 feet 	20 feet 	30 feet 
Wood or metal with outside sprinklers 	10 feet 	20 feet 	30 feet 
Wood, metal, or other 	20 feet 	30 feet 	50 feet 
 
Amendment No. 20
Private bridge engineering 
Section 503.2.6.1 is added to read as follows: 
 503.2.6.1 Private bridge engineering. Every private bridge hereafter constructed shall meet the following engineering requirements: 
a. The weight shall be designed for a minimum of HS-20 loading as prescribed by the AASHTO. 
b. The unobstructed vertical clearance shall be not less than 15 feet clear. 
c. The width shall be a minimum of 20 feet clear. The fire code official may require additional width when the traffic flow may be restricted or reduce the width to a minimum of 12 feet for Occupancy Group U or R-3 occupancies. 
d. The maximum grade change of the approach to and from any private bridge shall not exceed 8% for a minimum distance of 10 feet. 
Amendment 21
Section 503.2.6.2 Private bridge certification 
Section 503.2.6.2 is added to read as follows: 
 503.2.6.2 Private bridge certification. Every private bridge hereafter constructed shall be engineered by a licensed professional engineer knowledgeable and experienced in the engineering and design of bridges. Certification that the bridge complies with the design standards required by this code and the identified standards, and that the bridge was constructed to those standards, shall be provided by the licensed engineer, in writing, to the fire code official. Every private bridge, including existing and those constructed under this code, shall be certified as to its maximum load limits every ten (10) years or whenever deemed necessary by the fire code official. Such recertification shall be by a licensed professional engineer knowledgeable and experienced in the engineering and design of bridges. All fees charged for the purpose of certification or recertification of private bridges shall be at the owner's expense. 
Amendment 22
Section 503.2.7 Grade 
Section 503.2.7 is amended to read as follows: 
 503.2.7 Grade. The grade of fire apparatus access roads shall be no greater than 15% unless specifically approved by the fire code official. 
Amendment 23
Section 503.2.7.1 Paving 
Section 503.2.7.1 is added to read as follows: 
 503.2.7.1 Paving. All fire apparatus access roads over eight percent (8%) shall be paved with a minimum 0.17 feet of asphaltic concrete on 0.34 feet of aggregate base. All fire apparatus access roads over fifteen percent (15%) where approved shall be paved with perpendicularly grooved concrete. 
Amendment 24
Section 503.7 Fire apparatus access road names 
Section 503.7 is added to read as follows: 
 503.7 Fire apparatus access road names. All fire apparatus access road names shall be issued by the jurisdictional authority. 
Amendment 25
Section 506.1 Where required 
Section 506.1 is amended to read as follows: 
 506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box or other approved emergency access device to be installed in an approved location. The key box or other approved emergency access device shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys or other information to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. Where a key box is used, it shall be listed in accordance with UL 1037. 
Amendment No. 26
Section 507.5.2 Fire hydrant systems 
Section 507.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 507.5.2 Inspection, testing and maintenance. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to periodic tests as required by the fire code official. Fire hydrant systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall comply with approved standards. Records of tests and required maintenance shall be maintained. When required by the fire code official, hydrants shall be painted in accordance with the most current edition of NFPA 291. 
Amendment No. 27
Section 603.6.6 Spark arresters 
Section 603.6.6 is added to read as follows: 
 603.6.6 Spark arresters. An approved spark arrester shall be installed on all chimneys, incinerators, smokestacks or similar devices using solid fuel for conveying smoke or hot gases to the outer air. 
Amendment No. 28
Section 901.1.1 Fire protection systems 
Section 901.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
 901.1.1 Responsibility. The owner of the protected premises shall be responsible for all fire protection systems within the protected premises, whether existing or installed under this code. 
Amendment No. 29
Section 901.2.2 Additional Documentation 
Section 901.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
 901.2.2 Additional documentation. Additional documentation as required by the fire code official shall be provided to the fire code official in an acceptable format. 
Amendment No. 30
Section 901.4 Fire protection system installation 
Section 901.4 is amended to read as follows: 
 901.4 Installation. Fire protection systems shall be maintained in accordance with the original installation standards for that system. All systems shall be extended, altered, or augmented as necessary to maintain and continue protection whenever the building is altered, remodeled or added to. Alterations to fire protection systems shall be done in accordance with applicable standards. 
Amendment No. 31
Section 901.4.6 Fire protection system nonoperational equipment 
Section 901.4.6 is added to read as follows: 
 901.4.6 Nonoperational equipment. Any fire protection equipment that is no longer in service shall be removed. 
Amendment No. 32
Section 901.6.3 Inspection, testing and maintenance 
Section 901.6.3 is added to read as follows: 
 901.6.3 Qualifications of Inspection, Testing and Maintenance Personnel. All personnel performing any inspection, testing or maintenance of any fire protection system shall be qualified. Where such inspection, testing and maintenance is performed by an outside service company, the company shall be appropriately licensed in accordance with the California Business & Professions Code or by the California State Fire Marshal. 
Amendment No. 33
Section 901.6.4 Additional Records 
Section 901.6.4 is added to read as follows: 
 901.6.4 Additional records. All documentation generated during any scheduled inspection or test of any fire protection system, whether required or voluntarily installed, shall be forwarded to the fire code official within 21 calendar days after the date of the inspection or test. 
Amendment No. 34
Section 903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems 
Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all new buildings and structures constructed, moved into or relocated within the jurisdiction. 
Exceptions: 
(1) Structures not classified as Group R occupancies and not more than 500 square feet in total floor area. 
(2) Detached agricultural buildings, as defined by this code, located at least one hundred feet (100') from any other structure or the property line, whichever is closer. 
(3) Accessory structures associated with existing non-sprinklered R-3 occupancies (one or two family dwellings) and less than 1500 square feet in total fire area. 
(4) Where an insufficient water supply exists to provide for an automatic fire sprinkler system and where the fire code official permits alternate protection. 
 The following sections are amended by changing requirements to 500 square feet for fire sprinkler installation, as follows (the complete text of the section is not provided): 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. Change 5,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.1.5 Group A-5. Change 1,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.3 Group E. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.4 Group F-1. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.4.1 Woodworking. Change 2,500 square feet for woodworking operations to 500 square feet. 
903.2.7-1 Group M. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.7-3 Group M. Change 24,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.9 Group S-1. Change 12,000 square feet to 500 square feet. 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. Change 10,000 square feet (2 story buildings) and 12,000 square feet (1 story buildings) to 500 square feet. 
903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Change 20,000 cubic feet to 500 square feet. 
Amendment No. 35
Section 903.2.8 Group R fire area automatic sprinkler system 
Section 903.2.8 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided in all buildings with a Group R fire area, including, but not limited to, one- and two-family dwellings, townhomes, and manufactured homes and mobile homes located outside of licensed mobile home parks hereafter constructed, moved into or relocated within the jurisdiction, including all additions to buildings already equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
Amendment No. 36
Section 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations 
Section 903.3.1.1.1 #8 is added to read as follows: 
8. Passenger elevator shafts or associated passenger elevator mechanical rooms, where elevator shafts are constructed with a 2-hour fire resistive method. 
Amendment No. 37
Section 903.3.1.1.2 NFPA 13 fire sprinkler systems 
Section 903.3.1.1.2 is deleted. 
Amendment No. 38
Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems 
Section 903.3.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies up to and including four stories in height shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R as amended in Chapter 80. 
903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks and ground floor patios of dwelling units where the building is of Type V construction, provided there is a roof or deck above. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch (25 mm) to 6 inches (152 mm) below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches(356 mm) below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist construction. 
903.3.1.2.2 Open-ended corridors. Sprinkler protection shall be provided in open-ended corridors and associated exterior stairways and ramps as specified in Section 1027.6 Exception 3. 
903.3.1.2.2 Attics. Where NFPA 13R sprinkler systems are installed, all attic areas shall be provided with sprinkler protection in accordance with NFPA 13. 
903.3.1.2.3 Sprinkler control valves. Where NFPA 13R sprinkler systems are installed, sprinkler system control valves shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
903.3.1.2.4 Bathrooms. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all bathrooms, regardless of square footage, where an electrical receptacle is installed. 
903.3.1.2.5 Accessible storage areas. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all accessible storage areas. 
903.3.1.2.6 Under-stair spaces. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all under-stair spaces including all under-stair closets. 
Amendment 39
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D fire sprinkler systems 
Section 903.3.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic fire sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings; Group R-3 and R-4 congregate living facilities and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D. The requirements of this section supersede the requirements of the California Residential Code. 
903.3.1.3.1 All fire sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings shall be tested for leakage by undergoing a hydrostatic test made at 200 psi for a two-hour duration. 
903.3.1.3.2 Each water system supplying both domestic and fire protection systems shall have a single indicating-type control valve, arranged to shut off both the domestic and sprinkler systems. A separate shut-off valve for the domestic system only shall be permitted to be installed. The location of the control valve shall be approved by the fire code official. 
903.3.1.3.3 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all bathrooms, regardless of square footage, where an electrical receptacle is installed. 
903.3.1.3.4 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all attached garages and other accessory structures and in all garages and other accessory structures located within 20 feet of the main residence. 
903.3.1.3.5 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all accessible storage areas. 
903.3.1.3.5.1 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all under-stair spaces including all closets. 
903.3.1.3.6 Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed to protect all furnaces and heating system appliances. 
903.3.1.3.7 Local water flow alarms shall be provided on all sprinkler systems. Local water flow alarms shall be powered from the main kitchen refrigerator circuit. The local water flow alarm shall be clearly audible from within the master bedroom at an audibility level of not less than 75 dBa. Where no kitchen exists in the building, the water flow alarm shall be powered from the bathroom lighting circuit. 
Amendment No. 40
Section 903.4.1 Alarm monitoring 
Section 903.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved central station, remote supervising station or proprietary station as defined in NFPA 72, or, where approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible signal at a constantly attended location. The fire alarm system installed to transmit such signals shall be considered a building fire alarm system. 
 (exceptions remain unchanged). 
Amendment No. 41
Section 903.4.2 Alarms 
Section 903.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.4.2 Alarms. One exterior approved audible appliance shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system in an approved location. Sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a building fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. Interior alarm notification appliances shall be installed as required by Section 903.4.2.1. 
Amendment No. 42
Section 903.4.2.1 Alarms 
Section 903.4.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
 903.4.2.1 Where an automatic fire sprinkler system is installed in a building with more than one tenant or with over 100 sprinkler heads, audible and visible notification appliances shall be installed throughout the building as follows: 
a. Audible notification appliances shall be installed so as to be audible at 15 dBa above average sound pressure level throughout the building. 
b. Visible notification appliances shall be installed in all public and common use areas, restrooms and corridors in accordance with the spacing requirements of NFPA 72. 
c. Visible notification appliances can be eliminated in normally unoccupied portions of buildings where permitted by the fire code official. 
 EXCEPTION: The requirements of this section do not apply to Group R-3 Occupancies. 
Amendment No. 43
Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves 
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved indicating control valves and water flow switches shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in all buildings over one story in height, and shall be individually annunciated as approved by the fire code official. 
Amendment No. 44
Section 907.1.6 Multiple fire alarm systems. 
Section 907.1.6 is added to read as follows: 
 907.1.6 Multiple Fire Alarm Systems. Multiple fire alarm systems within a single protected premises are not permitted, unless specifically authorized by the fire code official. 
Amendment No. 45
Section 907.2 Fire alarm and detection systems. 
Section 907.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 907.2 Exception 1. The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm control units dedicated to elevator recall control. 
Amendment No. 46
Section 907.6.5 Access 
Section 907.6.5 is amended to read as follows: 
 907.6.5 Access. Access shall be provided to each fire alarm system component for periodic inspection, maintenance and testing. 
Amendment No. 47
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring 
Section 907.6.6 is amended to read as follows: 
 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems, whether required by this chapter or the California Building Code or voluntarily installed, shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72 and this section. 
Amendment No. 48
Section 907.6.6.4 Means of communication 
Section 907.6.6.4 is added to read as follows: 
 907.6.6.4 Means of communication. The use of either POTS or cable telephone lines with a digital alarm communicator transmitter shall not be permitted. 
 EXCEPTION. Where no other communications methods are available, the use of telephone lines shall be permitted to be used on a temporary basis not to exceed one year from the date of final acceptance test or until permitted alternate means of communications are available. 
Amendment 49
Section 907.7.2 Completion of Documents 
Section 907.7.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 907.7.2 Completion documents. The following documentation shall be provided at the time of acceptance testing for all fire alarm system installations: 
1. A record of completion in accordance with NFPA 72. 
2. A contractor's statement verifying that the system has been installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and has been 100% tested in accordance with NFPA 72. 
3. A contractor's affidavit of personnel qualifications, indicating that all personnel involved with the installation of the fire alarm system meet the qualification requirements of the fire code official. 
Amendment 50
Appendix Section D103.2 Grade 
Section D103.2 is amended to read as follows: 
 D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 15 percent in grade with a maximum side slope of 5%. 
 EXCEPTION: Grades steeper than 15 percent, if approved by the fire code official, shall be paved with perpendicularly grooved concrete. 
Amendment No. 51
Appendix O Standard Fire Conditions for Single Family Dwellings 
Add the following Appendix to read as follows: 
 APPENDIX O: Standard Fire Conditions for Single Family Dwellings: 
SECTION O101 - GENERAL 
O101.1 Scope. Applications for the construction or remodel of single family dwellings, including one- and two-family dwellings, townhomes, modular and manufactured homes, and mobile homes outside of established mobile home parks, shall be subject to the fire conditions in this appendix when required by the fire code official. 
O101.2 Conflicting Sections. Where provisions in this appendix conflict with other sections of this code or other appendices, the provisions of this appendix shall prevail unless otherwise directed by the fire code official. 
SECTION O102 - ROADS 
O102.1 General. These conditions will be used primarily when conditioning a subdivision or other project that requires roads. Roads are defined as access pathways for more than two parcels. 
O102.2 Road access. (FIRE 001). Access roads shall be required for every building when any portion of the exterior wall of the first story is located more than 150 feet from fire department access. All roads shall be constructed to provide a minimum of two nine-foot traffic lanes with an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet. The roadway surface shall provide unobstructed access to conventional drive vehicles including sedans and fire apparatus and shall be an all-weather surface designed to support the imposed load of fire apparatus (22 tons). Each road shall have an approved name. 
O102.3 Roadway engineering. (FIRE 002). The grade for all roads shall not exceed 15 percent with a maximum side slope of 5%. Where road grades exceed 8 percent, a minimum structural roadway surface of 0.17 feet of asphaltic concrete on 0.34 feet of aggregate base shall be required. The length of vertical curves in roadways, exclusive of gutters, ditches and drainage structures designed to hold or divert water, shall not be less than 100 feet. No roadway turn shall have a horizontal inside radius of less than 50 feet. A roadway turn radius of 50 to 100 feet is required to have an additional 4 feet of roadway surface. A roadway turn radius of 100 to 200 feet is required to have an additional 2 feet of roadway surface. Roadway turnarounds shall be required on dead-end roads in excess of 150 feet of surface length. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the road. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
O102.4 Dead end roads. 
O102.4.1 Parcels less than one (1) acre. (FIRE 003) For parcels less than 1 acre, the maximum length of a dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed 800 feet. All dead-end road lengths shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road to the end of the road surface at its furthest point. Where a dead-end road serves parcels of differing sizes, the shortest allowable length shall apply. Each dead-end road shall have a turnaround constructed at its terminus. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the road. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
O102.4.2 Parcels greater than 1 acre and not exceeding 5 acres. (FIRE 004) For parcels greater than 1 acre and not exceeding 5 acres, the maximum length of a dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed 1320 feet. All dead-end road lengths shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road to the end of the road surface at its furthest point. Where a dead-end road serves parcels of differing sizes, the shortest allowable length shall apply. Each dead-end road shall have a turnaround constructed at its terminus. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the road. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
O102.4.3 Parcels greater than 5 acres and not exceeding 20 acres. (FIRE 005) For parcels greater than 5 acres and not exceeding 20 acres, the maximum length of a dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed 2640 feet. All dead-end road lengths shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road to the end of the road surface at its furthest point. Where a dead-end road serves parcels of differing sizes, the shortest allowable length shall apply. Each dead-end road shall have turnarounds at its terminus and at no greater than 1320-foot intervals. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the road. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
O102.4.4 Parcels greater than 20 acres. (FIRE 006) For parcels greater than 20 acres, the maximum length of a dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed 5280 feet. All dead-end road lengths shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road to the end of the road surface at its furthest point. Where a dead-end road serves parcels of differing sizes, the shortest allowable length shall apply. Each dead-end road shall have turnarounds at its terminus and at no greater than 1320-foot intervals. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the road. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
SECTION O103 DRIVEWAYS, GATES, AND BRIDGES 
O103.1 Driveways. (FIRE 007) Driveways shall be defined as access pathways for one or two parcels. Driveways shall not be less than 12 feet wide unobstructed, with an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet. The grade for all driveways shall not exceed 15 percent with a maximum side slope of 5%. Where the grade exceeds 8 percent, a minimum structural roadway surface of 0.17 feet of asphaltic concrete on 0.34 feet of aggregate base shall be required. If permitted by the fire code official, grades over 15% shall be paved with perpendicularly grooved concrete. The driveway surface shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus (22 tons), and be accessible by conventional-drive vehicles, including sedans. For driveways with turns 90 degrees and less, the minimum horizontal inside radius of curvature shall be 25 feet. For driveways with turns greater than 90 degrees, the minimum horizontal inside radius curvature shall be 28 feet. For all driveway turns, an additional surface of 4 feet shall be added. All driveways exceeding 150 feet in length, but less than 800 feet in length, shall provide a turnout near the midpoint of the driveway. Where the driveway exceeds 800 feet, turnouts shall be provided at no greater than 400-foot intervals. Turnouts shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and 30 feet long with a minimum of 25-foot taper at both ends. Turnarounds shall be required on driveways in excess of 150 feet of surface length and shall be 30 feet long with a minimum 25-foot taper at both ends. Turnarounds shall be required on driveways in excess of 150 feet of surface length and shall be located within 50 feet of the primary building. The minimum turning radius for a turnaround shall be 40 feet from the center line of the driveway. If a hammerhead/T is used, the top of the "T" shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length. 
O103.2 Gates. (FIRE 008) All gates providing access from a road to a driveway shall be located at least 30 feet from the roadway and shall open to allow a vehicle to stop without obstructing traffic on the road. Gate entrances shall be at least the width of the traffic lane but in no case less than 12 feet wide. Where a one-way road with a single traffic lane provides access to a gated entrance, a 40-foot turning radius shall be used. Where gates are to be locked, the installation of a key box or other acceptable means for immediate access by emergency equipment may be required. 
O103.3 Bridges. (FIRE 009) All new and reconstructed bridges shall be at least the width of the roadbed and berms, but in no case less than 12 feet wide. Bridge width on all roads exceeding tertiary standards shall not be less than the width of the two lanes with berms. All bridges shall be designed for HS15-44 loading and have guardrails. Appropriate signage, including but not limited to, weight ratings or vertical clearance limitations, and one-way road or single-lane road conditions, shall be provided at both entrances to any bridge. One-lane bridges may be permitted if there is unobstructed visibility across the entire bridge, and turnouts are provided at both bridge ends. The fire authority may impose more stringent requirements for bridges. 
SECTION O104. SIGNS AND ADDRESSES 
O104.1 Road signs. (FIRE 010) All newly constructed or approved roads and streets shall be designated by names or numbers, posted on signs clearly visible and legible from the roadway. Size of letters, numbers and symbols for street and road signs shall be a minimum 4-inch letter height, ½-inch stroke, and shall be a color that is reflective and clearly contrasts with the background color of the sign. All numerals shall be Arabic. Street and road signs shall be non-combustible and shall be visible and legible from both directions of vehicle travel for a distance of at least 100 feet. Height, visibility, legibility, and orientation of street and road signs shall be meet the provisions of the jurisdiction. This section does not require any entity to rename or renumber existing roads or streets, nor shall a roadway providing access only to a single commercial or industrial occupancy require naming or numbering. Signs required under this section identifying intersecting roads, streets and private lanes shall be placed at the intersection of those roads, streets and/or private lanes. Signs identifying traffic access or flow limitations (i.e., weight or vertical clearance limitations, dead-end road, one-way road or single lane conditions, etc.) shall be placed: (a) at the intersection preceding the traffic access limitation; and (b) not more than 100 feet before such traffic access limitation. Road, street and private lane signs required by this article shall be installed prior to final acceptance of road improvements by the fire code official. 
O104.2 Addresses for buildings. (FIRE 011) All buildings shall be issued an address in accordance with jurisdictional requirements. Each occupancy, except accessory buildings, shall have its own permanently posted address. When multiple occupancies exist within a single building, each individual occupancy shall be separately identified by its own address. Letters, numbers and symbols for addresses shall be a minimum of 4-inch height, 1/2-inch stroke, contrasting with the background color of the sign, and shall be Arabic. The sign and numbers shall be reflective and made of a noncombustible material. Address signs shall be placed at each driveway entrance and at each driveway split. Address signs shall be and visible from both directions of travel along the road. In all cases, the address shall be posted at the beginning of construction and shall be maintained thereafter. Address signs along one-way roads shall be visible from both directions of travel. Where multiple addresses are required at a single driveway, they shall be mounted on a single sign. Where a roadway provides access solely to a single commercial occupancy, the address sign shall be placed at the nearest road intersection providing access to that site. Permanent address numbers shall be posted prior to requesting final clearance. 
SECTION O105—WATER SUPPLY 
O105.1 Water systems. (FIRE 012) The provisions of this condition shall apply when new parcels are approved by a local jurisdiction. The emergency water system shall be available on-site prior to the completion of road construction, where a community water system is approved, or prior to the completion of building construction, where an individual system is approved. Approved water systems shall be installed and made serviceable prior to the time of construction. Water systems constructed, extended or modified to serve a new development, a change of use, or an intensification of use, shall be designed to meet, in addition to average daily demand, the standards shown in Table 2 of the Monterey County General Plan, NFPA Standard 1142, or other adopted standards. The quantity of water required pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to the domestic demand and shall be permanently and immediately available 
O105.2 RESERVED (FIRE 013) 
O105.3 Single parcel fire protection water supply. (FIRE 014) For development of structures totaling less than 3,000 square feet on a single parcel, the minimum fire protection water supply shall be 4,900 gallons. For development of structures totaling 3,000 square feet or more on a single parcel, the minimum fire protection water supply shall be 9,800 gallons. For development of structures totaling more than 10,000 square feet on a single parcel, the reviewing authority may require additional fire protection water supply. Other water supply alternatives, including ISO Rural Class 8 mobile water systems, may be permitted by the fire authority to provide for the same practical effect. The quantity of water required by this condition shall be in addition to the domestic demand and shall be permanently and immediately available. 
O105.4 Fire hydrants and valves. (FIRE 015) A fire hydrant or fire valve is required. The hydrant or fire valve shall be 18 inches above grade, 8 feet from flammable vegetation, no closer than 4 feet nor further than 12 feet from a roadway, and in a location where fire apparatus using it will not block the roadway. The hydrant serving any building shall be not less than 50 feet and not more than 1000 feet by road from the building it is to serve. Minimum hydrant standards shall include a brass head and valve with at least one 2 1/2 inch National Hose outlet supplied by a minimum 4 inch main and riser. More restrictive hydrant requirements may be applied by the Reviewing Authority. Each hydrant/valve shall be identified with a reflectorized blue marker, with minimum dimensions of 3 inches, located on the driveway address sign, non-combustible post or fire hydrant riser. If used, the post shall be within 3 feet of the hydrant/valve, with the blue marker not less than 3 feet or greater than 5 feet above the ground, visible from the driveway. On paved roads or driveways, reflectorized blue markers shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with the State Fire Marshal's Guidelines for Fire Hydrant Markings Along State Highways and Freeways, May 1988. 
SECTION O106 SETBACKS 
O106.1 Setbacks. (FIRE 016) All parcels 1 acre and larger shall provide a minimum 30-foot setback for new buildings and accessory buildings from all property lines and/or the center of the road. For parcels less than 1 acre, alternate fuel modification standards or other requirements may be imposed by the fire code official to provide the same practical effect. 
SECTION O107—VEGETATION AND DEBRIS DISPOSAL 
O107.1 Disposition of vegetation and debris fuels. (FIRE 017) Disposal, including chipping, burying, or removal to a landfill site approved by the local jurisdiction, of vegetation and debris caused by site development and construction, road and driveway construction, and fuel modification shall be completed prior to final clearance of the related permit. 
SECTION O108—GREENBELTS 
O108.1 Greenbelts. (FIRE 018) Subdivisions and other developments, which propose greenbelts as a part of the development plan, shall locate said greenbelts strategically as a separation between wildland fuels and structures. The locations shall be approved by the fire code official. 
SECTION O109 - DEFENSIBLE SPACE 
O109.1 Standard defensible space requirements. (FIRE 019) Combustible vegetation shall be removed from within a minimum of 100 feet or to the property line from structures, whichever is closer. Vegetation shall be no taller than four inches (4") high. Tree limbs shall be removed to 6 feet up from the ground and from within 10 feet from chimneys. Additional or alternate fire protection approved by the fire code official may be required to provide reasonable fire safety. Environmentally sensitive areas may require alternative fire protection, to be determined by the fire code official and other jurisdictional authorities. 
O109.2 RESERVED (FIRE 020) 
SECTION O110 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
O110.1 Residential fire sprinkler systems. (Standard) (FIRE 021) The building(s) and attached structure(s) shall be fully protected with automatic fire sprinkler system(s). Installation shall be in accordance with the applicable NFPA standard. A minimum of four (4) sets of plans for fire sprinkler systems must be submitted by a California licensed C-16 contractor and approved prior to installation. This requirement is not intended to delay issuance of a building permit. A rough sprinkler inspection must be scheduled by the installing contractor and completed prior to requesting a framing inspection. 
O110.2 RESERVED (FIRE 022) 
O110.3 RESERVED (FIRE CONDITION 023) 
O110.4 Residential fire alarm systems. (FIRE 024) The residence shall be fully protected with an approved household fire warning system as defined by NFPA 72. Plans and specifications for the household fire warning system shall be submitted by a California licensed C-10 contractor and approved prior to installation. Household fire warning systems installed in lieu of single-station smoke alarms required by the California Residential Code shall meet the requirements of the California Residential Code. 
O110.5 RESERVED (FIRE 025) 
Amendment No. 52
Appendix P Roofs 
Add the following Appendix to read as follows: 
 Appendix P - Roofs 
 SECTION P101 - General 
P101.1 Scope. Applications for the construction or remodel of any buildings shall be subject to the roofing conditions of this appendix when conditioned by the fire code official. 
P101.2 Conflicting Sections. Where provisions in this appendix conflict with other sections of this code or other appendices, the provisions of this appendix shall prevail unless otherwise directed by the fire code official. 
 SECTION P102 - NEW BUILDINGS 
P102.1 General. (FIRE 026) Roofing requirements for all new buildings shall be a minimum Class "B" roof assembly as defined by the International Building Code. 
 EXCEPTION: Greenhouses shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
 SECTION P103 - EXISTING BUILDINGS 
P103.1 General. (FIRE 026) Roofing requirements for existing buildings when fifty percent (50%) or more of the roof area is reroofed within a one-year period after the issuance of a building permit shall be a minimum Class "B" roof assembly as defined by the International Building Code. Where there is no permit issued, this section is applicable to buildings constructed after the effective date of this code and to buildings where fifty percent (50%) or more of the roof area is reroofed within a one-year period after commencing construction. 
 SECTION P104 - ADDITIONS TO EXISTING BUILDINGS 
P104.1 General. The requirements of this Appendix shall apply to all additions to existing buildings, except that only the new portions of the roof shall be required to meet the requirements of this appendix. 
Amendment No. 53
Appendix Q Alternative Energy Systems 
 Add the following Appendix to read as follows: 
 APPENDIX Q—ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS 
Q101.1 Scope. Applications for the installation, additions or remodel of alternative energy system, including but not limited to photovoltaic and wind generation systems, shall be subject to this appendix when conditioned by the fire code official. 
Q101.2 Conflicting Sections. Where provisions in this appendix conflict with other sections of this code or other appendices, the provisions of this appendix shall prevail unless otherwise directed by the fire code official. 
Q102 Signing and marking: All photovoltaic systems shall be permanently marked as specified in this section. 
Q102.1 Main Service Disconnect 
a. Main Panel Exterior Marking. A placard is required to be permanently affixed to the main service disconnect panel. The placard shall be red in color with white capital letters at least 3/4" in height and in a non-serif font, to read "SOLAR DISCONNECT INSIDE PANEL." The placard shall be constructed of weather-resistant, durable plastic with engraved letters, or other approved material. 
b. Circuit Disconnecting Means Marking. A permanent label is to be affixed adjacent to the circuit breaker controlling the inverter or other photovoltaic system electrical controller. The label shall have contrasting color capital letters at least 3/8" in height and in a non—serif font, to read "SOLAR DISCONNECT." The label shall be constructed of durable adhesive material or other approved material. 
 Q102.2 Direct Current (DC) Conduits, Raceways, Enclosures, Cable Assemblies, and Junction Boxes. 
a. Marking is required on all interior and exterior direct current (DC) conduits, raceways, enclosures, cable assemblies, and junction boxes. 
b. Marking Locations. Marking shall be placed on all DC conduits, raceways, enclosures, and cable assemblies every ten feet (10'), at turns and above and below penetrations. Marking shall also be placed on all DC combiner and junction boxes. 
c. Marking Content and Format. Marking for DC conduits, raceways, enclosures, cable assemblies and junction boxes shall be red with white lettering with minimum 3/8" capital letters in a non-serif font, to read "WARNING: SOLAR CIRCUIT." Marking shall be reflective, weather resistant, and suitable for the environment. Materials used should be in compliance with UL Standard 969. 
Q102.3. Secondary Power Sources. Where photovoltaic systems are interconnected to battery systems, generator backup systems, or other secondary power systems, additional signage acceptable to the fire code official shall be required indicating the location of the secondary power source shutoff switch. 
Q102.4. Installer Information. Signage acceptable to the fire code official indicating the name and emergency telephone number of the installing contractor shall be required to be installed adjacent to the man disconnect. 
Q102.5 Inverters. No markings are required for inverters. 
Q102.6 AC Photovoltaic Systems. AC Photovoltaic Systems shall be marked as specified in this section. 
a. Main Panel Exterior Marking. A placard is required to be permanently affixed to the car service disconnect panel. The placard shall be red in color with white capital letters at least 3/4" in height and in a non—serif font, to read "SOLAR DISCONNECT INSIDE PANEL." The placard shall be constructed of weather resistant, durable plastic with engraved letters, or other approved material. 
b. Circuit Disconnecting Means Marking. A permanent label is to be affixed adjacent to the circuit breaker controlling the inverter or other photovoltaic system electrical controller. The label shall have contrasting color capital letters at least 3/8" in height and in a non-serif font, to read "SOLAR DISCONNECT." The label shall be constructed of durable adhesive material or other approved material. 
Q103 BUILDING MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS. 
Q103.1. All building- or roof—mounted photovoltaic systems shall be installed as specified in this section. 
a. Access, Pathways, and Smoke Ventilation. Access and spacing requirements shall be observed to ensure emergency access to the roof, provide pathways for specific areas of the roof, provide for smoke ventilation opportunity areas, and to provide emergency egress from the roof. 
b. Exceptions. Exceptions to the requirements in this section shall be permitted to be granted by the fire code official where access, pathway or ventilation requirements are reduced due to any of the following circumstances: 
(1) Proximity and type of adjacent exposures. 
(2) Alternative access opportunities, as from adjoining roofs. 
(3) Ground level access to the roof. 
(4) Adequate ventilation opportunities below solar arrays. 
(5) Adequate ventilation opportunities afforded by module set back from other rooftop equipment. 
(6) Automatic ventilation devices. 
(7) New technologies, methods, or other innovations that ensure adequate fire department access, pathways, and ventilation opportunities. 
c. Designation of ridge, hip, and valley does not apply to roofs with 2-in-12 or less pitch. 
d. Measurement Conventions. All roof dimensions shall be measured to centerlines. 
e. Roof Access Points. Roof access points shall be defined as areas where ladders are not placed over openings (windows or doors) and are located at strong points of building construction and in locations where they will not conflict with overhead obstructions (tree limbs, wires, or signs). 
Q103.2 Household Systems (One- and Two-Family Dwellings) 
a. Access and Pathways. 
(1) Hip Roof Layouts. Modules shall be located in a manner that provides one (1) three foot (3') wide clear access pathway from the eave to the ridge of each roof slope where the modules are located. The access pathway shall be located at a structurally sound location on the building, such as a bearing wall. 
EXCEPTION: Where adjoining roof planes provide a three foot (3') wide clear access pathway. 
(2) Single Ridge Layouts. Modules shall be located in a manner that provides two (2) three-foot (3') wide access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where the modules are located. 
(3) Hip and Valley Layouts. Modules shall be located no closer than one and one-half feet (1-1/2') to a hip or valley if modules are to be placed on both sides of a hip or valley. Where modules are located on only one side of a hip or valley that is of equal length, the modules shall be permitted to be placed directly adjacent to the hip or valley. 
b. Ridge Setback. The modules shall be located no higher than one and one—half feet (1—1/2') below the ridge. 
Q103.3. Commercial Systems. 
a. Definition. Commercial Systems shall be defined as all photovoltaic systems installed in any occupancy other than a one and two family dwelling. 
b. Alternative Requirements. Where the fire code official determines that the roof configuration is similar to residential (i.e., townhouses, condominiums, or single-family attached buildings) the fire code official shall be permitted to make a determination to apply the requirements under Section AE103.2, above. 
c. Access. There shall be a minimum six—foot (6') wide clear perimeter around the edges of the roof. 
EXCEPTION: If either access to the building is 250' or less, there shall be a minimum four foot (4') wide clear perimeter around the edges of the roof. 
d. Pathways. Pathways shall be established as follows: 
(1) Pathways shall be over structural members. 
(2) Centerline axis pathways shall be provided in both axes of the roof. 
(3) Centerline axis pathways shall run on structural members or Over the next closest structural member nearest to the center lines of the roof. 
(4) Pathways shall be straight line not less than four feet (4') clear to skylights, ventilation hatches, and/or roof standpipes. 
(5) Pathways shall provide not less than four feet (4') clear around roof access hatches with at least one not less than four foot (4') clear pathway to the parapet or roof edge. 
e. Smoke Ventilation. 
(1) Solar arrays shall be no greater than 150 feet by 150 feet in distance in either axis. 
(2) Ventilator options between array sections shall be 
(a) a pathway eight feet (8') or greater in width; 
(b) a pathway four feet (4') or greater in width and bordering on existing roof skylights or ventilation hatches; or 
(c) a pathway four feet (4') or greater in width and bordering four foot by eight foot (4' X 8) "venting cutouts" every twenty feet (20') on alternating sides of the pathway. 
 Q104. Location of Direct Current (DC) Conductors. 
a. Exterior mounted Direct Current conduits, wiring systems and raceways for photovoltaic circuits shall be located as close as possible to the ridge, hip or valley and from the hip or valley as directly as possible to an outside wall to reduce trip hazards and maximize ventilation opportunities. 
b. Conduit runs between sub—arrays and to DC combiner boxes shall use design guidelines that minimize the total amount of conduit by taking the shortest path from the array to the DC combiner box. 
c. DC combiner boxes shall be located so that conduit runs are minimized in the pathways between arrays. 
d. DC wiring shall be run in metallic conduit or raceways when located within enclosed spaces in a building and shall be run as follows: 
(1) When run perpendicular or parallel to load bearing members, a minimum ten inch (10") space below roof decking or sheathing shall be maintained. 
(2) Where flexible metal conduit (FMC) or metal clad cable (MC) containing PV power circuit conductors is installed across ceilings or floor joists, the raceway or cable shall be protected by guard strips. 
 Q105 GROUND MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS 
Q105.1 Marking. Markings shall be in accordance with Section Q102, above. 
Q105.2 Setbacks. Special setback requirements do not apply to ground-mounted, freestanding photovoltaic arrays. NOTE: The zoning regulations of the jurisdiction regulate setbacks between buildings, accessory structures (possibly including ground-mounted photovoltaic arrays) and property lines. 
Q105.3 Clearances. A clear area of ten feet (10') around ground-mounted photovoltaic installations shall be provided. 
Q105.4 Non-Combustible Base. A gravel base or other non—combustible base acceptable to the fire code official shall be installed and maintained under and around the installation. 
Q105.5 Protection. Fencing, skirting, or other suitable security barrier shall be installed when required by the fire code official. NOTE: Security barriers are intended to protect individuals and animals from contact with energized conductors or other components. 
Q105.6 Fire Sprinkler Protection. Fire sprinkler protection is not required for ground-mounted photovoltaic installations. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.090 - 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code, adopted by reference. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Conference of Building Officials, entitled "1997 Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code," including any secondary California codes identified therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is hereby adopted by reference except for the following amendments. 
Amendment No. 1
Section 205 Board of Appeals 
Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.100 - 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, adopted by reference. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Code Council, entitled "2015 International Property Maintenance Code," including any California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is hereby adopted by reference except for the following amendments: 
Amendment No. 1
Section 111.2 Membership of Board 
Section 111.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 1-4-2017)  
15.08.110 - 2016 California Residential Code, adopted by reference. 
That certain document in book form published by the International Code Council, entitled "2016 California Residential Code," including appendix H and any secondary California codes therein adopted by reference, and including amendments thereto adopted by the Building Standards Commission and the state Housing and Community Development Department but excluding any penalty clauses appearing therein, is hereby adopted by reference except for the following amendments: 
Amendment No. 1
Section R108 Fees 
Section R108 of the California Residential Code is hereby deleted. 
Amendment No. 2
Section R112 Board of Appeals 
Section R112 of the California Residential Code is hereby deleted. 
Amendment No. 3
Section R602.10.2.2.1 
Add a new sentence to subsection R602.10.2.2.1 to read: 
In Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 , and D 2 , Method GB is not permitted and the use of Method PCP is limited to one-story single family dwellings and accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 1-4-2017)  
Chapter 15.10 - LANDSCAPE 
Sections: 
 
15.10.010 - Purpose. 
The landscaping of all areas of the community is intended to provide visual relief and delight, complement buildings and other structures, provide transitional areas between potential competing land uses, aid in reducing air pollution, require little supplemental irrigation water once established, and provide an attractive environment for the enjoyment of the public. Landscaping which is integrated with building design is an acceptable and desirable objective of contemporary community development. 
Residential landscaping plays an important role in providing visual relief and delight to families and guests of our communities. The purpose of the section is to provide minimum standards for design and construction of required landscaping for commercial and residential properties within the city of Soledad. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.020 - Definitions. 
The purpose of this section is to define the following: 
"Friable condition" means cultivation or amendment of the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and measured from the property line fronting the public improvements to the building line and extending to side lot lines. 
"Interim ground cover" means rocks, gravel, small to medium wood chips, or any other acceptable material. 
"Landscape area" means the total area of the site not covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways or streets, and shall include planting areas, patios, plazas, sidewalks, hard-courts, water features, yards, and parkway areas. 
"Nonconforming landscape" means landscaping that has been and continues to be maintained in a healthy growing state free of rubbish, weeds and debris prior to the adoption of this section. 
"Planter areas" means a peripheral concrete or acceptable permanent border to prevent cars and pedestrians from damaging plant materials. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and measured from the rear property line to the rear of the building line and extending to side lot lines. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending the full depth of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the line fronting the public improvements to the building line and extending to the rear lot lines and the front lot line. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Whenever landscaping or a landscape plan is required by this code or as a condition of any action authorized by this code, the following standards of landscape design irrigation system design and landscape and irrigation specifications shall apply: 
1.  Landscape areas of ten thousand square feet and under are subject to the requirements defined in this code. 
2.  All landscape areas in excess of ten thousand one square feet will be subject to all portions of the State of California Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
3.  New and renovated single-family dwelling and multi-family projects shall submit landscape and irrigation plan for compliance with this code, state law or as a condition of permit. Other actions authorized by this code shall not exempt landscaping and irrigation requirements provided in this section. 
B.  Conformance with water efficient landscape standards. In addition to the criteria found in Chapter 15.10, new construction and rehabilitated landscapes that meet the following criteria shall also conform to the requirements of Chapter 15.11: 
1.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than twenty five hundred square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit; 
2.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in single-family and multi-family projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than twenty five hundred square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit; 
3.  New construction landscapes which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired in single-family and multi-family residential projects with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 3 (exhibit B), 7-1-2015; Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.040 - Standards of landscape design. 
A.  Plan Preparation. It is required that a licensed landscape architect, landscape contractor, architect, engineer, property owner or his agent, be employed in preparing the landscape and irrigation plans. 
Prior to plan preparation, the public works department shall be contacted for street tree planting information to ensure the landscape plantings will not interfere with the city's tree planting plan. 
B.  Plant Materials. The selection of plant materials should include both evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and attractive erosion-preventing ground cover. It is required that at least seventy percent of the plants selected in non-turf areas be well suited to the climate of the region and require minimal water once established in the landscape. Up to thirty percent of the plants may be of a non-drought-tolerant variety as long as they are grouped together and can be irrigated separately. 
Attention shall be given to appearance, height, spread, growth rate, moisture requirements, potential root damage, disease, and pest susceptibility, climatic adaptability, soil type slope, function and degree of maintenance required. 
C.  Plant Coverage. Plants shall be so spaced and sized that, when mature, they will fill the planter area. Although a reasonable number of growing seasons will be allowed for full plant coverage to develop, interim ground cover shall be provided during this period. 
Interim cover of surfacing materials shall consist of rocks, gravel, small to medium wood chips or any other acceptable material. Small to medium wood chips must be a minimum of three inches thick when used as an interim measure with herbicide impregnated weed barrier. 
D.  Plant Maintenance. Underground, automated irrigation systems shall be provided to assure efficient water use with a minimum of labor and water waste. Irrigation controllers must have multiple-cycle capabilities and include a rain-sensing override device. Plant material must be maintained in a healthy condition. Unhealthy plants shall be replaced. Planters shall be kept free of all weeds, debris and trash. 
E.  Planter Construction. All planter areas shall have a peripheral concrete or acceptable permanent border to prevent cars and pedestrians from damaging plant materials. All planters constructed adjacent to buildings or structures shall be so designed to avoid irrigation water intrusion into or on that adjacent building or structure. The minimum width of a planter bed shall be forty inches measured from the inside of curbing or acceptable permanent border. 
F.  Compacted Soils. Prior to the planting of any materials, the compacted soils surrounding a building site shall be cultivated or amended to a friable condition. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.050 - Landscaping requirements in setback areas. 
A.  Single-Family and Two-Family Residential-Front and Street Side. 
1.  Front Yard Landscape: A maximum of forty percent of the front yard area may be paved and designated off-street parking provided that such area is: 
a.  To give access to covered parking; and 
b.  The paved area is not more than the width of the opening for the covered parking. 
An additional maximum of ten percent of the front setback area may be paved for walkways or uncovered patio use. 
2.  Street Side Yard Landscape: A maximum of ten percent of the street side setback area or a twelve-foot maximum access to rear of property, whichever is greater, may be paved for access to rear yard area. 
This requirement does not apply to that portion of the street side yard located behind a fence that is in compliance with the street side fence requirements set forth in the Soledad Municipal Code. 
The remaining portion of the front and side yard setback areas shall be landscaped, irrigated and maintained with primarily low ground cover or turf. Only living vegetation may be used as ground cover. 
B.  Multi-Family Residential (Three or More Units)—Front and Street Side. All minimum front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped, irrigated and maintained with primarily low ground cover or turf. Only living vegetation may be used as ground cover. Driveways and uncovered walkways are permitted to cross over the required front and street side landscaped setback areas. The required front and street side yard setback areas are not permitted to be paved for parking or patio areas. 
C.  Nonresidential—Front and Street Side Yard. Except for approved off-street parking areas, all minimum front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped, irrigated and maintained with primarily low ground cover or turf. Only living vegetation may be used as ground cover. No asphalt concrete, masonry, rock, gravel, wood bark, chips or other form of surfacing as a principal ground cover shall be permitted. 
D.  Residential and Nonresidential—Interior Side and Rear. The minimum landscape requirements are as follows: fifteen percent or five hundred square feet of private areas on each lot whichever is greater shall be landscaped. At least seventy-five percent of the required landscape area shall be a combination of trees, turf and/or live ground cover and shrubs. A fully automatic irrigation system shall be provided. In areas other than turf the use of herbicide impregnated weed barrier shall be installed prior to the installation of bark material/ground covered material. 
E.  Vehicles Prohibitive. Vehicles, including but not limited to autos, boats, campers, trailers, and other recreational vehicles, are not permitted to be parked within the required landscaped area; they must be parked on the paved surface (driveway) that is provided to access the covered parking area, on the street or wholly within the covered parking area. 
F.  Planter. Except for single-family and two-family residential uses, a landscaped planter is may be installed adjacent to the property line abutting a public street, for all surfaced areas. 
The planter shall be surrounded with six inch raised concrete curbing. The minimum width of planter, excluding curbing, shall be four feet. An irrigation a system shall be installed in each separate planter area. Planter area shall not be surfaced in part or whole with concrete, asphalt or other surface material, but shall contain earth and living plants. 
G.  Trash Enclosure. Trash enclosures planters constructed adjacent to buildings or structures shall be so designed to avoid irrigation water intrusion into or on adjacent building or structure. The minimum width of all planter bed of trash enclosures shall be thirty inches measured from the inside of curbing or acceptable permanent border along the exterior wall or fence of the trash enclosures. Vines and other plantings are encouraged in this area. 
H.  Landscape Requirements. The landscaped area shall include a combination of trees, turf and/or live ground cover and shrubs. A fully automatic irrigation system shall be provided. 
I.  Parking Lot Landscape Requirements. The minimum amount of landscaping fronting the parking area and the right-of-way shall be ten feet from property line. Developers/owners are responsible to design and install all landscaping including landscaping within the right-of-way. Side walks placed within the right-of-way shall be included in the design requirements. When vehicles with in the parking area overhang and no wheel stops are provided, the landscaping fronting the parking area must be increased to twenty feet. A six inch raised concrete curb is required at the back of sidewalk; however, if turf is used and extends farther than fifteen feet from the property line, this curb is not required. Driveways and sidewalks are allowed to cross the landscaped area. 
There shall be a minimum of five percent with a minimum of one tree per two hundred square feet of the overall paved area provided as landscaped area. Landscape areas shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area. Landscape areas within parking lots shall not be less than sixty inches wide. A fully automatic irrigation system shall be provided within each landscape area in parking lots. 
(EXAMPLE: if the use requires twenty-four thousand square feet of parking area—roughly sixty-four to seventy parking spaces—required landscaping would be one thousand two hundred square feet. Required number of trees would be 6. (24,000 × .05 = 1,200) Total required landscaped area. (1,200 ÷ 200 = 6) Total number of trees required. (As referenced in SMC Section 17.36.020F) 
J.  Parking Lot Tree Shading. Trees shall be planted and maintained throughout any surface parking lot to ensure that, within ten years after establishment of the parking lot, at least fifty percent of the parking area will be shaded. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.060 - Landscape plan specifications. 
A.  Number of Submittal Documents: Three copies of the landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the building official, in accordance with the standards of landscape design set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The Landscape Plans: The landscape plans shall be legible and drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals twenty feet. Maximum sheet size on all drawing shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches ("D" size). 
C.  Property Lines: The landscape plans shall indicate property lines, important dimension lines, setback lines, walls and fences, driveways, adjacent streets, outline of all structures, and adjacent land uses. 
D.  Planting Details: The landscape plans shall indicate planting details, pre-emergent soil treatment rates and materials. 
Soil tests for horticultural suitability and infiltration rates may be required at time of landscape plan submittal. Soils shall be prepared and/or amended as appropriate to encourage successful plant growth. 
A minimum of three inches of mulch shall be added in non-turf areas to the soil surface after planting. Plant types that are intolerant to mulch shall be excluded from this requirement. 
Sheet plastic and other non-porous material shall not be placed under mulch. 
E.  Turf Restrictions: The use of turf as a plant material will not be permitted on slopes that are in excess of three to one (3:1). 
On slopes exceeding fifteen percent, a level buffer zone of eighteen inches is required between bermed turf areas and any hardscape (i.e., streets, walkways, etc.). 
F.  Plant List: The landscape plans shall include a plant list giving the common and botanical names of plants to be used. This plant list shall be arranged in legend form with a key number assigned to each plant. On the plan, each plant shall be identified by a key number. The size of the plant, its spacing, and the quantity to be used, shall follow in the legend, as the following example illustrates: 
No. 	Botanical Name 	Common Name 	Size 	Space 	Quantity 
1. 	Casuriana stricta 	Drooping She Oak 	15 		
2. 	Cinnamomum camphora 	Camphora 	15 		
3. 	Ficus (microcapa) retusa 	Indian Laurel Fig 	15 		
4. 	Ligustrum lucidum 	Glossary Privet 	15 		
5. 	Liquidambar styraciflua 	American Sweet Gum 	15 		
6. 	Pistacia chinensis 	Chinese Pistache 	15 		
7. 	Pyrus calleryana 	Chanticleer Pear 	15 		
8. 	Fraxinus oxycarpa 	Raywood Ash 	15 		
9. 	Callistemon red chico 	Fireball bush 	1 gal. 	10' 	6 
10. 	Hedra canariensis 	Algerian ivy 	Flat 	10' 	3 
11. 	Ajuga reptans 	Carpet bugle 	Flat 	6? 	5 
 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.070 - Irrigation plan specifications. 
A.  Number of Submittal Documents: Three copies of the irrigation plans shall be submitted for review and approval by the building official to ensure adequate irrigation coverage and compliance with the requirements of the plumbing code of the city. The irrigation system shall be designed with water conservation in mind. Wind direction, surface drainage, soil type, and application method shall be considered. 
B.  Where irrigation is proposed under this chapter, the design and construction shall be in accordance with Section 15.11.040 and Section 15.11.050. 
C.  Irrigation Plans: Irrigation plans shall indicate potable water system point of connection and size, water pressure available, and maximum demand of the system in gallons per minute or gallons per hour if appropriate. 
D.  Irrigation Equipment: Irrigation equipment specified must be identified by manufacturer's name and equipment identification number. 
E.  Performance Data for Irrigation: Heads and emitters including discharge rates, effective diameter, and operating pressure shall be listed in irrigation legend. 
F.  Location of Valves and Controllers: All locations of irrigation valves, controllers, hose bibs, quick coupler valves, sprinkler heads, and backflow prevention devices, valves, filters, pressure regulators, emitters, rain switches, and moisture sensors must be indicated. 
G.  Irrigation Details: Irrigation details must be used to clarify particular situations. Typical details should include backflow prevention devices, valves, irrigation heads, emitters, filters, pressure regulators, moisture sensors, rain switches, check valves and irrigation controllers. 
H.  Sizing of Irrigation Lines: All irrigation lines must be sized. 
I.  Schedule 40 P.V.C.: Pipe is required under all paved areas. Piping must be installed a minimum of twelve inches underground for non-pressure irrigation lines and eighteen inches underground for constant pressure irrigation lines. Emitter distribution tubing may be located at grade. 
J.  Irrigation Watering Schedules: Irrigation watering schedules for the entire year must be provided on irrigation drawings. These schedules will include an establishment (first twelve months) and post-establishment. Post-establishment schedules will be divided into four quarters. Those quarters are winter, spring, summer and fall. All watering schedules must be in compliance with any current city of Soledad water scheduling requirements. 
K.  Irrigation System: The irrigation system must be designed by a qualified designer. Qualified designers would include certified irrigation designers, landscape contractors and landscape architects, and engineers. 
L.  Pop-up Sprinklers in Turf: Areas shall have a minimum four inch pop-up height. Sprinkler coverage shall be one hundred percent. Heads shall be placed at a maximum of fifty percent of the diameter of throw (head to head). Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. System should be designed for minimum runoff and overspray onto nonirrigated areas. 
M.  Sprinklers and Sprays: Sprinklers and sprays shall not be used in areas less than ten feet wide. Drip and bubblers shall be used that do not exceed one and one-half gallons per minute per device. 
N.  Serviceable Check Valves: Serviceable check valves are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage. 
O.  Irrigation Controllers: Irrigation controllers must be capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible calendar program. Controllers shall be set to operate between sunset and sunrise. 
P.  Scheduling of Controllers: Water application rates shall not exceed the infiltration rate of soil. A minimum of a one- hour period shall be allowed prior to the application of additional water. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 3 (exhibit B), 7-1-2015; Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.075 - Design standards for bioretention facilities. 
Landscape areas used for bioretention facilities shall be designed in accordance with Section 15.11.060 
(Ord. No. 690, § 3 (exhibit B), 7-1-2015)  
15.10.080 - Inspections. 
Upon installation of landscaping and irrigation systems, the person or entity doing the work must contact the city building division and request an inspection. An inspector from the building department will inspect the installation to verify compliance with the approved landscape and irrigation plans. The landscape and irrigation installation must conform to the approved plans before a certificate of occupancy will be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.090 - Maintenance. 
Whenever a landscaping and irrigation plan is required by the code, or as a condition of an action authorized by this code, it shall be a violation of this code if a property owner fails to maintain his property in accordance with that approved landscape or irrigation plan. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction, punishable in the manner set forth in Chapter 1.04 of this code. The penalties established therein are in addition to any and all other legal and equitable means of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
15.10.110 - Fees. 
A.  Plan Review Fee. A landscaping and irrigation plan review fee shall be paid to the city when a plan review fee is requested. Plan review fee shall be sixty-five percent of the landscape permit fee. 
B.  Landscape Permit Fee. The landscape inspection fee for the inspection required in Section 15.10.080 for each permit shall be paid before the permit is issued. The amount of the landscape permit shall be a rate determined from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 15.11 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
15.11.010 - Purpose. 
Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to identify landscape design standards for new and redevelopment projects that minimize water use and eliminate water waste in new and rehabilitated landscape areas by requiring low water landscape plantings and irrigation methods, and by encouraging stormwater management within required landscape areas. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit; 
2.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in single-family and multi-family projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than twenty-five hundred square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit; 
3.  New construction landscapes which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired in single-family and multi-family residential projects with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand square feet requiring a building permit, design review or other discretionary use permit; 
B.  This chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
4.  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public; or 
5.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 492.4, 492.11 and 492.12; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 493, 493.1 and 493.2 of the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below: 
1.  "Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
2.  "Automatic irrigation controller" means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
3.  "Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
4.  "Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution a professional trade organization or other program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program. 
5.  "Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
6.  "Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per California Civil Code Section 1351. 
7.  "Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
8.  "Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
9.  "Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
10.  "Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
11.  "Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
12.  "Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
13.  "Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
14.  "Estimated total water use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 15.11.050.A.1.c. 
15.  "ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. 
16.  "Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
17.  "Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
18.  "Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
19.  "Homeowner-provided landscaping" means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings. 
20.  "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
21.  "Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
22.  "Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. "Noxious weeds" means any weed designated by the weed control regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a Regional District noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
23.  "Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems. 
24.  "Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
25.  "Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California. 
26.  "Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
27.  "Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
28.  "Landscape plan" means the documents required under Section 15.11.040.A.2. 
29.  "Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 15.11.020. 
30.  "Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
31.  "Local water purveyor" means the City of Soledad Public Works Department Water Quality Control Division. 
32.  "Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
33.  "Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
34.  "Maximum Applied Water Allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 15.11.050.A.3. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. 
35.  "Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
36.  "Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
37.  "Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
38.  "New construction" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
39.  "Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
40.  "Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
41.  "Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
42.  "Permit" means an authorizing document issued by the city for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
43.  "Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
44.  "Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species." 
45.  "Precipitation rate" means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour. 
46.  "Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape plan required under Section 15.11.040.A.2, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
47.  "Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
48.  "Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
49.  "Recreational area" means areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface. 
50.  "Recycled water", "reclaimed water", or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
51.  "Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
County and City 	Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec 	Annual ETo 
MONTEREY 
Soledad 	1.7 	2.0 	3.4 	4.4 	5.5 	5.4 	6.5 	6.2 	5.2 	3.7 	2.2 	1.5 	47.7 
 
52.  "Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires landscape plan approval, meets the requirements of Section 15.11.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than twenty-five hundred square feet, is fifty percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year. 
53.  "Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
54.  "Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
55.  "Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
56.  "Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface. 
57.  "Sprinkler head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
58.  "Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
59.  "Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
60.  "Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
61.  "Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
62.  "Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
63.  "Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a low plant factor. 
64.  "Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
65.  "WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.040 - Landscape and irrigation plan contents. 
Landscape and irrigation plans submitted to the city under this chapter shall include the following: 
A.  Compliance with landscape plan. 
1.  Prior to construction, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan to the city for review and approval. 
2.  Upon approval of the landscape plan by the city, the project applicant shall: 
a.  Receive a permit for the proposed landscaping and irrigation improvements; 
b.  Submit a copy of the approved landscape plan along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
c.  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the city public works department water quality control division. 
B.  Elements of the landscape plan. The landscape plan shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project applicant name; 
c.  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)); 
d.  Total landscape area (square feet); 
e.  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed); 
f.  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, etc.) and purveyor; 
g.  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner; 
h.  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape plan"; 
2.  Water efficient landscape worksheet: 
a.  Hydrozone information table; 
b.  Water budget calculations: 
i.  Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA); 
ii.  Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU); 
3.  On-site soil characteristics; 
4.  Landscape design plan; 
5.  Irrigation design plan; and 
6.  Grading design plan (if applicable). 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.050 - Landscape and irrigation design 
Landscape and irrigation designs shall include the water efficient landscape worksheet, landscape design plan, irrigation design plan, irrigation scheduling, and recycled water plan as applicable to the project design proposal. 
A.  Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
1.  A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections: 
a.  A hydrozone information table for the landscape project; and 
HYDROZONE INFORMATION TABLE 
Hydrozone* 	Zone or Valve 	Irrigation 
Method** 	Area 
(Sq. Ft.) 	% of 
Landscape 
Area 
				
				
				
				100% 
 
* Hydrozone 	**Irrigation Method 
HW = High Water Use Plants 	MS = Micro-spray 
MW = Moderate Water Use Plants 	S = Spray 
LW = Low Water Use Plants 	R = Rotor 
	B = Bubbler 
	D = Drip 
	O = Other 
 
b.  A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water Use, a project applicant shall use 47.7 inches as the city ETo as established in the state department of water resources' CIMIS reference evapotranspiration zones map. 
i.  Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). The project's maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using this equation: 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 × LA) + (0.3 × SLA)] 
where: 
MAWA = Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year) 
ETo = 47.7 inches per year 
0.7 = ET adjustment factor (ETAF) 
LA = Landscaped area includes special landscape area (square feet) 
0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons per square foot) 
SLA = Portion of the landscape area identified as special landscape area (square feet) 
0.3 = The additional ET adjustment factor for special landscape area (1.0 - 0.7 = 0.3) 
Maximum applied water allowance = ____ gallons per year 
c.  Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU). The project's estimated total water use is calculated using the following formula: 
 
where: 
ETWU = Estimated total water use per year (gallons per year) 
ETo = 47.7 inches per year 
PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS (see Definitions) 
HA = Hydrozone area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet) 
SLA = Special landscape area (square feet) 
0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons per square foot) 
IE = Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71) 
Hydrozone table for calculating ETWU 
Hydrozone No. 	Plant Water 
Use Type(s) 	Plant Factor 
(PF) 	Area (HA) 
(square feet) 	PF x HA 
(square feet) 
				
				
				
			Sum 	
	SLA 			
 
Estimated Total Water Use = ____ gallons 
2.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
b.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
c.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below. 
d.  ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
3.  Maximum applied water allowance. The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the equation where the ETo is 47.7 inches: 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 × LA) + (0.3 × SLA)] 
4.  Estimated total water use. The estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA. 
Where: 
ETWU = Estimated total water use per year (gallons) 
ETo = Reference evapotranspiration (inches) 
PF = Plant Factor from WUCOLS 
HA = Hydrozone area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet) 
SLA = Special landscape area (square feet) 
0.62 = Conversion factor 
IE = Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71) 
B.  Landscape Design Plan. 
1.  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape plan. 
a.  Plant Material 
i.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
1.  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
2.  Selection of water-conserving plant and turf species; 
3.  Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance; 
4.  Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines; and 
5.  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
ii.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 15.11.050.C.2.a.vii. 
iii.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
1.  Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
2.  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; and 
3.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
iv.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run × 100 = slope percent). 
v.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per the California Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. 
vi.  The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged. 
vii.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
b.  Water Features 
i.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
ii.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
iii.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
iv.  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
c.  Mulch and Amendments 
i.  A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. 
ii.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes. 
iii.  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
iv.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of a soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected. 
2.  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
a.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
b.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
c.  Identify recreational areas; 
d.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
e.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
f.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
g.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
h.  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
i.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
j.  Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground; 
ii.  Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants; and 
iii.  Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff. 
k.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.); 
l.  Include the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the chapter and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and 
m.  Bear the signature of the person authorized to design a landscape. 
C.  Irrigation Design Plan. 
1.  For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape plan. 
2.  For the purpose of determining maximum applied water allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. 
a.  System. 
i.  Dedicated landscape water meters are recommended on landscape areas smaller than five thousand square feet to facilitate water management. 
ii.  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
iii.  The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
1.  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
2.  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
iv.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems. 
v.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
vi.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. 
vii.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
viii.  Relevant information from a soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
ix.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
x.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 15.11.050.A.1.c regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
xi.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
xii.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
xiii.  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
xiv.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas. 
xv.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems. 
xvi.  Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low volume irrigation system. 
xvii.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
1.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
3.  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape plan and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 15.11.050.C.2.a.vii. 
4.  Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
xviii.  Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape plan, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
b.  Hydrozone 
i.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
ii.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
iii.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf. 
iv.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
1.  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
2.  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
v.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
vi.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table. 
3.  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
a.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape; 
b.  location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
c.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
d.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
e.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 15.11.050.E; 
f.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
g.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. 
D.  Irrigation Scheduling. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
2.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. 
3.  Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
4.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed for each of the following: 
a.  Plant establishment period; 
b.  Established landscape; and 
c.  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
5.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
a.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
b.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
d.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
e.  Application rate setting; 
f.  Root depth setting; 
g.  Plant type setting; 
h.  Soil type; 
i.  Slope factor setting; 
j.  Shade factor setting; and 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
E.  Recycled Water. 
1.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in Section 15.11.050.E.2. 
2.  Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the local water purveyor stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future. 
3.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws. 
4.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.060 - Stormwater management. 
Landscape-related stormwater management practices can reduce runoff and improve water quality when properly designed and constructed. The following standards apply to the design of landscape areas used as bioretention facilities: 
A.  Facility Sizing. Bioretention facilities shall be designed to manage stormwater from the drainage management area. Sizing shall be in accordance with the city's stormwater permit and as codified elsewhere in the Soledad Municipal Code. 
B.  Plant Selection. Plants used in bioretention facilities shall be selected for tolerance to both periodic inundation, as well as prolonged dry periods. Plants shall be non-invasive and should be native to the region whenever possible. A list of suitable plant species is on file with the city community & economic development department. Plants shall be selected according to the surface grade and the incidence of periodic surface water inundation. Plants selected for zone A should tolerate periodic surface water inundation as well as seasonal dry periods. Plants selected for zone B should tolerate the planting on side slopes and surface water runoff. 
C.  Hydrozone Grouping and Irrigation. Installed plants within rain gardens and other bioretention facilities shall be grouped into hydrozones based on similar water usage. During plant establishment, temporary irrigation shall use separate valves for each hydrozone. All irrigation shall be removed or disconnected from the bioretention facility at the end of plant establishment. 
D.  Planter Edge and Curb Design. Bioretention facilities are intended to receive and treat stormwater runoff. Edge treatments shall be designed not to impede sheet flow from surrounding areas. See standard design details contained in the city standard drawings. 
E.  Mulching. Mulch application, quantity, and composition for bioretention facilities shall be as specified in the design details contained in the city standard drawings. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
15.11.070 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. 
B.  Regular maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  Irrigation systems shall be properly maintained to prevent water waste from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4 (Exhibit C), 7-1-2015)  
Chapter 15.12 - FENCE CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Permitted materials. 
A fence may be constructed of permanent material, such as wood, chain link, stone, rock, concrete block, masonry brick, brick, decorative wrought iron or other material as provided in Section 17.36.010b and approved by the building department. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.020 - Prohibited materials. 
Fencing materials prohibited include, but are not limited to. the following: 
A.  Cast-off, secondhand, or other items not originally intended to be used for constructing or maintaining a fence; 
B.  Plywood less than five-eighths inches thick, plywood not of a grade approved by the building official, particleboard, paper, and visqueen plastic, plastic tarp, or similar material; 
C.  Concertina wire, serpentine wire, barbed wire, razor wire, and other similar fencing materials capable of inflicting significant physical injury, except as permitted in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.030 - Maintenance. 
All fences shall be properly maintained so as not to create a hazard, public nuisance or blight in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.040 - Applicability. 
The requirements of this chapter apply only to fences located in the front yard; street side yards, and fences abutting parks, alley or other public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.050 - Nonconforming fence. 
A.  "Nonconforming Fence" Defined. For purposes of this chapter, "nonconforming fence" means a fence that does not comply with provisions of this chapter as of its effective date. 
B.  Continuation and Maintenance. A nonconforming fence may be continued, and may be maintained, except as provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
C.  Maintenance or Repair of Existing Nonconforming Fence. Maintenance or repair-including structural repairs, may be made to any nonconforming fence or portions thereof if the repairs do not result in a different condition of nonconformity, or if the repairs bring the fence into compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Reconstruction of Damaged Nonconforming Fence. A property owner may reconstruct a nonconforming fence damaged by fire or other calamity if the reconstructed fence is in conformity with this chapter. 
E.  Removal of worn nonconforming fence. If because of normal wear and tear a nonconforming fence is no longer fully upright or is no longer serviceable, the property owner either shall remove it or shall replace it with a new fence in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.060 - Nuisance abatement of nonconforming fences. 
Whenever the city manager determines that a nonconforming fence constitutes a nuisance as specified in Chapter 9.04. of this code, he may order either that the property owner remove the nonconforming fence or bring it into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.070 - Notice to owner. 
A.  The owner(s) of any property on which exists a nonconforming fence found to constitute a nuisance as specified in Chapter 9.04 of this code shall be notified in writing either by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt, or by personal service. If after several attempts, the owner cannot be served by certified mail or personal service, then the city manager may make service by publication in :L local publication of general circulation. 
B.  Upon receipt of the notice either to remove the nonconforming fence or bring it into compliance with this chapter, or upon ten days after publication of the notice, the owner(s) shall have thirty days to comply. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.12.080 - Failure to obey notice. 
Upon expiration of the time period set forth in Section 15.12.070 of this chapter, and the failure of the owner(s) to comply with the notice to remove the fence or bring it into conformity with this chapter, the city manager may issue a hearing notice pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 9.04 of this code. The abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 9.04 of this code shall apply. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 15.20 - BUILDING EARTHQUAKE SAFETY 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on buildings constructed prior to the adoption of local building codes requiring earth quake-resistant design and construction, which have unreinforced masonry bearing walls and other characteristics specified in Section 19161 of the Health and Safety Code which make them potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake. This chapter establishes a program for the identification of all such buildings in the city, for the determination of the seventy and extent of such hazards in relation to their potential for causing death or injury in the event of an earthquake, and for the carrying out of measures to mitigate such hazards. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.020 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 12.2, Division 1, of the Government Code (commencing with Section 8875) and Article 4, Chapter 2, Part 3, Division 13, of the Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 19160). 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.030 - Uniform Building Code references. 
References in this chapter to the Uniform Building Code (UBC) are to the latest edition of the code adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this title, except where a different edition of the UBC is specifically made applicable. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.040 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings constructed or under construction prior to January 1, 1935, or for which a building permit was issued prior to that date, which on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter have unreinforced masonry bearing walls, external hazards and other characteristics specified in Chapter 19161 of the Health and Safety Code which make them potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake except for the following: 
A.  Detached one-or two-family dwelling and detached apartment houses containing less than five dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes; 
B.  Warehouses or similar structures not used for human habitation, except for warehouses or structures housing emergency services equipment or supplies; 
C.  Any building which qualifies as "historical property" as determined by an appropriate governmental agency under Section 37602 of the Health and Safety Code. Such buildings shall comply with the State Historical Building Code, being Sections 18950 through 18961 of the Health and Safety Code and Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.050 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "External hazard" means an object attached to or forming the exterior facade of a building which may fall onto pedestrians or occupants of adjacent buildings, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Parapets; 
b.  Architectural ornamentation, including cornices and other decorative appendages; 
c.  Nonstructural exterior wall panels, such as: 
i.  Masonry or stone wall veneer not securely anchored to the wall, 
ii.  Masonry chimneys, 
iii.  Tile roofing, 
iv.  Marquees, awnings and other similar projections, 
v.  Wall signs and exterior lighting fixtures hung from a building exterior. 
vi.  Fire escapes and balconies. 
2.  "Occupants" means the total occupant load of a building as determined by the provisions of Section 1003.2.2 of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, or the actual number of occupants of a building as established by the building official of the city. 
3.  "Owner" means any person, firm or corporation in whom title to real property is vested. 
4.  "Unreinforced masonry building" or "URM" means any building constructed wholly or partially with any of the following materials: 
a.  Unreinforced brick masonry; 
b.  Unreinforced concrete masonry; 
c.  Hollow clay tile; 
d.  Adobe or unburned clay masonry; 
e.  Concrete block. 
5.  "Unreinforced masonry bearing wall," means a masonry wall having all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Provides the vertical support for a wall or roof; 
b.  The total superimposed load is over one hundred pounds per linear foot; and 
c.  The area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty percent of that required by Section 2704(h)4 of the Uniform Building Code, 1985 Edition (or any subsequent revision of that section contained in a later edition of the UBC adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this code). 
B.  UBC definitions, as set forth in the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this title, shall be used when applicable. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.060 - Identification of URM buildings. 
The building official shall conduct a field survey of buildings within the city for the purpose of identifying those buildings within the scope of this chapter that are potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.070 - Preliminary investigation by engineer. 
Where the building official is unable to determine whether or not a building is of URM construction, the building official shall serve upon the owner of the building a written notice and order requiring the owner to employ an engineer, licensed to practice in the state of California, to conduct a preliminary investigation of the building for the purpose of determining whether or not the building is, in fact, of URM construction. The notice and order may be served personally or by mail addressed to the owner at the address shown upon the latest equalized assessment roll. Within six months after the date of service of the notice and order, the owner shall file with the building official the written report of the engineer stating his findings as to whether or not the building is of URM construction. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.080 - Investigation and engineering report. 
A. Where a building has been identified by the building official, or by the engineer conducting a preliminary investigation pursuant to Section 15.20.070 of this chapter as being of URM construction or otherwise potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake, the building official shall serve upon the owner of the building a written notice and order requiring the owner to employ an engineer, licensed to practice in the state of California, to make a full and comprehensive investigation and engineering report as to whether or not the building is potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake. The investigation and engineering report shall contain the following: 
1.  General Information. A description of the building including: 
a.  The street address; also, a legal description and assessor's parcel number for the property on which the building is located; 
b.  The type of occupancy within the building, with separate uses that generate different occupant loads indicated on a plan showing the square footage of each different use; 
c.  Plans and elevations showing the location, type, and extent of lateral force resisting elements in the building (both horizontal and vertical elements); 
d.  A description of the construction materials used in the structural elements and information regarding their present condition; 
e.  The name and address of the original designer and contractor, if known, and the name and address of the designer and contractor, if known, of any subsequent additions or substantial structural alterations. 
2.  Investigation and Evaluation of Structural Systems. The standards to be applied in investigating and evaluating the structural systems of unreinforced masonry buildings pursuant to this section shall be those set forth in Sections A 103 through A 108 of Appendix Chapter I to the 1998 Edition of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, entitled "Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Un-reinforced Masonry Buildings," which standards are incorporated herein by reference. 
3.  Evaluation of Nonstructural Elements. The report also shall evaluate external hazards, as defined in Section 15.20.050 of this chapter, and other non-structural elements of the building with regard to their potential for causing death or injury in the event of an earthquake. 
4.  Test Reports. All field and laboratory test results shall be included in the report. Evaluation of the significance of these test results shall be made with regard to each structural system or typical connection being evaluated. This evaluation may be limited to a statement of the adequacy or the inadequacy of the system or connection based on the lateral load demand it would be required to resist by calculation. If tests reveal inadequacy, a conceptual solution must be included in the report. 
5.  Conclusions. Based on the standards referred to in subsection B of this section, a statement shall be provided explaining the overall significance of the deficiencies found to exist in the building's structural system regarding potential collapse or partial collapse failure. 
6.  Recommendation. An appropriate solution which could be used to strengthen the building structure to alleviate any collapse or partial collapse threat, external hazards, or other recognized hazardous condition. 
B.  The notice and order may be served personally or by mail, addressed to the owner at the address shown upon the latest equalized roll. The investigation and engineering report must be submitted to the building official within one year from the date of service of the notice and order. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.090 - Exceptions and alternatives. 
Exceptions to the specific items required to be included in an investigation and engineering report may be granted by the building official, with the concurrence of the city engineer, upon review of a written request from the engineer preparing the report. Such a request shall provide evidence that adequate information concerning the required item or items can be determined by alternate means or that a conclusion can be made without following the solution recommended pursuant to Section 15.20.080 of this chapter. 
In no case shall an exception be granted, which would result in an item not being completely evaluated. The decision of the building official in this regard shall be final. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.100 - Review of reports—Recordation of notice— Fees—Copies. 
A.  The city engineer and the building official shall review each investigation and engineering report to determine whether or not it conforms to the requirements of this chapter. If found to conform, they shall forward the report to the city council with their comments and recommendation. 
B.  At its next regular meeting the city council shall accept the report and order it filed, or shall reject it and require that all deficiencies found to exist therein be corrected within a period of time specified by the city council, but in no event longer than three months. 
C.  Upon the approval and filing of an investigation and engineering report which identifies a building as being potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a notice of such filing shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. The notice shall include a legal description of the property upon which the building is situated, together with the assessor's parcel number for the same, and shall state that the building has been investigated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and has been found to be potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake. When and if the building is reconstructed or repaired and found by the city engineer and the building official to be structurally capable of resisting seismic forces so that it no longer is potentially dangerous to life, or upon demolition of the building, a notice canceling and removing from the record the previous notice identifying the building as being potentially hazardous to life shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
D.  All costs of review shall be covered by a fee to be paid by the owner of the building. The amount so paid shall be deducted from the plan check fee payable in connection with any work done to correct structural inadequacies specified in the report. 
E.  Copies of investigation and engineering reports shall be available to individuals requesting the same for a standard copying fee, or may be reviewed in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.110 - Responsibilities of owner. 
When the investigation and engineering report shows that a building has defects, which render it potentially hazardous to life 'in the event of an earthquake, the owner shall: 
A.  Notify all tenants of the building, in writing, that a structural investigation has been performed and that the report is available at the office of the building official. This notice must be sent to each tenant within thirty days of the date the completed report is submitted to the building official, and a copy of the notice, with proof of service on each tenant, shall be filed concurrently with the building official. 
B.  The building owner shall submit a letter to the building official within six months of the date that the report was submitted to the building official, stating the owner's intentions for dealing with the potential earthquake hazards found to exist in the building. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.120 - Events requiring corrective work or demolition. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the owner of a building found by the investigation and engineering report to have unreinforced masonry bearing walls, external hazards, or other characteristics specified in Section 19161 of the California Health and Safety Code which make it potentially hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake shall take corrective action to eliminate the hazardous condition, or shall demolish and remove the building from the premises on which it stands, upon the happening of either of the following events: 
A.  A change of occupancy: for purposes of this provision, the classification of buildings by occupancy as Group A, B, E, H, l, M or R, set forth in Chapters 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the Uniform Building Code adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this code and in effect on the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be used by the building official in determining whether or not there is a change of occupancy in the building. A change of occupancy as to a portion of a building shall be deemed to be a change of occupancy as to the entire building. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply, however, in cases where the occupant load under the new or proposed occupancy, as determined by applying the occupancy load factor set forth in Table 33-A of the 1985 edition of the Uniform Building Code, will not exceed the occupant load of the existing use determined in the same manner. 
C.  Any repair, remodeling, or alteration of the building, the cost of which, as estimated by the building official, amounts to more than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the building: for the purpose of making this determination the building official may require an appraisal of fair market value by a qualified real estate appraiser regularly engaged in appraising properties in Monterey County, California, to be paid for the owner of the building. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.130 - Program status report to the city council. 
The building official shall submit a semiannual report to the city council on the status of the seismic hazards identification and mitigation program set forth in this chapter. The reports shall include information regarding the number of buildings investigated and evaluated, the severity of the structural inadequacies discovered, and any actions taken by individual building owners to correct these inadequacies. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.20.140 - Remedies. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner of a building identified as being within the scope of this chapter to fail to submit an investigation and engineering report within the time period specified in Section 15.20.070 of this chapter, or to fail to submit a letter of intent within the time period specified in Section 15.20.100 of this chapter. For any such failure, the following remedies are available to the city: 
1.  The city may seek injunctive relief on behalf of the public to enjoin a building owner's violation of this chapter. 
2.  A building owner violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.04 of this code. Such owner shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such violation is committed, continued, or permitted by such building owner. 
B.  The foregoing remedies are not exclusive and the city may pursue such other remedies as may be available to it to require the repair, vacation, or demolition of buildings which from any cause endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, including but not limited to the remedies set forth in the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 15.30 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.30.010 - Findings of fact. 
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.020 - Statement of purpose and methods. 
A.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
B.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
4.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless specifically defined in subsection (B) of this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
1.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
2.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. 
3.  "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the one hundred-year flood). 
4.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
5.  "Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material, which are not part of the structural support of the building, and which are designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and not more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
6.  "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
7.  "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
8.  "Flood or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of floodwaters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or 
c.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this paragraph. 
9.  "Flood boundary and floodway map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
10.  "Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
11.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
12.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
13.  "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
14.  "Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
15.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
16.  "Flood management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
17.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real property or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.) 
18.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as regulatory floodway. 
19.  "Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 15.30.160, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the (community governing body) will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject, during all those years, to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
20.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
21.  "Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
22.  "Hardship" as related to Section 15.30.170, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The (governing body) requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
23.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
24.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
a.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.30.080(C); 
(2)  The anchoring standards in Section 15.30.080(A); 
(3)  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.30.080(B); and 
(4)  The standards for utilities in Section 15.30.090. 
b.  For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
25.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
26.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
27.  "Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
28.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
29.  "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city. 
30.  "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
31.  "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
32.  "One hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the base flood, which is the term used throughout this chapter. 
33.  "Person" means any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or company, or any agent of the foregoing, or the state or its agencies or political subdivisions. 
34.  "Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 15.30.160, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
35.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
36.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
37.  "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
38.  "Ravine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, or creek. 
39.  "Special food hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, E or M. 
40.  "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
41.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground. 
42.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
43.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
c.  any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or city health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
d.  any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
44.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
45.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
46.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
47.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, steam, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.040 - General provisions. 
The following provisions shall apply to the application of this chapter: 
A.  Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the city. 
B.  Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Community Panel No. 060204 0001C for the city of Soledad, California, dated May 15, 1984, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions. The flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map are on file in the office of the city engineer and at the city of Soledad city hall. The areas described or shown in the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map are the minimum areas of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy and violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warnings and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer, official or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
G.  Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.050 - Requirements for floodplain development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.30.040(B). Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
1.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
3.  If available, the base flood elevation from the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate map; and 
4.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway. 
B.  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.30.080(C) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
3.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test method). 
C.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed, as required in Section 15.30.080(C) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
D.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.30.070 of this chapter. 
E.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.060 - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
The city engineer or the city engineer's designee is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator, with full power and authority to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.070 - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Review all development proposals to determine that: 
1.  The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, adversely affects means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
a.  In making the determinations specified above, the floodplain administrator may refer any development proposal to the city engineer, and to any other persons, departments or agencies he deems necessary or appropriate for review of the proposal and submission of recommendations thereon, including recommended conditions of development. 
B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 15.30.040(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the standards set forth in Sections 15.30.080 through 15.30.150 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one or two methods from the FEMA publication, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas — A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations", dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 5: 
1.  Simplified method: 
a.  100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
b.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
2.  Detailed method: 
a.  The 100-year or base flood discharge and the base flood elevation shall be obtained using detailed methods identified in FEMA Publication 265, published in June 1995 and titled, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas — A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations." 
C.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.30.080(C)(1) and 15.30.110 (lowest floor elevations). 
D.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.30.170(H). 
E.  Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the floodplain administrator shall: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and 
2.  Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
F.  Maintenance of Records. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following certifications: 
1.  The certification required in Subsection 15.30.080(C)(1) (floor elevations); 
2.  The certification required in Subsection 15.30.080(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  The certification required in Subsection 15.30.080(C)(2) or 15.30.080(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  The certified elevation required in Subsection 15.30.100(B) (subdivision standards); 
5.  The certification required in Subsection 15.30.130(A) (floodway encroachments). 
G.  Remedy of Violations. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter, as specified in Subsection 15.30.040(C). 
H.  Appeals. Any decision or determination by the floodplain administrator made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the building code board of appeals of the city of Soledad. Such appeals shall be governed by the procedure set forth in the most recently adopted edition of the California Building Code, Section 105 and as amended by the city code. In addition thereto, the board of appeals shall be guided by the considerations listed in Subsection 15.30.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.080 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Flood Proofing. (See Section 15.30.030(B) definitions for "basement," "lowest floor," "substantial damage," and "substantial improvement.") 
1.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement. 
a.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. (The state of California recommends that in AO zones without velocity, the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least two feet, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.) 
b.  In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.30.070(B) of this chapter. (The state of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community.) 
c.  In all other zones, elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.30.080(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.30.080(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.30.110. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.090 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.100 - Standards for subdivisions and building sites. 
A.  All applications for tentative subdivision or tentative building site approval shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All final subdivision or building site plans shall indicate the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision and building site proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision and building site proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions and building sites shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.110 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation) and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's flood insurance rate map will meet the requirements of Section 15.30.110(A). 
C.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones Al-30, V1-30, V, and VE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.30.110(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation); or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.120 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones Al-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
2.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.30.050 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.30.110(A). 
B.  Recreation vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's flood insurance rate map will meet the requirements of Section 15.30.120(A). 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.130 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 15.30.040 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If the requirements in paragraph (A) of this section are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions set forth in Sections 15.30.080, 15.30.090, 15.30.100, 15.30.110 and 15.30.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.140 - Mudslide prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area. 
B.  Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to: 
1.  The type and quality of soils; 
2.  Evidence of ground water or surface water problems; 
3.  Depth and quality of any fill; 
4.  Overall slope of the site; and 
5.  Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope. 
C.  Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the floodplain administrator shall require that: 
1.  A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering; 
2.  The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages; 
3.  The proposed grading, excavations, new construction and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and 
4.  Drainage, planting, watering and maintenance not endanger slope stability. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.150 - Flood-related erosion-prone area. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
B.  Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
C.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
D.  Within zone E on the flood insurance rate map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat area, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.160 - Variance procedures. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  In making its decision on a variance application (or on an appeal to the planning commission taken pursuant to this section) the entity deciding the variance shall consider all technical evaluations, and all relevant factors and standards specified in this chapter, and shall also be guided by the following considerations: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
C.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the items listed in paragraph (B) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
D.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all actions by the planning commission under this chapter and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
15.30.170 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  The floodplain administrator may impose such conditions upon the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter and to make the determinations set forth in paragraph (B) of this section. 
B.  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause and upon a determination by the planning commission that: 
1.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
2.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing ordinances of the city. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
E.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. The applicant shall also be required to execute an indemnity agreement to hold the city harmless from any claim, cause of action, liability, cost, expense or damage arising from or in any manner relating to the granting of the variance. A copy of the notice and the original indemnity agreement shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that they appear in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(Ord. 696 § 2 (Attach. A (part)), 2002)  
Chapter 15.35 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT OR MACHINERY 
Sections: 
 
15.35.010 - Definitions. 
The words "building" and "structure," as used in this chapter, shall have the same meanings as defined in the building code, as adopted by reference in Chapter 15.15 of this title. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.020 - Classification of permits. 
For the purposes of this chapter, permits for the moving of buildings, structures, heavy machinery or equipment are hereby classified as follows: 
A.  Class A Permit: For any building or structure moved by motor truck or any vehicle propelled by its own power, not using any trailer or house-moving dollies. 
B.  Class B Permit: For any heavy machinery or equipment moved by motor truck or any vehicle propelled by its own power, where the weight of such machinery or equipment to be moved exceeds eight tons. 
C.  Class C Permit: For any building or structure which is moved by loading on house moving dollies and does not exceed twenty-two feet in height or thirty feet in width. 
D.  Class D Permit: For any building or structure, other than one constructed of brick or concrete, which, when loaded on house-moving dollies, is more than twenty-two feet in height but does not exceed twenty-eight feet in height, and is more than thirty feet in width but does not exceed forty feet in width. 
E.  Class E Permit: For any building or structure other than one constructed of brick or concrete, which, when loaded on house-moving dollies, exceeds twenty-eight feet in height or exceeds forty feet in width. 
F.  Class F Permit: For any building or structure, the walls of which are constructed of brick or of concrete, which, when loaded on house-moving dollies, exceeds twenty-two feet in height or exceeds thirty feet in width. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.030 - Requirement for permit. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building or structure or any machinery or equipment of any of the classes as enumerated in Section 15.35.020 of this chapter, or any section of any such building, structure, machinery or equipment, over, upon, along or across any public street or alley in the city or from one location to another in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city engineer, together with approval by the city engineer as to route and condition of streets to be traversed, which approval shall be set forth on such permit. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.040 - Separate permits required. 
With the exception of Class A and Class B permits, no permit granted under this chapter shall authorize the moving of more than one building or structure or more than one section or portion thereof, in any case in which any such building or structure is to be moved in two or more sections or portions, but a separate permit shall be required for each such section or portion. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.050 - Application for permit fees. 
A.  Applications for moving permits shall be filed with the city engineer, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the owner, the type of building or structure, the present and proposed location, the fair value and approximate age of the building or structure to be moved, the route proposed to be followed, the method of moving and the time within which the work of moving will be commenced and completed. 
2.  That all necessary authority and permits have been obtained from the operators of public utilities which might be affected by such moving operations. Such other pertinent information as the city engineer may require. 
B.  In all cases, except where the building structure is being moved to a location outside of the city limits, in addition to such application, there shall be filed a plan showing the location upon the property to which the building or structure is to be moved, together with photographs of all sides of such building or structure, showing the general architectural design and appearance thereof, and if any material alteration, repair work or other work is proposed to be done after removal has been completed, then there shall also be filed plans showing the general architectural design and appearance of the building or structure on ail sides after such work has been completed. 
C.  All applications shall be accompanied by a processing fee in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.060 - Investigation of route. 
The city engineer shall cause an investigation to be made of the proposed route to determine the effect of the moving of such building, structure, machinery or equipment described in the application upon the streets, highways or other property of the city and no moving permit shall be issued unless the city engineer shall find that such moving can be accomplished without detrimentally affecting streets, highways or other property of the city along the route of such proposed moving operation. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part). 2001)  
15.35.070 - Refusal to issue permit. 
A.  The city engineer may refuse to grant a moving permit on any of the following grounds: 
1.  Where the condition of the building, structure, machinery or equipment is such that it is dangerous or defective and such condition cannot effectively be remedied or corrected. 
2.  If the relocation of such building, structure, machinery or equipment would cause appreciable damage to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within the immediate vicinity of the proposed new location. 
3.  If the granting of the permit would be materially detrimental or injurious to the public safety or public welfare. 
4.  If the building or structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any law or ordinance of the city. 
B.  In the event the city engineer denies a permit, he shall so inform the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for such denial, and the applicant may thereafter appeal such decision to the city council in accordance with the procedure established by the city council. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.080 - Term of permit. 
Each permit granted under this chapter shall state on the face thereof a time limit within which the moving operation covered thereby shall be completed, which time shall in no event be greater than the time as set forth in the application for such permit; provided, that the city engineer, on request of the applicant, may extend the time of any such moving permit where delay is caused by reason of inclemency of the weather, strikes, acts of God or the public enemy or other causes not within the control of the permittee or for such other cause which, in the city engineer's opinion, warrants such extension of time. All extensions shall be visibly stamped upon the permit. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.090 - Display of permit. 
Any person having a valid moving permit under this chapter shall either conspicuously post the same on the building, structure, machinery or equipment for which the permit has been granted at all times during the moving thereof or, in the alternative, shall have such permit physically in the possession of a person in charge of such moving operation who is present at all times during such moving. 
A.  Performance bonds. All applications for Class C, D, E and F permits shall be accompanied by a surety bond in the minimum sum of one hundred thousand dollars, in favor of the city, for the benefit of any person, including the city, who may be damaged directly by the moving of such building or structure; provided, that any person engaged in the business of moving buildings may file with the city clerk a bond in the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, payable to the city for like purposes, and in that event such person need not file the one hundred thousand dollar bond herein above required for any single moving operation. City shall retain the right to require a bond in an amount greater than that set forth above if, in the city's determination, a given moving operation requires additional security. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.100 - Indemnification of the city; liability insurance. 
A.  No Class C, D, E or F permit shall be issued until the applicant has executed a written agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees and volunteers harmless from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, expenses or liabilities arising or resulting from the doing or refraining from doing any act permitted by such permit, or the failure to comply with any terms or conditions of such permit. 
B.  As a condition for the issuance and continuation of a Class C, D, E or F permit, the applicant shall furnish to the city', at the applicant's own cost and expense, a policy of liability insurance providing coverage in accordance with the applicable insurance standards of the city, as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such insurance coverage shall be maintained in full force and effect in accordance with such insurance standards for as long as the permit remains issued and outstanding. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.110 - Repair of damage to public streets and utilities. 
If the moving operation causes any damage to any public street or other public property or public utility, the proper city department or utility company shall do such work as may be necessary to restore the street or other public property' or public utility to as good a condition as the same was in prior to such damage and shall charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the permit was issued for the moving operation. No building permit shall be issued for the repair or reconstruction of any building or structure until all charges, costs and fees due the city incident to such moving have been paid or discharged to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.120 - Safety precautions. 
No person shall cause to be moved any building, structure, machinery or equipment or section or portion thereof over, upon, along or across any public street, alley or other public place without keeping a red light burning at all times between sunset and sunrise at each comer of such section or portion of such building, structure, machinery or equipment and at the end of any projection thereof and at intervals of not more than ten feet on the side thereof facing the open street. During all the time while such building, structure, machinery or equipment is being moved and in motion, sufficient look-outs shall be maintained to safeguard persons or property against injury or damage which might result from such moving operations. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.130 - Compliance with other ordinances. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be in addition to all permits required under any other provisions of this code or other ordinance of the city and all such relocated buildings or structures shall be subject to the inspection of the building official and shall conform to all requirements of the building and other codes or ordinances relating to building, construction and necessary installations incident thereto. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.140 - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to ail persons moving buildings, structures, machinery or equipment within the city, or from a location outside of the city to a location within the city, or from one location to another within the city; provided, that upon a proper showing, the city engineer may waive or reduce the deposit and permit fees where the building, structure, machinery or equipment to be moved is owned or is to be used or occupied by another public agency or where the distance such structure, building, machinery or equipment is moved is so short that, in his judgment, a modification of the fees or other requirements hereof is reasonable under all circumstances. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
15.35.150 - Violation and penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance, subject to the penalties as prescribed in chapter 9 of this code. 
(Ord. 575 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Citation and authority. 
This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state, found in Division 2 (commencing with Section 66410) of Title 7 of the Government Code, and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Soledad". 
(Amended during 1986 codification; prior code Appx. B §§ 1,34)  
16.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California. Whenever any words or phrases as used in this title are not defined herein but are found in the Subdivision Map Act, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply as though specifically set forth in this title. 
B.  As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Arterial street" means any street which carries traffic between different areas of the city, and traffic entering from collector streets. 
2.  "Average lot depth" means the sum of the length of the two side lines of the lot divided by two. 
3.  "City street" means any street, avenue, etc. accepted by the city council. 
4.  "Collector street" means a street which collects traffic from a subdivision or area to an arterial street (sometimes referred to a as a secondary street). 
5.  "Design" refers to street alignment, grades and widths, alignment and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and utilities, park or recreation sites, and lot area, width, depth and shape and pattern as required in this title. 
6.  "Easement" means an easement dedicated to and accepted by the city, which shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city. 
7.  "Expressway" means a street of general city-county importance, which is a limited-access street carrying major traffic through several areas. 
8.  "Final map" refers to a map prepared in accordance with this title, which is designed to be placed on record with the county recorder of the county of Monterey. 
9.  "Front lot line" means in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street, and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. 
10.  "Improvement" refers to such street work, drainage needs and utilities, parks, landscaping, recreation sites or other improvements to be installed, or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public streets, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and the surrounding area as a condition precedent to approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. 
11.  "Local street" means that which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
12.  "Lot" means a parcel of land established, or to be established, by the standard subdivision procedure or minor subdivision procedure, as provided in this title. 
13.  "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
14.  "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the required front setback line. 
15.  "Minor subdivision" means any division of land into four or less lots or parcels by use of a parcel map or other divisions requiring the use of the parcel map as indicated in subsection Q of this section. 
16.  "Owner" means the individual, firm, partnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the ordinance. 
17.  "Parcel map" refers to a map showing the division of land as described in the following cases: 
a.  Any parcel or parcels of land which is divided into four or less parcels; 
b.  The whole parcel before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a public street and no dedications or improvements are required; 
c.  Any parcel or parcels of land divided into lots or parcels, each of a gross area of twenty acres or more, and each of which has an approved access to a maintained public street; 
d.  Any parcel or parcels of land divided into lots or parcels, each of which is forty acres or more; 
e.  Any parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial development and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; provided, however, that the planning commission may require the filing of a standard subdivision on such industrially zoned land where it deems it in the public interest and approved and filed in accordance with law under the standard subdivision procedure. 
18.  "Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of at least ten feet. 
19.  "Side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
20.  "Standard subdivision" means any map prepared, filed and approved in accordance with the state law and Chapters 16.08 and 16.16. 
21.  "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be subdivided into any amount of parcels. 
22.  "Subdivision" means any real property, improved or unimproved, or portion thereof, shown on the latest adopted county tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units, which is divided for the purpose of sale, lease, transfer or financing, including condominiums or similar projects whether immediate or future, by any person, firm or corporation or their assigns within any period. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way. The following, however, are not subdivisions within the meaning of this title: 
a.  Leasing of industrial buildings, stores, offices, apartments or similar space within buildings or spaces within a trailer park; 
b.  Mineral, oil or gas leases, and cemeteries; 
c.  Leases of less than ten years which result in division of land into no more than two parcels; 
d.  Any division of property for the sole purpose of adjusting property lines between contiguous parcels when no new building site as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city is thereby created and where no building site as defined in the zoning ordinance is thereby rendered made until it has been determined by the planning director that the proposed division meets the requirements of this provision. 
23.  "Tentative map" means any map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision or parcel map showing the existing conditions in and around it, prepared as required in this title. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 4)  
16.04.030 - Advisory agency. 
The city council is designated as the advisory agency with respect to subdivisions and final maps. The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency with respect to minor subdivisions as provided in the Subdivision Map Act of the state. The city council and planning commission shall have all the powers and duties with respect to tentative and final maps and the procedures relating to them, which are specified by law and this title. 
(Ord. 576 § 2, 2001; Prior code Appx. B § 3)  
16.04.040 - Fees. 
The city council by resolution may establish a schedule of fees to be paid for the filing and processing of all maps and for other procedures authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
(Added during 1986 codification)  
16.04.045 - Reimbursement of expenses. 
In addition to the basic processing fee specified in Section 16.04.040, an applicant for subdivision approval under this title shall reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by it in connection with the project, including but not limited to payments for engineering, planning, legal, consulting, and other similar services, and such reimbursement shall be a condition of approval of the tentative or parcel map for the project. At the time the application is filed the applicant shall execute a written agreement, in form satisfactory to the city, providing for such reimbursement and for an advance deposit of funds to be held by the city and applied to the payment of such costs and expenses as the same are incurred. 
(Ord. 482 § 1, 1990)  
16.04.050 - Waiver of inadvertent errors. 
The planning commission, in the case of parcel maps, and the city council, in the case of tentative subdivision maps and final maps, may waive technical and inadvertent error, which does not affect the validity of the map, as provided in Section 66473 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 576 § 2, 2001; Added during 1986 codification)  
Chapter 16.08 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Standard subdivision procedure. 
A.  This procedure applies to all subdivisions, parts of subdivisions or any division of land, except any division which qualifies as a "minor subdivision." 
B.  Prior to the filing of a tentative map of a subdivision a tract number shall be obtained. 
C.  Tentative map—data required and design: The initial action in connection with the making of a subdivision shall be the preparation of a tentative map or maps, which shall comply with Chapter 16.24 as to design, and shall include the following data: 
1.  A sketch, at a minimum scale of one inch equals one thousand feet, indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or region; 
2.  Name and address of record owner and subdivider; 
3.  Name and address of surveyor or engineer, or person who prepared the tentative map; 
4.  Date, north point (generally up on the map) and scale. Minimum scale is one inch equals one hundred feet. Minimum map size is eighteen inches by twenty-six inches; 
5.  Names of all adjacent subdivisions; location of, names and width of adjacent streets, highways, alleys and ways, together with the type and location of street improvements on them; 
6.  The contour of the land, at intervals of not more than two feet if the general slope of the land is less than ten percent or of not more than five feet if the general slope of the land is greater than ten percent; 
7.  Sufficient data to define the boundaries of the tract, or a legal description of the tract and blue border on reverse side of map to indicate tract boundaries. Tentative map to show probable units of final map; 
8.  Width, approximate location and purpose of all existing and proposed easements; 
9.  The width and approximate grade of all streets, highways, alleys and other rights-of-way proposed for dedication or not; 
10.  The approximate radii of all curves; 
11.  All lots numbered consecutively throughout entire development; the approximate dimensions of all lots; lot areas shall be shown for all lots not rectangular in shape; 
12.  The approximate locations of areas subject to inundation by stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses existing and proposed; 
13.  The location and outline to scale of each building or structure within the subdivision, noting thereon whether or not the building or structure is to be removed from or remain in the development of the subdivision, and its future use; 
14.  Approximate finished elevation at street intersections; 
15.  The location, pipe size and approximate grades of proposed sewers, water line and underground storm drains, including the proposed location of fire hydrants and street lights; 
16.  The location of all trees over four inches in diameter (where stands of trees are located individual trees need not be shown, but as a group); 
17.  The location of existing fences, wells, cesspools, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, underground structures or sand, gravel or other excavation within two hundred feet of any portion of the subdivision, noting thereon whether they are to be abandoned or used. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 13)  
16.08.020 - Statements to accompany map. 
A.  Accompanying the tentative map shall be statements by the subdivider as follows: 
1.  Statement as to existing zoning and as to proposed use; 
2.  Statement as to intention of subdivider in regard to slope planting, erosion control and improvements to be constructed by him, as required in Chapter 16.24 and other laws of the city; 
3.  Statement as to front yard depths and building lines; 
4.  Proposed source of water supply and sewage disposal, indicating whether or not Section 16.24.080 can be complied with; 
5.  Type of tree planting as required; 
6.  Proposed public areas to be dedicated or scenic easements proposed; 
7.  Statement as to development of lots (whether for sale as lots or fully developed house and lot); 
8.  A geological report shall be submitted so that it can be determined if there are known geological hazards; 
9.  An environmental impact report shall be submitted to the satisfaction of the planning commission and adopted guidelines. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 14)  
16.08.030 - Covenants. 
A.  A copy of any condition, restrictive reservation or covenant existing or proposed shall be attached to the statements required in Section 16.08.020. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 15)  
16.08.040 - Tentative map—Completeness and filing. 
A.  A tentative map is complete for the consideration of the city planning commission when maps or sketches have been submitted. If the tract is a portion of a larger area which may be subdivided later, the tentative map shall roughly indicate the ultimate plan for the whole. 
B.  Twelve copies of a tentative map and statement of the proposed subdivision of any land shall be presented to the city clerk at least fifteen days prior to the planning commission meeting, at which the map will be formally filed, together with a fee established by the city council. 
C.  The city clerk shall transmit copies of the tentative map to the city engineer, city health officer, irrigation district, utility companies serving the area, and to the District Engineer, State Division of Highways, if the subdivision is adjacent to a state highway. When the proposed subdivision is adjacent to the corporate limits of the city, a copy of the tentative map shall be submitted to the secretary of the Monterey County planning commission. 
D.  Any department or agency receiving a copy of the map shall notify the planning commission, within ten days of receipt of the map, of particulars which do not conform to the requirements of this title coming within its authorized scope. Failure to so notify the planning commission shall be deemed approval of the tentative map by the respective agency. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 16)  
16.08.050 - Tentative map—Review by planning commission. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to review the proposed tentative map within the time prescribed by law. The commission shall consider all matters pertinent to approval, conditional approval, or denial of the map and shall forward its written recommendation to the city council. Such action shall be by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 576 § 3, 2001)  
16.08.055 - Tentative map—Action by city council. 
A.  The city council shall act on any tentative map within the time prescribed by law unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the city council and the subdivider. Failure to act within the time limits prescribed or agreed-upon extension shall be deemed approval of the tentative map. 
B.  The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission and shall determine whether a tentative map is in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title and upon that basis approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of the map. It shall report such action directly to the subdivider, and shall also transmit to the subdivider a copy of the resolution setting forth the action of the city council on the map. 
(Ord. 576 § 4, 2001)  
16.08.060 - Improvement plans. 
After approval or conditional approval by the city council of the tentative map of any subdivision, the subdivider shall furnish the following information to the city engineer and shall receive authorization of the city engineer before submission of the final map to the city clerk: 
A.  A grading plan consisting of typical cross sections and finished grades of all lots, roads, streets and highways in the proposed new subdivision; 
B.  Plan profile drawings on all streets, sewer and drainage improvements; utilities may be shown in plan only. All tracings or duplicate tracings shall be filed with the city engineer; all work submitted to and signed by the city engineer; 
C.  Estimated costs of improvements to be dedicated to the city or other public agency. The cost of estimate shall include ten percent contingency; 
D.  Any other pertinent information required by the conditional approval of the city council and city engineer. 
(Ord. 576 § 6, 2001; Prior code Appx. B § 19)  
16.08.070 - Expiration of tentative map. 
A tentative map shall expire twenty-four months from the date it was approved or conditionally approved, unless it is extended in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.090. 
(Ord. 441 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code Appx. B § 17.2)  
16.08.080 - Extension of tentative map. 
A.  Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the city council for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years. Such application shall be filed at least thirty days, but not more than ninety days, prior to the date of expiration and shall state the reasons for the requested extension. 
B.  The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the requested extension. In granting the extension the city council may impose new conditions and may revise existing conditions. 
C.  Prior to acting upon an application for extension, the city council may refer the application to the planning commission for recommendation and report. The planning commission shall report within forty-five days of the council's referral. 
(Ord. 441 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code Appx. B § 17.4)  
Chapter 16.12 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAP FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Citation and authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (referred to in this chapter as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.04.010)  
16.12.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to this chapter. The city council finds and determines that the regulations outlined in this chapter are necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.04.020)  
16.12.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan, or any applicable specific plan, or which is not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.04.030)  
16.12.040 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
1.  "General plan" means the general plan of the city. 
2.  "Specific plan" means a plan authorized under the provisions of Title 7, Division 1, Article 8 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 65450. 
3.  "Subdivision Map Act" means the State Subdivision Map Act set forth in Division 2, Title 7, of the Government Code, commencing with Section 66410. 
4.  "Subdivision ordinance" means the subdivision ordinance of the City, codified as Title 16 of this code. 
5.  "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in the subdivision ordinance, that has printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.12.060, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, references to "tentative map" include tentative parcel map, and references to "final map" include parcel maps. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the subdivision ordinance are applicable to this chapter.* 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.04.040) 
*  Editor's Note: The subdivision ordinance is codified in the other chapters of this title.  
16.12.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter applies only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.04.050)  
16.12.060 - Filing and processing. 
A.  A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the subdivision ordinance for a tentative map, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
C.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall supply the data and information required by the subdivision ordinance for the filing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.08.010)  
16.12.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by city council resolution for the filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.08.020)  
16.12.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map expires at the end of the same time period, and is subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.08.030)  
16.12.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. Should Government Code Section 66474.2 be repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved; provided, that with regard to the payment of a particular type of fee (e.g., school impact fees, in-lieu recreation fees, water and sewer fees, etc.), the map approval may contain a condition that the amount of the fee is to be determined as of the date of issuance of a building permit. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to in this section expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.12.080. If the final map is approved, these rights last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of eighteen months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period begins for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial time period specified in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period specified in subdivision 1 of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen days, in writing. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to in this section continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.12.010)  
16.12.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map, notwithstanding subsection A of Section 16.12.090, confers the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section are for the time periods set forth in subparagraph C of section 16.12.090. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.12.020)  
16.12.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in subsection A of Section 16.12.090 and Section 16.12.100, and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 440 § 1 (Exbt. A) (part), 1985: prior code § 19-A.12.030)  
Chapter 16.16 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Generally—Application and filing. 
A.  After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, and prior to the expiration of the same, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and may file with the city council for approval a final map conforming to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. At the time of filing all required certificates on the final map must have been signed, and where necessary, acknowledged. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk receives the map. 
B.  Any failure to record a final map prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. Before a final map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map shall be submitted and approved, or conditionally approved, by the city council. 
(Ord. 441 § 2, 1985: prior code Appx. B § 20)  
16.16.020 - Form of final map. 
A.  The final plan or map shall be made to a scale large enough to show the details clearly, on a minimum scale of one hundred feet to the inch or larger, using more than one sheet if necessary to furnish the desired space. The original shall be drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth of good quality and the size of the sheets shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches. All sheets shall have a two-and-one-half-inch margin on the left border and a one-inch margin on all other borders. 
B.  Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown, and the number of sheets used in the map shall be set forth in the title of the map. If more than two sheets are necessary for the map, an index map is required. 
C.  The title of each such final map shall consist of a tract number and name, if any, conspicuously placed at the lower right-hand corner of the sheet followed by the words, "consisting of ____________ sheets" (showing the number thereof), followed by the words, "Lying within the City of Soledad." 
(Prior code Appx. B § 21)  
16.16.030 - Data required. 
The final map shall show the following: 
A.  Boundaries and streets: The exterior boundaries of the property (shown in blue); the border lines and centerlines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths and names; any other portions intended to be dedicated to the public use. In case of branching streets, the line of departure from one street to another shall be indicated; 
B.  Adjacent streets: The lines of all adjoining properties; the lines of adjacent streets and alleys, showing their widths and names; 
C.  Lot lines and numbers: All lot lines, and numbers for all lots, building lines, easements and their purposes. All lots are to be numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision, starting with the No. 1, except units of a total development, which shall be numbered consecutively throughout the development; 
D.  Dimensions: All dimensions, both linear and angular, for locating boundaries of subdivisions, lots, street and alley lines, easements and building lines. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot; 
E.  Monuments: All permanent monuments, together with their descriptions showing fully and clearly their location and size. If any points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated; 
F.  Title and description: Title and description of property being subdivided, showing its location and extent, points of compass, scale of plan, basis of bearing and name of subdivider and of engineer or surveyor platting the tract; 
G.  The boundaries of any areas within the proposed subdivision which are subject to periodic inundation by water; 
H.  Private restrictions: Any private restrictions shall be shown on the plat or reference to them thereon; and the plats shall contain proper acknowledgment of owners and mortgagees accepting the platting and restrictions; 
I.  City boundaries: City boundaries which adjoin the subdivision shall be clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines. No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line; 
J.  Zoning setback lines shall be shown as fine dotted lines; 
K.  The title sheet shall indicate where vehicular access rights have been surrendered on arterial or expressway streets. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 22)  
16.16.040 - Additional material required. 
The following additional material shall be submitted with the final map: 
A.  Traverse Sheets. The subdivider shall furnish the city engineer traverse sheets prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, showing the mathematical closure within one foot to twenty thousand feet perimeter of the exterior boundary of the tract and of each block within the tract and each irregular lot. 
B.  Guaranty of Title. The subdivider shall furnish to the city council a guaranty of title or letter from a competent title company, certifying that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all acknowledgments thereto appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary. Such guaranty shall be issued for the benefit of the city and protection of the city council and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording. 
C.  Improvement Agreement. The subdivider shall file an agreement for all improvements as required in this title, and as may be further required by the city council or by law, and shall secure the performance thereof by a good and sufficient surety bond executed by a responsible surety company to be approved by the council, or an instrument of credit approved by the city council; or in lieu of such surety bond, instrument of credit or a cash deposit, which bond, instrument of credit or cash deposit shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the improvement as estimated by the city engineer or by the city council; provided, however, that the subdivider may, at his option, in lieu of such agreement and bond or cash deposit, enter into a contract with the city council, secured by a faithful performance bond or cash deposit in the manner and condition as provided by Section 11612 of the Business and Professions Code of California and all other laws applicable thereto. 
D.  Taxes. 
1.  Prior to the filing of the final map, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the county of Monterey a certificate from the official computing redemptions in Monterey County and in the city, showing that according to the records of his office there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. 
2.  As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the county of Monterey a certificate by each proper officer, giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not yet payable. 
3.  Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the board of supervisors a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the board and by its terms made to inure to the benefit of the county upon the payment of all state, county, municipal and local taxes, and all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property but which are not yet payable. In lieu of a bond, a deposit may be made of money or negotiable bonds in the amount, and of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 23)  
16.16.050 - Completion and filing. 
A.  Completion. A final map is complete for filing when it complies with the previous section and is accompanied with the statements, agreements, cash and/or bonds required. 
B.  Filing. The subdivider shall file the following with the city clerk: 
1.  Twelve blueline copies, the original tracing on linen, and duplicate on linen or film; boundary traverse map; approved improvement plans, and a checking fee as established by the city council, for such detailed examination of final maps and field checking as may be necessary for the city engineer to make his required certification. The map shall be accompanied by traverse sheets showing the closure within allowable limits of the exterior boundaries and of each irregular block and lot; 
2.  Title guarantee, deed restrictions, improvement agreement and bond, if not previously filed. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 24)  
16.16.060 - Department approvals. 
The following functions shall be acted upon within twenty days after filing: 
A.  The city engineer shall examine the final map. If he determines that the surveys are correct and that the map is technically correct, substantially conforms to the tentative map and any approved alteration thereof, and to the provisions of this chapter and to state law, he shall so certify on the map and transmit it to the city clerk. If he finds that full conformity has not been made, he shall so advise the subdivider in writing and afford him an opportunity to make the necessary changes. 
B.  The secretary of the planning commission shall examine the final map. If he determines that the map substantially conforms to the approved tentative map and any condition imposed thereon, he shall so certify on the map. 
C.  When filing is completed and approved as outlined, the city clerk shall transmit the following as provided by the subdivider: an original linen or one duplicate transparency on film suitable for reproduction, with all accompanying statements, agreements, cash and/or bonds required (and the recording fee) to the city council for consideration. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 25)  
16.16.070 - Action by city council. 
A.  Upon presentation of the above material by the city clerk, as provided in Section 16.16.060, the city council shall consider the map, the plan of subdivision and the offers of dedication. The city council may reject any or all offers of dedication or require dedication of all proposed streets. In the event that improvements are required under the terms of this title or by law, the city council shall approve a contract with the subdivider for posting a bond or cash deposit as provided in this title. In such case, when the agreement and bond or cash deposit have been approved by the city attorney as to form, and by the city engineer or city council as to sufficiency, the city council may consider the final map. 
B.  After the city council determines that the map is in conformity to the requirements of this title, it shall approve the map by resolution. In case the city council determines that the map is not in conformity with the requirements of this title, it shall disapprove said map, specifying reasons therefor and advising the subdivider of such disapproval. Within ninety days thereafter the subdivider shall file with the city clerk a map altered to meet with approval of the city council and shall conform with the procedures specified in this title. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 26)  
16.16.080 - Recording. 
The city clerk, after approval by the city council and after signatures and seals have been affixed, shall transmit the final map and duplicate cloth tracings, accompanied by the necessary recording fee, to the county recorder. No map shall have any force or effect until it has been approved by the city council and no title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall pass until recordation of the final map. No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel shown on the final map until recordation of the final map. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 27)  
Chapter 16.20 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS—PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Filing of map—Fee. 
Where required by the provisions of this title, parcel maps, as set out in the Subdivision Map Act, shall be prepared and filed with the planning commission, together with a filing fee in an amount fixed by city council resolution, plus recording fee. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 28(1))  
16.20.015 - Reimbursement of expenses. 
In addition to the basic processing fee specified in Section 16.20.010, an applicant for minor subdivision approval under his title shall reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by it in connection with the project, including but not limited to payments for engineering, planning, legal, consulting and other similar services, and such reimbursement shall be a condition of approval of the tentative or parcel map for the project. At the time the application is filed the applicant shall execute a written agreement, in form satisfactory to the city, providing for such reimbursement and for an advance deposit of funds to be held by the city and applied to the payment of such costs and expenses as the same are incurred. 
(Ord. 482 § 2, 1990)  
16.20.020 - Design and improvements. 
Division of property by this section shall be governed as to design and improvements by Chapter 16.24. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 28(2))  
16.20.030 - Parcel map information. 
A legible tentative map drawn to scale and eighteen inches by twenty-six inches in size on tracing paper shall be prepared and submitted showing: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of person filing the map; the name and tract number of proposed subdivision; 
B.  Name and legal designation of tract or grant in which the subdivision is located and ties to adjoining streets; 
C.  Any other data necessary for the intelligent interpretation of the various items and location of the points, line and areas shown, including: elevations where topography is a vital factor; centerlines of important watercourses; areas subject to flood, roads (accurately located), existing structures and dimensions. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 28(3))  
16.20.040 - Statement to accompany map. 
Accompanying the tentative map shall be the following: a statement by the subdivider as to drainage, surfacing or other required improvements to be constructed by him, and whether proposed roads, widenings or street openings are offered for separate dedication, and if so, four copies of a preliminary title report on subject property shall be included. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 28(4))  
16.20.050 - Processing of parcel map. 
A statement regarding proposed improvements and one reproducible tracing and fifteen copies of the map shall be filed with the city clerk at least five days prior to the time at which action by the subdivision review board is expected. The city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of said map and accompanying data to each member of the planning commission, the health department and, if advisable, to each public utility serving the general area of the proposed minor subdivision. 
If the city engineer finds compliance with applicable sections and the parcel map to be technically correct, he shall endorse a statement on it attesting to his examination thereof, and shall present it to the planning commission for approval. Otherwise, he shall return it to the person who presented it, together with a written statement of the changes necessary to make it conform to the requirements of this title. 
The health department shall make a report on their appropriate areas concerning adequacy of lot size, sewerage and water facilities. 
Any utility company concerned may make a report to the committee as to the adequacy of the proposed easement. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code § 29(1))  
16.20.060 - Lots—Previously recorded. 
Any lots created by an approved minor subdivision approved by the city shall eliminate any previously recorded lot lines which fall within the minor subdivision. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 29(3))  
16.20.070 - Partial width streets. 
Partial width streets may be approved by the planning commission when lot owners are not able to coordinate development on adjacent lots, but in no case shall such street be less than thirty feet of right-of-way and twenty feet of pavement. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 29(4))  
16.20.080 - Panhandle lot subdivisions. 
A.  Tandem lots not fronting on a standard street width shall be twenty percent larger than required by the zone in which the lot is located. 
B.  The original lot or parcel shall not have less area or width than required by the zone in which the lot or parcel is located. 
C.  Where two or more lots are served by common access, the area of the lots shall not include the access. 
D.  Where two or more lots share a common driveway, mutual easements and maintenance covenants shall be recorded. 
E.  All driveways serving more than one residence in a panhandle lot subdivision must be surfaced in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
1.  Two inches premix asphalt over four inches aggregate base Type A; and 
2.  Four inches concrete may be used in lieu of asphalt. 
F.  Each dwelling unit must be provided with a guest parking space to be not less than twenty by twenty feet minimum size. In lieu of the above, guest parking space may be provided by locating the garage a minimum of twenty-five feet from the nearest edge of a common driveway or property line and such space shall be a minimum of twenty feet wide. 
G.  Each single-family dwelling unit must be serviced by separate sewer and waterlines if available, by gas and electricity, and each must be shown on the submitted plot plan. 
H.  All surface drainage water must drain to a natural waterway or to a public street by: 
1.  Natural slope; or 
2.  Fill dirt hauled in and compacted to specification; or 
3.  By securing an easement over adjacent property to run an underground duct to the adjacent public street or road. 
All drainage proposals, including alternates, are to have the prior approval of the county surveyor. 
I.  All plot plans or other applications directed to the planning commission shall be verified by the applicant and said verification shall be a permanent part of the plot plan as submitted. 
J.  All tentative and final maps for plot plans for deep lot subdivisions or lot splits shall be submitted on a one inch equals fifty feet scale. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 29(5))  
16.20.090 - Action by planning commission. 
Upon receipt of a parcel map the planning commission shall determine whether the map is in conformity with the requirements of this title and if so, it may approve the map when accompanied by offers of dedication, an agreement for the installation of improvements, performance and payment bonds or other security authorized by law, and title guaranty, which have been previously approved by the city council. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 29(6))  
16.20.100 - Expiration of parcel map—Extension of time. 
An approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four months after its approval or conditional approval. The expiration of the tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the expired tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of said map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period not to exceed an additional year, for a total of three years from the date of approval or conditional approval. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 29(7)(a))  
16.20.110 - Appeal. 
Appeal to the city council from the action of the planning commission must be made in writing by the applicant within fifteen days from the date of action of the planning commission. The city council shall render its decision on any appeal within thirty days after filing thereof. If the city council fails to act within the prescribed thirty days, the action of the planning commission shall be deemed as final, unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city council. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B §§ 29(7)(b), (c), 30(1))  
16.20.120 - Recordation of map—Issuance of building permits. 
After a parcel map has been approved, it shall be recorded by the city clerk. No building permit for property within a minor subdivision may be issued prior to the recording of the parcel map. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 29 (part))  
16.20.130 - Subdivision alternate. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any owner from processing any division of land as a subdivision. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 31)  
16.20.140 - Cemeteries excepted. 
This chapter shall not apply to any land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 30(3))  
Chapter 16.24 - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Applicability. 
Subdivision design and improvements are required as set out in this chapter. 
(Prior code Appx. B Art. II (part))  
16.24.020 - Industrial subdivisions. 
A.  Lots. Minimum lot area and width for industrial subdivisions shall be as stipulated in the zoning ordinance, but not less than ten thousand square feet in area and seventy-five feet in width. 
B.  Street Design. Street design shall be as set forth in Section 16.24.070 for industrial areas. 
C.  Improvements. All improvements shall be as set out in Section 16.24.080. 
D.  Other Regulations. All other regulations set out in this title shall be complied with in the development of industrial subdivisions. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 5)  
16.24.030 - Commercial subdivisions. 
A.  Lots. Minimum lot area and width for commercial subdivisions is five thousand square feet area and fifty feet width, provided that the planning commission may reduce the lot sizes not more than fifty percent when the total lot size and land used for parking and landscaping in undivided interest equals the required lot size. 
B.  Street Design. Street design shall be as set out in Section 16.24.070 for commercial areas. 
C.  Improvements. All improvements shall be as set out in Section 16.24.080. 
D.  Other Regulations. All other regulations set out in this title shall be complied with in the development of commercial subdivisions. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 6)  
16.24.040 - Residential subdivisions. 
A.  Lots. 
1.  Minimum lot area and width for residential subdivisions shall be six thousand square feet area and sixty feet width, unless greater lot area and width is stipulated in the zoning ordinance for the area to be subdivided. Lot size may be reduced through the use of Section 16.24.060. 
2.  Width at front property line may be reduced to thirty-five feet where the frontage abuts the outside of any sharp curve and to twenty feet on panhandle development where not more than one lot is served by the panhandle. "Sharp curve" means centerline radius of less than one hundred feet. 
B.  Contouring. Mass recontouring may be allowed when approved by the planning commission, provided that such contouring shall be planted or reforested to approval of the planning commission. 
C.  Improvements. All design and improvements shall be as set forth in Sections 16.24.050 through 16.24.080. 
D.  Other Regulations. All other regulations set out in this title shall be complied with in the development of residential subdivisions. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 7)  
16.24.050 - General design and improvement standards. 
A.  Blocks. Blocks shall not be longer than one thousand two hundred feet between intersecting street lines, except on arterial streets and expressways where longer blocks may be required. Lots with frontage on more than one street will not be permitted, except corner lots, unless topographic conditions warrant and then only upon approval of the planning commission and when access rights are released on one street. A one-foot nonaccess strip, in addition to other easements, shall be dedicated to the city for the installation of a permanent wall or fence when required by the planning commission. 
B.  Walkways. Improved walkways not less than ten feet in width may be required through blocks more than nine hundred feet in length and through other blocks where necessary to provide access to schools, parks and scenic easements. 
C.  Utility Easements. Easements not less than five feet wide shall be required on each side of all lots and ten feet wide at the rear of all lots where necessary for poles, wires, drainage and water mains, or other utilities. The city engineer may allow reduction of the width when in his opinion, and in the opinion of the serving utility, a lesser width is justified. All pole lines shall be located in the rear except when otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
D.  Watercourses. Watercourses shall be shown as easements, and storm drains shall be placed in easements when public right-of-way is not available or adequate. The planning commission or city engineer may require watercourses to be placed entirely in underground conduits or adequately fenced or otherwise improved. 
E.  Monuments. Durable metal monuments consisting of iron pipes approved by the city engineer shall be installed or referenced to the following locations: 
1.  Boundary corners; 
2.  At intervals of not more than five hundred feet along boundary lines; 
3.  At the beginning and ending of property line curves or P.I. at discretion of city engineer; 
4.  Lot corners, and in addition, a lead and tack shall be set in the sidewalk on the prolongation of the side lot lines. 
Standard monuments shall be placed along the centerlines of public streets and alleys as follows: All intersections, all P.I.'s or beginning and ending of curves. 
F.  Access. All lots shall abut on a street unless approved as a "deep lot" subdivision by the planning commission, under policies adopted by the planning commission. 
G.  Setbacks. Building setbacks shall be required at least as great as the applicable zoning requirements. 
H.  Lot Configuration. The size and shape of lots shall conform to any zoning regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. In no case shall the lot depth be greater than three times the average width. 
I.  Roads and Streets. 
1.  Existing streets shall be continued as required by the planning commission. 
2.  Street stubs shall be required adjacent to unsubdivided property where, in the opinion of the planning commission, they are necessary. A satisfactory temporary turnaround may be required. 
3.  Streets shall intersect at as near right angles as is practicable. Radius of curvature, where the property lines intersect, shall be a minimum of ten feet, except at arterial street and expressways, where it shall be twenty feet. 
4.  "T" or three-way intersections are preferable to four-way intersections. The centerlines of opposing streets intersecting a common street shall be offset not less than two hundred feet. 
5.  Reserve strips, where required to control access over certain lot lines or over the ends of street stubs, shall be dedicated to the city. 
6.  Alleys shall be constructed in industrial, commercial and in multiple-family areas where necessary to control access to expressways and arterial streets. 
7.  Cul-de-sac streets shall have the following limiting dimensions: 
a.  Forty feet minimum radius to curb, at turnaround; 
b.  Fifty feet minimum radius to property line at turnaround. 
c.  Five hundred feet maximum length, from intersecting street line to bulb radius point. Longer cul-de-sac may be allowed to serve twelve or less lots. 
8.  Names for proposed new streets shall be assigned by the planning department and shown on the tentative map, following review and approval of all such names by the city council. 
9.  Streets, rights-of-way and easements in any subdivision shall be offered for dedication. The city may, at its option, accept or reject any such offer. 
10.  Streets shall conform, as to alignment and width, to the official circulation element of the general plan, provided that the following are the minimum standards: 
	Right-of-way (feet) 	Pavement Width (feet) 
Divided major 	100 	32 
Major 	84 	64 
Collector 	60 	40 
Minor 	54 	34 
Cul-de-sac 	50 	30 
 
11.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains any existing or proposed state highway or freeway, arterial street or railroad right-of-way, the planning commission shall require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
12.  Streets within a new subdivision shall connect to a city street, county-maintained road, or state highway. Where an off-site connection is necessary to provide access to such street, road or highway, the subdivider shall acquire the right-of-way and construct the improvements required. 
(Ord. 570 § 1, 2000; prior code Appx. B § 8)  
16.24.060 - Optional design and improvement standards. 
Where a subdivider by written affirmation signifies his intent to enhance the livability and appearance of his proposed subdivision by using new concepts in the arrangement of lots, circulation pattern to serve such lots, and by providing permanent open space within the neighborhoods in the proposed subdivision, and by providing appropriate means of access to blocks, schools, shopping centers and other uses, he may use the following procedure: 
A.  Improved Design Based on Density Control and Better Community Environment. The standards set out in this chapter may be varied only when gross density of an area is not increased, and where the design has the approval of the planning commission, and where in the opinion of the planning commission (or, on appeal, the city council) the deviation will: 
1.  Produce a more desirable and livable community than the minimum requirements in this chapter; 
2.  Create better community environment through dedication of public areas, or setting out permanent scenic easements or open spaces, rearrangement of lot sizes, reforestation of barren areas; 
3.  Reduce the danger of erosion; 
4.  Reduce the area and unsightliness of cut-and-fill banks. 
B.  As an incentive to creating better overall communities, the planning commission may authorize reduction in lot size but with no increase in density in the overall development. The planning commission may authorize similar deviations from other standards in this chapter, where the deviations are for the purposes outlined in this subsection. 
C.  Before any deviation based on improved design is authorized it shall be passed by not less than a two-thirds vote of the total membership of the planning commission, upon a finding that the variation as authorized will result in a community which is a substantial improvement over the community which could have been developed by following the requirements set out in Sections 16.24.020 through 16.24.050. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 9)  
16.24.070 - Specific street design and improvements. 
Street design shall conform to the engineering standards of the city. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 10)  
16.24.080 - Improvements. 
A.  On-Site Improvements. All improvements shall conform to the city's "standard details and specifications," as adopted by the city council. Any deviation shall be only with the written approval of the planning commission. Permits shall be obtained from the city engineer, where required, before any construction is started. Improvements to be installed by each subdivider shall include the following: 
1.  Curb, gutter, sidewalk and walkways (or parking bays where required); 
2.  Water lines, gas, electric and other utility services to serve each lot and stubbed to property line; 
3.  Fire hydrants; 
4.  Sanitary sewers and laterals to serve each lot and stubbed to property line prior to paving; 
5.  Storm sewers, drains and channel improvements; 
6.  Slope planting silt basins or other forms of erosion control; 
7.  Paved streets; 
8.  Ornamental street lights; 
9.  Street trees, not less than one tree per lot; average spacing forty feet on center; 
10.  Street signs, at locations approved by the city engineer; 
11.  Stop signs where street intersects with an arterial or expressway; 
12.  Other traffic-control signs as required by the city engineer; 
13.  Utility lines, including but not limited to electric, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground in accordance with the utility rules of the California Public Utilities Commission. In cases where the utility rules do not require undergrounding, the planning commission may do so unless information is furnished to the planning commission to enable them to find that such undergrounding is unreasonable because of terrain, soil conditions or geological problems. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and he shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. Transmission lines may be placed underground at the option of the developer or utility and concurrence of the county planning commission. For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground. No waiver of underground facilities shall be granted in any underground district previously established. Any waiver granted by the California Public Utilities Commission or the planning commission shall be to streamline construction only and not the conventional overhead lines; 
14.  School sites: Where any subdivider proposes a development or completion of a development of one or more subdivisions on any parcel or contiguous parcels within one or more school districts, the planning commission may require the subdivider to dedicate to the school district such land as the governing body deems necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school facilities. This requirement is applicable only to a subdivider and his successors who have owned the land being subdivided for less than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative maps in accordance with this title. The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless the school district enters into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication within thirty days after the requirement is imposed by the city. The required dedication may be made at any time before, currently with or up to sixty days after filing the final map of any portion of the subdivision. The school district shall, in the event that it accepts the dedication, repay to the land subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts: 
a.  The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider; 
b.  The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date demand for dedication is made; 
c.  Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land. 
B.  Off-site Improvements. The following off-site improvements may be required: 
1.  The development of a domestic water supply, including storage facilities, or financial contributions for the improvement of any existing source of supply and the construction of transmission lines from that supply to the proposed development; 
2.  The development of sewage disposal facilities or financial contributions for the improvement of any existing source of supply and the construction of transmission lines from that supply to the proposed development; 
3.  When flood zones are established by the city council, the subdivider shall pay the fee set out for the particular zone in which the subject land lies; 
4.  Properly graded, drained and paved access roads; 
5.  The extension of other utilities; 
6.  In addition, there may be imposed, as a condition of subdivision approval, a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. In the event of the installation of such improvements, the city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. In order to pay the costs as required by such reimbursement agreement, the city may obtain funding by means of any or all of the methods provided for in Section 66487 of the Government Code, or it may use any other city funds which may be available for that purpose. 
C.  Plans and Inspection. In addition to all other requirements in this section: 
1.  Improvement work, including grading, shall not be commenced until improvement plans for such work have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
2.  All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of, and to the satisfaction of, the city engineer. 
3.  Cost of inspection shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 530 § 2 (Exbt. A), 1993; prior code Appx. B § 11)  
16.24.090 - Deviation from requirements—Variances. 
A.  It is realized that there are certain parcels of land of such dimension, subject to such title restrictions, so affected by physical conditions and/or devoted to such use that it is impossible for the subdivider to conform to all of the requirements of this title when subdividing property. 
B.  The planning commission (or on appeal the city council) may grant variances from the requirements of this title when all the following conditions are found to apply: 
1.  That any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity; 
2.  That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict literal application of this title is found to deprive subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity; 
3.  That under the circumstances of this particular case the variance, rather than the sections at issue in this title, actually carries out the spirit and intent of this title. 
(Prior code Appx. B § 12)  
Chapter 16.28 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Compliance required. 
No lot or parcel of land in the city, or any portion thereof, shall be used, developed, or built upon unless it conforms to the requirements of this title. No building permit shall be issued for any construction on a lot or parcel not so conforming. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 32)  
16.28.020 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person who sells or leases, or who constructs or occupies a building on, any parcel of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this title, without complying with this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 33 (part))  
16.28.030 - Other remedies available to city. 
Nothing contained in this chapter bars any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city otherwise may be entitled, and the city may file an action in the Superior Court for Monterey County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision of land or sale of land which is in violation of this title. 
(Amended during 1986 codification: prior code Appx. B § 33 (part))  
Title 17 - ZONING[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 438. 
 
Chapter 17.02 - ADOPTION OF ZONING PLAN 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Short title. 
This title shall be known by the following short title: "The City of Soledad Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.02.020 - Adoption of zoning plan. 
There is adopted a precise zoning plan for the city, the plan being a districting plan, as provided by law. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.02.030 - Purpose. 
The plan is adopted to implement the general plan, to provide rules and regulations for the development and use of land in an orderly manner, and to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.02.040 - Nature of plan. 
The plan is a part of the general plan and consists of the establishment of various districts within the city wherein the use of land and buildings, and the spacing, placement, height and bulk of buildings and structures are regulated in a manner appropriate to the district in which those things are located. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.02.050 - Effect of plan. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, no building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved into, reconstructed, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, or moved, nor shall any land, building or premises be used or designed to be used for any purpose or in any manner not permitted in the zone in which such land, building or premises is located. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.04 - INTERPRETATION 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Grammatical interpretation. 
Whenever in this title the context so requires, feminine or neuter pronouns shall be substituted for those masculine in form and vice versa; words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular shall include the plural. As used in this title the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.04.020 - General plan consistency. 
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.04.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Alley" means a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
"Apartment" means any building or portion thereof which is designed and built for occupancy of four or more families. (See also "dwelling, multiple.") 
"Block" means all property fronting upon one side of a street, between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, dead-end street or unsubdivided land. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of a street which it intercepts. 
"Boardinghouse" means a dwelling or part thereof, where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons not transients is provided for compensation. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and designed for the shelter or housing of any person, animal or chattel and having a fixed location upon the ground. 
"Building, accessory" means a subordinate building, including shelters of pools, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same building site. 
"Building, main" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot and/or building site on which it is situated. 
"Building site" means a lot or parcel of land, in single or joint ownership, occupied or to be occupied by a building or group of buildings, including all open spaces required by this title. 
"Business" means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of offices, structures and premises; or the maintenance and use of recreational or amusement enterprises; or the maintenance and use of offices and facilities by professions and trades rendering service. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building, such as an apartment. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property. The word "condominium," as used in this title, also refers to townhouses, cooperative housing, and similar residential developments. 
"Cooperative housing": See "condominium." 
"Court" means an open, unoccupied space, unobstructed to the sky, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings and which is bounded on three or more sides by such building or buildings. 
"Director" means the planning director of the city. 
"District" means a designated area of the city in which the use of land and buildings, and the spacing, placement, height and bulk of buildings and structures are regulated by this title according to the zoning classification assigned to the area. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, three-family dwellings and apartments, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or boardinghouses. 
"Dwelling, single-family" means a building containing not more than one kitchen, designed for or used to house not more than one family. 
"Dwelling, two-family" or "duplex" means a building containing not more than two kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than two families, living independently of each other. 
"Dwelling, three-family" or "triplex" means a building containing not more than three kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than three families, living independently of each other. 
"Dwelling, multiple" means a building or portion thereof, used and designed as a residence for four or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including motels, hotels or boardinghouses. 
"Dwelling group" means a group of two or more dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having a yard or court in common, but not including automobile courts. 
"Family" means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit (as distinguished from a group of transients occupying such premises), including residents of a boardinghouse or group home for persons with common disabilities or handicaps. A family includes all necessary employees of such family. 
"Fence" means any structural device forming a physical barrier by means of hedge, wood, mesh, metal, chain, brick, stake, plastic or other similar materials. 
"Garage" or "carport" means accessible and usable covered space for the storage of motor vehicles. 
"Garage sale" means sale of secondhand consumer items on a private premises zoned for residential purposes, not requiring a business license, when held no more than four days at the same location during each calendar year. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city, including all of its elements. 
"Guest house" means detached living quarters of a permanent type of construction and without kitchens or cooking facilities, for the use of which no compensation in any form is received or paid. 
"Guest room" means attached or detached living quarters of a permanent type of construction without kitchen or cooking facilities, for the use of which compensation in some form is received or paid. 
"Height of building" means the vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the topmost point of the roof, excluding elevator rooms, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment. 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
"Home occupation" means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of a dwelling for residential purposes, causing no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, generating no need for parking in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and involving no activity, process or equipment causing noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference, or any other significant disturbance of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
"Junkyard" means more than one hundred square feet of the area of any lot used for the storage of junk, including scrap metals, salvage or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, whether for sale or storage. 
"Kitchen" means a room or area with permanent cooking facilities and accommodations for dishwashing. 
"Lot": See "building site." In a mobile home park, "lot" means a space alloted for occupancy by a mobile home. 
"Lot coverage" means that percentage of the area of a lot that is covered by buildings or structures, including facilities for vehicle storage or vehicle access. 
"Lot depth" means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
"Lot line" means a line separating the front from a street, the side from a street adjoining property, the rear or side from an alley or street or adjoining property. 
"Lot line, front" means the shortest dimension of a lot fronting on a street, irrespective of the direction in which the main entrance faces. 
"Lot line, rear" means the lot boundary opposite or approximately opposite the lot front; in the case of a triangular or gore-shaped lot, or other irregular lot, a line ten feet in length, within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front line of the lot. 
"Lot line, side" means any lot boundary not a front or rear lot line. 
"Lot, through" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the required front setback line. 
"Mobile home" means a vehicle or other structure fabricated off-site and transportable on permanently attached or detached wheels, or on a truck or other conveyance, intended for use as a dwelling unit, and containing a complete kitchen, sanitary facilities, and utilities for connection to on-site service connections. For purposes of Chapter 17.24 of this title only, "mobile home" includes modular dwellings intended for assembly on the site and not designed for subsequent or repeated relocation. 
"Mobile home park" means a residential facility arranged or equipped for the accommodation of mobile homes, with spaces for such mobile homes available for rent, lease, or purchase, and providing utility services and other facilities, either separately or in common to mobile home spaces therein. 
"Modular house": See "mobile home." 
"Motel" or "hotel" means one or a group of two or more detached or semi-detached buildings containing guest rooms, with automobile parking space provided in connection therewith, which building or group of buildings is designed and used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers, provided that a maximum of twenty percent of the rooms, the guest room or rooms may contain mechanical equipment for the preparation or storage of food or beverages. These rooms are excluded from the fourteen-day transient occupancy limit and may be occupied continually for up to thirty consecutive days. A conditional use permit shall be required for the conversion of existing units or an increase of the twenty percent limit for rooms to be equipped with mechanical equipment for the preparation or storage of food or beverages. 
"Multiple dwelling": See "dwelling, multiple." 
"Nonconforming use" means a use that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated. 
"Office" means a business establishment for rendering of service or administration, but excluding retail sales. 
"Parking space" means an accessible and usable space on the building site, or adjacent lot, at least nine feet by twenty feet, for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
"Person" includes any individual, city, county, or city and county, partnership, firm, corporation, cooperative, association, trust or any other legal entity, including the state of California and the federal government. 
"Plan line" means a line established by the city council for a proposed street or right-of-way. 
"Rest home" means any premises licensed as a "long-term health care facility," as that term is defined in Section 1418 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the state of California. 
"Roominghouse": See "boardinghouse." 
"Sanitarium" means a health station or retreat or other place where patients are housed, and where treatment is given, but excluding mental institutions or institutions for treatment of persons addicted to the use of drugs. 
"Setback lines" means a line established by this title to govern the placement of buildings or structures with respect to lot lines, streets or alleys. 
"Sign" means every sign, display board, poster, picture, wall graphic, graphic decorative display, map, banner, pennant, balloon, insignia, emblem or other device, with or without lettering, which is intended to advertise or attract the attention of the public, including but not limited to clocks, barber poles and similar devices. 
"Sign, freestanding" means any sign erected on one or more poles or posts or similar uprights which is not a part of any building or structure, other than a structure supporting the sign. 
"Sign, projecting" means any sign, other than a wall sign, which is suspended from or supported by a building or wall and which projects outward therefrom; also any sign suspended under a marquee, awning, porch, walkway covering, or similar covering structure adjacent to a building. 
"Sign, roof" means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building, including the roof of any porch, walkway covering, or similar covering structure, and supported by or connected to the roof or parapet. 
"Sign, temporary" means a sign consisting of any material and intended to be displayed for a short period of time, in no event to exceed sixty days. 
"Sign, wall" means any sign applied to or mounted on the wall or vertical surface of a building or structure, or to the vertical surface of a marquee, awning, porch, walkway covering, or similar covering structure adjacent to a building or structure, in an essentially flat position, with the face of the sign parallel to the place of the wall or vertical surface, including window signs. 
"Sign, window" means any sign, other than a temporary sign, which is painted on, attached to, or placed or hung adjacent to, either the inside or the outside of a door or window; it does not apply to or include any display of merchandise, products or materials appurtenant to the business conducted on the premises which is not attached or placed adjacent to a window, or to any noncommercial display or exhibit designed to be seen through a window. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this section. 
"Street line" means the boundary between a street right-of-way and property. 
"Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or in the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground, including driveways, patios or parking spaces. "Structure" includes "building." 
"Townhouse": See "condominium." 
"Trailer court": see "mobile home park." 
"Transient," when used to defined living accommodations, describes such accommodations when customarily used or furnished for a period of forty-eight hours or less but in no event longer than fourteen days. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
"Use, accessory" means a use incidental or subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to the main use of a lot or a building located on the same lot. 
"Use, nonconforming": See "nonconforming use." 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
"Yard" means the open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in Chapters 17.08, 17.10, 17.28 and 17.36 of this title. 
"Yard, front" means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest permitted line of the building; provided however, that if any official plan line has been established for the street upon which the lot faces, the front yard measurements shall be taken from such official plan line to the nearest permitted line of the building. 
"Yard, rear" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the main building. 
"Yard, side" means a yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 526 § 2 (Exbt. A), 1993; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.06 - ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - Establishment of districts. 
The several districts into which the city is divided are established and designated as follows: 
Type of District 	Designation 
Single-family residential 	R-1 
Medium-density multifamily residential 	R-2 
High-density multifamily residential 	R-3 
Mobile home residential 	M-H 
Commercial residential 	C-R 
Community commercial 	C-C 
Retail central business 	C-1 
General service 	C-2 
Highway commercial 	H-C 
Industrial 	M 
Open space 	OS 
Public facility 	PF 
 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.06.020 - Study areas. 
All lands included within the boundaries of the city, as of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, which are not designated on the zoning map described in Section 17.06.030 as being included in any district, are and shall be designated as "SA" or study areas. Until such land is classified into one or more of the other districts, uses conforming to the land use element of the general plan may be allowed. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.06.030 - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of the districts designated and established by Section 17.06.010 of this title are shown on that certain map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Soledad," incorporated in this section and made a part of this title by reference as if fully set forth in this title. The map is on file in the office of the city clerk, and reference is hereby made to it for full particulars as to the location of the areas shown within the districts. The districts so shown are subject to the regulations contained in this title and each designated district is subject to the regulations prescribed in this title for that district. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.06.040 - Boundaries. 
Where the exact boundaries of a district cannot be readily or exactly ascertained by reference to the zoning map, the boundary shall be deemed to be along the nearest street or lot line, as the case may be. If a district boundary line divides or splits a lot, the lot shall be deemed to be included within the district which is the more restrictive. The provisions of this section do not apply to acreage. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.06.050 - Modification of boundaries. 
Changes in the boundaries of districts shall be made by ordinance in the manner provided in Chapter 17.48. The ordinance shall describe the area to be changed either by lot and block number or by metes and bounds. After adoption of any ordinance changing any boundaries of any district, the city clerk shall mark the zoning map to show the number and date of the adoption of the ordinance making such change. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.07 - DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The downtown specific plan is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
 
17.07.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the downtown specific plan is to provide policies and regulations to guide development in the downtown area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 679, § 2, 10-3-2012)  
17.07.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Downtown specific plan regulations shall only be applied within the boundaries of the downtown specific plan. 
B.  Amendments to the downtown specific plan must be processed in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Amendments). 
(Ord. No. 679, § 2, 10-3-2012)  
17.07.030 - Other provisions. 
A.  The uses and regulations for development in the downtown specific plan area are specified in Chapter 5 of the downtown specific plan. Matters not regulated by the downtown specific plan shall be regulated by other applicable provisions of Title 17 (Zoning). 
B.  Where there is a conflict between the regulations in Title 17 (Zoning) and the downtown specific plan, the regulations in the downtown specific plan shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 679, § 2, 10-3-2012)  
Chapter 17.08 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Applicability. 
All regulations in this title which pertain to the districts established in Chapter 17.06 are subject to the general provisions, conditions and exceptions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.08.020 - Interpretation by planning commission. 
Whenever there is a question regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this title or their application to any specific case or situation, the planning commission shall interpret the intent of this title by written decision, and such interpretation thereafter shall be followed in applying the provisions, subject to appeal to the city council by any interested person. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.08.030 - Architectural review. 
The planning commission shall act as, or it may appoint three or more of its members to act as, an architectural review committee to review and approve the architectural and general appearance of buildings, structures and grounds in accordance with the provisions of this title. No permit shall be issued in any case where architectural review is required until such review has been conducted and plans for the project have been approved by the committee; provided, that minor changes in an approved plan may be made when approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.08.040 - Exception to height limits. 
Where chimneys, cupolas, steeples, poles, monuments, storage tanks or towers, windmills, and similar structures and mechanical appurtenances are permitted in a district, height limits may be exceeded upon the securing of a use permit in each case. This section does not apply to signs. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.08.050 - Projections into required yard areas. 
Building features such as awnings, cornices, and eaves may extend not more than two feet into any required yard. Fireplaces not exceeding six feet in breadth may extend not more than two feet into a required yard. Open, uncovered porches or landings which are raised less than thirty inches above the nearest lot line's natural elevation, and stairs, may extend not more than two feet into any required side yard, nor more than six feet into any required rear or front yard. In any such case a lesser setback may be allowed upon the securing of a use permit; provided, however, that in no case shall any such projection extend closer than three feet to the nearest lot line. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.08.060 - Detached accessory structures in yard areas. 
Detached accessory structures, including garages may occupy rear and interior side yards subject to site plan approval by the planning director and when in compliance with the Uniform Building Code as determined by the building official and provided that no accessory structure shall extend into any public utility easement. On a comer lot no detached accessory structure shall be located so as to encroach on the half of the lot nearest the street side yard. 
(Ord. 578 § 1, 2001)  
Chapter 17.10 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
The R-1 district is intended to provide for the development of single-family residential homes on lots not less than five thousand square feet in area, not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot, except within planned developments. All regulations for this district are deemed necessary for the protection of the quality of the residential environment and for the securing of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.10.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 district. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in Section 17.10.040: 
A.  One-family dwelling units, not more than one dwelling per lot; 
B.  Accessory buildings, including garages; 
C.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens; 
D.  Home occupations, subject to Section 17.38.140; 
E.  Temporary tract offices and model homes, in the tract being developed; 
F.  Day nursery, small; 
G.  Mobile home on a permanent foundation, subject to Section 17.38.210; 
H.  Swimming pools subject to Section 17.38.320. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.10.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Antennas for personal use subject to Section 17.38.020; 
B.  Churches and parochial schools; 
C.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
D.  Day nursery, commercial (see Section 17.38.060); 
E.  Day nursery, institutional (see Section 17.38.060); 
F.  Day nursery, large (see Section 17.38.060); 
G.  Microwave relay structures; 
H.  Private schools; 
I.  Public schools; 
J.  Public libraries; 
K.  Electric distribution substations; 
L.  Planned residential development, including mobile home parks subject to Section 17.38.230; 
M.  Swimming lessons, large group, subject to Section 17.38.310; 
N.  Parks, except those included in the overall design of a subdivision; 
O.  Yard setback reduction or lot dimension modifications for energy conservation purposes on multiple lots; 
P.  Second residential units, subject to Section 17.38.260; 
Q.  Condominiums, subject to Section 17.38.050; 
R.  Welfare and charitable organizations. 
(Ord. 549 § 2, 1996; Ord. 466 § 5, 1988; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.10.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 apply to all lands and structures in the R-1 district: 
A.  Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot shall have a minimum net area of six thousand square feet, except as provided in this section. A nonconforming lot of record under separate ownership at the time it became nonconforming may be used for or occupied by any use permitted in this district. 
2.  If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, two or more nonconforming lots, each with a separate and distinct number or other designation on an official map or approved record of survey recorded in the office of the county recorder, or delineated on a recorded subdivision map on file with the city, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way are held in separate ownership: 
a.  Each such lot may be used as a separate lot if it contains at least six thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  If three or more such nonconforming lots are held in separate ownership, they may be divided into lots each of which contains at least six thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. If such division requires a change of any existing lot line, a parcel map shall be filed with the planning director. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. All lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots existing as of that effective date may not be reduced below these standards. Each dimension is minimum only. One or both shall be increased to attain the minimum lot area required. 
1.  Width: 
a.  Interior lots shall have a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  Corner lots shall have a minimum width of sixty-five feet. 
c.  Lots siding on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
d.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum street frontage width of forty feet. 
2.  Depth: 
a.  Lots facing on local street shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
b.  Lots facing on a major street as shown on the circulation element of the general plan shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet. 
c.  Lots backing on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet. 
C.  Population Density. The density shall not exceed one dwelling for each six thousand square feet of lot area. For planned developments density shall be calculated on gross lot area minus public streets. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  No main building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty feet. 
2.  No accessory building erected in this district shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed fourteen feet. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty feet extending across the full width of the lot. The front yard shall be thirty feet for lots required to have a depth of one hundred twenty feet by paragraph (B)(2)(b)of this section. 
b.  Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. 
c.  The planning commission may require the staggering of setback, with a variation of up to three feet between houses. In no case shall a setback of less than fifteen feet be allowed, except on cul-de-sacs, where the planning commission may approve a setback of ten feet as part of the total development plan of a subdivision. 
d.  In situations where four or more lots have been improved with buildings, the required setback is the average of the improved lots, if the setback is less than the stated requirement. 
2.  Side yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than five feet except for special conditions treated in this subdivision. 
b.  When siding on an existing alley, a main building shall be located not less than thirty feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
c.  On corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this title, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
d.  Where a dwelling unit is located on a lot so that the main entrance is located on the side of the building, the required side yard setback shall be not less than ten feet to such entrance. 
e.  In situations where the entrance to a covered parking space faces an interior side property line, the required side yard setback from the side property line shall be twenty-five feet. 
f.  In situations where the entrance to a covered parking space faces a street-side property line, the required setback shall be twenty feet from the street-side property line to the covered parking space. 
3.  Rear yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot of not less than ten feet, provided that a minimum of one thousand square feet of open space is maintained to the side or rear of the main dwelling or in an "L" or "U" design; otherwise, twenty feet shall be provided. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. 
1.  Unless attached to the main building, accessory buildings shall be a minimum of six feet from the main building. However, the accessory building may be connected to the main building by means of a breezeway open to two sides consisting of a common roof using the same roofing materials as the main building. 
2.  Where an accessory building is used for covered parking and where the garage is located within the area defined by the projection of the side lines of any main building, and where vehicular access to the garage faces any main building and falls entirely or in part within that area, the accessory building shall not be less than twenty-five feet from the main building. 
3.  Where a lot abuts upon an alley, garages having vehicular access from the alley shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed forty percent of the total lot area. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, including walls and hedges, not exceeding three feet in height, may occupy any yard area. Fences, hedges and wall fences up to six feet in height are allowed in street side yards where: 
1.  Residential lots abut nonresidential uses or zoned property; 
2.  Where street sideyard abuts another street side yard subject to sight distance requirements (Section 17.36.010(C)). 
Fences or other structures over six feet in height to enclose tennis courts or similar areas located on the rear half of a lot may be allowed, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
I.  Off-street Parking. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or recognized alley to the required off-street parking facilities. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.040 applies. 
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 487 § 2, 1990; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.10.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.11 - R-1.5 LOW-DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.11.010 - Purpose. 
The R-1.5 district is intended to provide for residential development not to exceed one dwelling unit per four thousand five hundred square feet of lot area. All regulations for this district are deemed necessary for the protection of the quality of the residential environment and for the securing of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(Ord. 498 (part), 1991)  
17.11.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1.5 district. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in Section 17.11.040 of this chapter: 
A.  Single-family dwellings and duplexes, provided that the total number of existing and proposed units does not exceed two on a lot; 
B.  Accessory buildings, including garages; 
C.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens; 
D.  Home occupations, subject to Section 17.38.130 of this title; 
E.  Day nursery, small; 
F.  Swimming pools subject to Section 17.38.330 of this title. 
(Ord. 498 (part), 1991)  
17.11.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 district subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Antennas for personal use subject to Section 17.38.010; 
B.  Churches and parochial schools; 
C.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
D.  Day nursery, commercial (see Section 17.38.060 of this title); 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Day nursery, large (see Section 17.38.060 of this title); 
G.  Microwave relay structures; 
H.  Private schools; 
I.  Public schools; 
J.  Public libraries; 
K.  Electric distribution substations; 
L.  Swimming lessons, large group, subject to Section 17.38.370 of this title; 
M.  Civic and social clubs of two hundred fifty or less members; 
N.  Parks, except those included in the overall design of a subdivision; 
O.  Yard setback reduction or lot dimension modifications for energy conservation purposes on multiple lots; 
P.  Condominiums, subject to Section 17.38.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 498 (part), 1991)  
17.11.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 of this title apply to all lands and structures in the R-1.5 district: 
A.  Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot shall have a minimum net area of six thousand square feet, except as provided in this section. A nonconforming lot or record under separate ownership at the time it became nonconforming may be used for or occupied by any use permitted in this district. 
2.  If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, two or more nonconforming lots, each with a separate and distinct number or other designation on an official map or approved record of survey recorded in the office of the county recorder, or delineated on a recorded subdivision map on file with the city, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way are held in separate ownership: 
a.  Each such lot may be used as a separate lot if it contains at least six thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  If three or more such nonconforming lots are held in separate ownership, they may be divided into lots each of which contains at least six thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. If such division requires a change of any existing lot line, a parcel map shall be filed with the planning director. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. All lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots existing as of that effective date may not be reduced below these standards. Each dimension is minimum only. One or both shall be increased to attain the minimum lot area required. 
1.  Width: 
a.  Interior lots shall have a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  Corner lots shall have a minimum width of sixty-five feet. 
c.  Lots siding on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
d.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum street frontage width of forty feet. 
2.  Depth: 
a.  Lots facing on a local street shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
b.  Lots facing on a major street as shown on the circulation element of the general plan shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet. 
c.  Lots backing on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet. 
C.  Population Density. Density shall not exceed two dwelling units for each lot but not to exceed one dwelling unit for each four thousand five hundred square feet of area in a lot. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  No main building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty feet. 
2.  No accessory building erected in this district shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed fourteen feet, unless the planning commission approves an exemption by determining the following: 
a.  The proposed project meets the intent of the City of Soledad Residential Design Guidelines and is harmonious with the primary dwelling and the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The proposed structure exceeds the minimum setbacks in a manner proportional to the increased height; 
c.  The proposed structure does not create any additional impacts on neighboring properties, including but not limited to, noise, light and aesthetics; 
d.  The proposed use has been identified as an acceptable accessory use to the primary residential use based on evidence supplied by the applicant. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front Yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet extending across the full width of the lot. 
b.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. 
c.  The planning commission may approve a setback of ten feet on cul-de-sacs as part of the total development plan of a subdivision. 
2.  Side Yard: The provisions of the R-1 district apply. 
3.  Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot of not less than fifteen feet. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. In addition to the R-1 district requirements the following shall apply: Between main buildings the sum of the height of any two adjacent buildings, divided by two, but in no case less than twenty feet. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty percent of the total area. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, including walls and hedges, not exceeding three feet in height, may occupy any yard area. Fences, hedges and wall fences up to six feet in height are allowed in street side yards where: 
1.  Residential lots abut nonresidential uses or zoned property; 
2.  Where street sideyard abuts another street side yard subject to sight distance requirements (Section 17.36.010(C)). 
Fences or other structures over six feet in height to enclose tennis courts or similar areas located on the rear half of a lot may be allowed, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
I.  Off-street Parking. Section 17.36.010 of this title applies. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or recognized alley to the required off-street parking facilities. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 of this title applies. 
L.  Utilities. Section 17.38.330 of this title applies. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 2, 5-1-2013; Ord. 523, § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 498 (part), 1991)  
17.11.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning director in accordance with Chapter 17.44 of this title. 
(Ord. 498 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 17.12 - R-2 MEDIUM-DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
The R-2 district is intended to provide for residential development not to exceed one dwelling unit per three thousand five hundred square feet of lot area. All regulations for this district are deemed necessary for the protection of the quality of the residential environment and for the securing of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 district. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in Section 17.12.040: 
A.  Single-family dwellings, duplexes and triplexes, provided that the total number of existing and proposed units does not exceed three; 
B.  Accessory buildings, including garages; 
C.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens; 
D.  Home occupations, subject to Section 17.38.130; 
E.  Day nursery, small; 
F.  Swimming pools subject to Section 17.38.330. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.12.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 district subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Antennas for personal use subject to Section 17.38.010; 
B.  Churches and parochial schools; 
C.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
D.  Day nursery, commercial (see Section 17.38.060); 
E.  Day nursery, institutional (see Section 17.38.060); 
F.  Day nursery, large (see Section 17.38.060); 
G.  Microwave relay structures; 
H.  Private schools; 
I.  Public schools; 
J.  Public libraries; 
K.  Electric distribution substations; 
L.  Planned residential development, including mobile home parks subject to Section 17.38.230; 
M.  Second residential units, subject to Section 17.38.260; 
N.  Swimming lessons, large group, subject to Section 17.38.370; 
O.  Civic and social clubs of two hundred fifty or less members; 
P.  Parks, except those included in the overall design of a subdivision; 
Q.  Yard setback reduction or lot dimension modifications for energy conservation purposes on multiple lots; 
R.  Condominiums, subject to Section 17.38.050. 
(Ord. 466 § 6, 1988; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.12.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 apply to all lands and structures in the R-2 district: 
A.  Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot shall have a minimum net area of five thousand square feet, except as provided in this section. A nonconforming lot of record under separate ownership at the time it became nonconforming may be used for or occupied by any use permitted in this district. 
2.  If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, two or more nonconforming lots, each with a separate and distinct number or other designation on an official map or approved record of survey recorded in the office of the county recorder, or delineated on a recorded subdivision map on file with the city, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way are held in separate ownership: 
a.  Each such lot may be used as a separate lot if it contains at least five thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  If three or more such nonconforming lots are held in separate ownership, they may be divided into lots each of which contains at least five thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. If such division requires a change of any existing lot line, a parcel map shall be filed with the planning director. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. All lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots existing as of that effective date may not be reduced below these standards. Each dimension is minimum only. One or both shall be increased to attain the minimum lot area required. 
1.  Width: 
a.  Interior lots shall have a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  Corner lots shall have a minimum width of sixty-five feet. 
c.  Lots siding on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
d.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum street frontage width of forty feet. 
2.  Depth: 
a.  Lots facing on local street shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
b.  Lots facing on a major street as shown on the circulation element of the general plan shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet. 
c.  Lots backing on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet. 
C.  Population Density. Density shall not exceed twelve dwelling units for each acre of building site area, or one dwelling unit for each three thousand five hundred square feet of area in a building site of less than one acre. A minimum of three hundred square feet of open space shall be provided per dwelling unit. That area shall be designed to be usable for the residents. 
Second-story balconies shall not be included in open space calculations. A minimum of two hundred square feet per unit shall be designated as a public common area. Public common areas shall require the following: 
1.  All dimensions for areas to be calculated as public open space shall be a minimum of two hundred feet. 
2.  Open space areas shall not include building footprints, parking areas, driveways, front yard setbacks, and landscaping areas (bushes, shrubs, etc.) that create barriers that preclude enjoyment of open space. 
3.  Developments over six units in size shall provide recreational amenities. Such amenities shall occupy at least fifty percent of the required open space amount. Any request for deviation from this requirement shall require planning commission approval. 
4.  Residents of housing projects shall have safe and efficient access to usable open space, whether public or private, for recreation, and social activities. The design and orientation of these areas should take advantage of available sunlight and be sheltered from the wind, noise, and traffic on adjacent streets, and incompatible uses. 
5.  Required common open spaces shall be conveniently and centrally located to the majority of dwelling units in the development to promote a sense of community. Open space areas located within center courtyards is encouraged to provide resident privacy and security. 
6.  Common usable open spaces and children's play areas shall be visible from individual dwelling units and be connected to the internal pedestrian system in the development. 
7.  Private usable open spaces shall be contiguous to and have direct pedestrian access from the dwelling units they serve. 
8.  All usable open space areas shall have appropriate lighting and be regularly maintained to reduce the potential for criminal activities. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  No main building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty feet. 
2.  No accessory building erected in this district shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed fourteen feet. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet extending across the full width of the lot. 
b.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. 
c.  The planning commission may approve a setback of ten feet on cul-de-sacs as part of the total development plan of a subdivision. 
2.  Side yard: The provisions of the R-1 district apply. 
3.  Rear yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot of not less than fifteen feet. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. In addition to the R-1 requirements the following shall apply: Between main buildings the sum of the height of any two adjacent buildings, divided by two, but in no case less than twenty feet. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed sixty percent of the total lot area. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, including walls and hedges, not exceeding three feet in height, may occupy any yard area. Fences, hedges and wall fences up to six feet in height are allowed in street side yards where: 
1.  Residential lots abut nonresidential uses or zoned property; 
2.  Where street sideyard abuts another street side yard subject to sight distance requirements (Section 17.36.010(C)). 
Fences or other structures over six feet in height to enclose tennis courts or similar areas located on the rear half of a lot may be allowed, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
I.  Off-street Parking. Section 17.36.020 applies. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or recognized alley to the required off-street parking facilities. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
L.  Utilities. Section 17.38.330 applies. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 2, 3-4-2015; Ord. No. 523, § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. No. 445, § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.12.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning director in accordance with Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.14 - R-3 HIGH-DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The R-3 district is intended to provide for residential development not to exceed one dwelling unit per three thousand square feet of lot area. All regulations for this district are deemed necessary for the protection of the quality of the residential environment and for the securing of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.14.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 district. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in Section 17.14.040: 
A.  Single-family dwellings, duplexes and triplexes, provided that the total number of existing and proposed units does not exceed three; 
B.  Accessory buildings, including garages; 
C.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens; 
D.  Home occupations, subject to Section 17.38.140; 
E.  Day nursery, small; 
F.  Day nursery, large; 
G.  Boardinghouses. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.14.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 district subject to a conditional use permit: 
A.  Antennas for personal use subject to Section 17.38.010; 
B.  Churches and parochial schools; 
C.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
D.  Day nursery, institutional (see Section 17.38.060); 
E.  Day nursery, commercial (see Section 17.38.060); 
F.  Microwave relay structures; 
G.  Private schools; 
H.  Public schools; 
I.  Public libraries; 
J.  Electric distribution substations; 
K.  Planned residential development, including mobile home parks subject to Section 17.38.230; 
L.  Swimming lessons, large group, subject to Section 17.38.310; 
M.  Civic and social clubs of two hundred fifty or less members; 
N.  Parks; 
O.  Yard setback reduction or lot dimension modifications for energy conservation purposes on multiple lots. 
(Ord. 466 § 7, 1988; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.14.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 apply to all lands and structures in the R-3 district: 
A.  Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot shall have a minimum net area of six thousand square feet, except as provided in this section. A nonconforming lot of record under separate ownership at the time it became nonconforming may be used for or occupied by any use permitted in this district. 
2.  If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, two or more nonconforming lots, each with a separate and distinct number or other designation on an official map or approved record of survey recorded in the office of the county recorder, or delineated on a recorded subdivision map on file with the city, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way are held in separate ownership: 
a.  Each such lot may be used as a separate lot if it contains at least five thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  If three or more such nonconforming lots are held in separate ownership, they may be divided into lots each of which contains at least five thousand square feet of lot area and has a minimum width of fifty feet. If such division requires a change of any existing lot line, a parcel map shall be filed with the planning director. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. All lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots existing as of that effective date may not be reduced below these standards. Each dimension is minimum only. One or both shall be increased to attain the minimum lot area required. 
1.  Width: 
a.  Interior lots shall have a minimum width of fifty feet. 
b.  Corner lots shall have a minimum width of sixty-five feet. 
c.  Lots siding on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
d.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum street frontage width of forty feet. 
2.  Depth: 
a.  Lots facing on local street shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
b.  Lots facing on a major street as shown on the circulation element of the general plan shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet. 
c.  Lots backing on freeways or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet. 
C.  Population Density. Density shall not exceed sixteen dwelling units for each acre of building site area, or one dwelling unit for each three thousand square feet of area in a building site of less than one acre. Density may be increased to a maximum of twenty-two units per acre subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. A minimum of three hundred square feet of open area shall be provided per dwelling unit. That area shall be designed to be usable for the residents. 
Second-story balconies shall not be included in open space calculations. A minimum of two hundred square feet per unit shall be designated as a public common area. Public common areas shall require the following: 
1.  All dimensions for areas to be calculated as public open space shall be a minimum of two hundred square feet. 
2.  Open space areas shall not include building footprints, parking areas, driveways, front yard setbacks, and landscaping areas (bushes, shrubs, etc.) that create barriers that preclude enjoyment of open space. 
3.  Developments over six units in size shall provide recreational amenities. Such amenities shall occupy at least fifty percent of the required open space amount. Any request for deviation from this requirement shall require planning commission approval. 
4.  Residents of housing projects shall have safe and efficient access to usable open space, whether public or private, for recreation, and social activities. The design and orientation of these areas should take advantage of available sunlight and be sheltered from the wind, noise, and traffic on adjacent streets, and incompatible uses. 
5.  Required common open spaces shall be conveniently and centrally located to the majority of dwelling units in the development to promote a sense of community. Open space areas located within center courtyards is encouraged to provide resident privacy and security. 
6.  Common usable open spaces and children's play areas shall be visible from individual dwelling units and be connected to the internal pedestrian system in the development. 
7.  Private usable open spaces shall be contiguous to and have direct pedestrian access from the dwelling units they serve. 
8.  All usable open space areas shall have appropriate lighting and be regularly maintained to reduce the potential for criminal activities. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  No main building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty feet. 
2.  No accessory building erected in this district shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed fourteen feet. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet extending across the full width of the lot. 
b.  Curve lots and cul-de-sac lots shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. 
c.  The planning commission may approve a setback of ten feet on cul-de-sacs as part of the total development plan of a subdivision. 
2.  Side yard: 
a.  Each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than five feet except for special conditions treated in this subdivision. 
b.  When siding on an existing alley, a main building shall be located not less than thirty feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
c.  On corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this title, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
3.  Rear yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot of not less than fifteen feet. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. 
1.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of six feet from a main building. 
2.  Where an accessory building is used for covered parking and where the garage is located within the area defined by the projection of the side lines of any main building, and where vehicular access to the garage faces any main building and falls entirely or in part within that area, the accessory building shall not be less than twenty-five feet from the main building. 
3.  Where a lot abuts upon an alley, garages having vehicular access from the alley shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
4.  Minimum space between main buildings is the sum of the height of any two adjacent buildings, divided by two, but in no case less than twenty feet. 
5.  Between a side property line and the entrance side of single-row dwelling groups, the minimum space is fifteen feet. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed sixty percent of the total lot area. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, including walls and hedges, not exceeding three feet in height, may occupy any yard area. Fences, hedges and wall fences up to six feet in height are allowed in street side yards where: 
1.  Residential lots abut nonresidential uses or zoned property; 
2.  Where street sideyard abuts another street side yard subject to sight distance requirements (Section 17.36.010(C)). 
Fences or other structures over six feet in height to enclose tennis courts or similar areas located on the rear half of a lot may be allowed, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
I.  Off-street Parking. Section 17.36.020 applies. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or recognized alley to the required off-street parking facilities. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
L.  Utilities. Section 17.38.330 applies. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 2, 3-4-2015; Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.14.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected or moved on any lot in the R-3 district, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city in accordance with Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.20 - C-R COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose. 
The C-R district is intended to provide for both residential and light commercial activities within the downtown specific plan area and in neighborhood commercial zoning districts as an overlay zone. Mixed use residential-commercial may be considered, providing specific findings are made per Section 17.20.040(M). 
(Ord. 609 § 2, 2004: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.20.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses when conducted wholly within a building, are permitted in a C-R district subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in each case. 
A.  Residential uses: Single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings; 
B.  Nonresidential uses: 
1.  Antique shops, 
2.  Apparel shops, 
3.  Artist studios and galleries, 
4.  Barber and hair salons, 
5.  Bookstore, 
6.  Boutiques, 
7.  Craftsman, 
8.  Day nursery, commercial, 
9.  Dressmaking or millinery shops, 
10.  Jewelry, 
11.  Photographic studios and supplies, 
12.  Professional and administrative offices, 
13.  Shoe repair, 
14.  Specialty shops, 
15.  Tailor, 
16.  Any other use which the planning commission finds to be consistent with the purposes of this chapter and the downtown specific plan. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.20.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 apply to all land and structures in the C-R district: 
A.  Lot Area. No requirements. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width: No requirements. 
2.  Depth: No requirements. 
C.  Population Density. The density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each three thousand square feet of lot area subject to the limitation that any lot having less than four thousand square feet of area may not be used for residential purposes. 
D.  Building Height. No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than ten feet. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained. 
2.  Side yard: None required, except: 
a.  Where the side yard abuts a street, a ten-foot side yard shall be provided along the street. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained; 
b.  A five-foot interior side yard shall be provided for residential uses. 
3.  Rear yard: None required except for residential uses, in which case ten feet is required. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. Where a garage is located within the area defined by the projections of the side lines of any main building, and where the garage faces and is detached from any main building and the vehicular access to the garage falls entirely or in part within the area, the garage shall be not less than twenty-five feet from the main building or buildings. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed sixty percent of the total lot area. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, including walls and hedges, not exceeding three feet in height, may occupy any yard area. Fences, hedges and wall fences up to six feet in height are allowed in street side yards where: 
1.  Residential lots abut nonresidential uses or zoned property; 
2.  Where street sideyard abuts another street side yard subject to sight distance requirements (Section 17.36.010(C)). 
Fences or other structures over six feet in height to enclose tennis courts or similar areas located on the rear half of a lot may be allowed, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
I.  Off-street Parking. The provisions of Section 17.36.020 apply. 
J.  Access. 
1.  There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated and improved street. The design of the access shall be approved by the city engineer as able to withstand commercial usage. 
2.  There shall be pedestrian access from a dedicated and improved street to property used for residential purposes. 
K.  Signs. The provisions of Section 17.36.030 apply. 
L.  Loading. Where a loading area abuts a residential use, loading shall be done between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. Otherwise, the area shall be located not less than one hundred feet from the residential use or be completely enclosed. 
M.  Findings for C-R Use in Neighborhood Commercial Zones. 
1.  The residential-commercial project design meets or exceeds the minimum qualifications established as follows: 
a.  Residential units are constructed above neighborhood commercial uses and covered parking is provided for the residential occupants, adjacent or attached to, the residential uses. In no case shall the covered parking be located further away than the width of a private driveway; 
b.  The residential units are integrated into the design of the building and provision of private open space in the form of a terrace or balcony be considered; 
c.  Private entrances are provided to each unit that are separated from any commercial uses; 
d.  Safe pedestrian access shall be provided between residential units and public sidewalks. 
2.  The Unit Design. 
a.  A mix of unit sizes shall be required in all cases and for in-fill development a minimum of twenty percent of the units shall be affordable to lower income qualifying residents. 
b.  For newly annexed areas, the percent of affordable housing shall be in conformance with housing goals and objectives of the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 609 § 3, 2004; Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.20.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the director pursuant to Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.22 - C-C COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 577. 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose. 
The community commercial ("C-C") district is intended to ensure that development of major and smaller, neighborhood commercial shopping center facilities are planned, designed and implemented in accordance with the best contemporary standards so as to be a commercial and aesthetic asset to the city. The district regulations provide a process for review and approval of the overall shopping center site plan consistent with design guidelines and standards established for that purpose. Property shall be designated in the C-C district only in connection with, and following city receipt of a development application for a community shopping center and a request for rezoning or prezoning to the C-C district. The district provides procedures and standards for modifications of uses and approval of site features and buildings within approved centers. The C-C district is intended to be consistent with areas designated for general commercial or highway commercial uses by the Soledad general plan. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.020 - Master development plan review and approval. 
A master development plan, consisting of a development plan and final plan, as described in Sections 17.22.040 and 17.22.050 of this chapter, shall be processed and approved in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures of Chapter 17.42 of this title prior to initial development of a shopping center in the C-C district. This process will establish the master development plan for the center, including the layout of major elements such as building groups, circulation, parking and landscaped areas, and will determine the precise details of architectural design and execution, signing, and lighting. On sites of at least ten acres, the master development plan may include development and/or use regulations for the C-C site in addition to or in lieu of the provisions of this chapter if approved by the city council. However, to the extent that alternative development and/or use regulations are not established by an approved development plan, the requirements of this chapter shall continue to apply. The procedures herein defined shall be in addition to and shall supersede the requirements of Chapter 17.42 of this title where conflicts exist. Master development plan approval shall proceed as set forth below. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.030 - Preliminary review. 
Prior to submittal of a development plan for consideration and action, the applicant shall submit preliminary plans showing site layout, proposed design theme, and architectural styles for preliminary review and comment by staff, and by the architectural review committee, planning commission and city council. Preliminary plans shall indicate the relationship and functional aspects of the project, including major building placement and orientation, roadway access and vehicular circulation, parking and major areas to be landscaped. The applicant shall consider and reflect comments received during preparation of a complete application for plan approval. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.040 - Development plans required. 
A.  Submission of Development Plan. Following preliminary plan review, a development plan shall be submitted for approval pursuant to this section. The focus of this development plan shall be the architectural, landscaping, signing and lighting details of the project. Development plans shall generally conform to and meet the standards described in the Community Commercial Design Handbook, adopted by resolution of the city council, and which may be amended from time to time. These standards shall be used in addition to development standards of this chapter and shall take precedence where a conflict exists. 
B.  Contents of the Development Plan. A development plan shall provide the details of property development and improvements related to site design, architectural treatment, preliminary landscaping, lighting, pedestrian and vehicular circulation and materials and finish. In addition to the application requirements of the Community Commercial Design Handbook, development plan applications shall provide those items specified by the city's site plan review procedures, Section 17.44.010(A) of this title. Additional information shall be submitted as needed to address the guidelines and standards set forth in the Design Handbook and shall include completion of the checklist contained in the handbook. On building sites of ten or more acres, development plans may also include development regulations and/or a description of uses in addition to or instead of those regulations or uses established by this chapter. Where more than one retail or service business is proposed to operate in a single building or lease area designed for a single business, to the extent possible, the specific building(s) or lease area(s) shall be identified on the development plan. Where development phasing is proposed, a phasing program shall also be provided showing the boundaries, timing and sequencing of development and associated infrastructure improvements within the district. 
C.  Development Plan Approval. 
1.  A development plan shall be processed in accordance with procedures for a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 17.42 of this title except that final approval of the development plan shall be by the city council. If the planning commission consideration is to recommend city council approval of the plan, it shall report such findings and recommendation to the city council by resolution. If the commission determines to deny the plan, such action need not be forwarded to the council and the commission decision shall become final unless appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.46 of this title. 
2.  The planning commission, in recommending approval of the development plan, and the city council, in granting approval, must find the plan consistent with the Soledad General Plan and consistent with the development standards of this chapter and Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 of this title, except as otherwise provided herein, and with the Community Commercial Design Handbook. It is intended that, where conflicts arise between standards established in the code and those of the design handbook, that the Community Commercial Design Handbook shall govern. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.050 - Final development plans. 
A.  Content of Final Development Plan. The final development plan shall consist of the development plan as approved and/or modified by the planning commission and city council, including any additional development and/or use regulations governing the C-C site that may have been required by the city council, along with any other detailed plans such as infrastructure improvement plans, landscaping plan and sign program as reviewed and approved by the architectural review committee, and the parking and loading plan. To the extent possible, the final development plan shall also identify the specific building(s) or lease area(s) where more than one retail sales or service business is proposed to operate in a single building or lease area designed for a single business. 
B.  Action by City Council. The city council shall review the final development plan and determine its conformity to the approved development plan as previously approved. If it is determined that the final plan substantially conforms to the approved development plan, the final plan shall be approved by resolution. No conditional use permit approved in the C-C district shall be valid and no building permits or other project entitlements shall be granted until approval of the final plan is obtained. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.060 - Expiration of plan and permit approvals. 
Master development plans shall expire and be of no further force if an applicant fails to obtain a building permit(s) for construction authorized by such plans within three years from the date of plan approval. Notwithstanding, upon receipt of a request at least sixty days prior to said expiration date, the planning commission may grant an extension on the validity of the plans of up to three years. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.070 - Phased development. 
In the event that the applicant intends to develop the project in phases, and the planning commission or city council, as applicable, approves phased development, such plans shall remain in effect so long as not more than three years lapses between the end of one phase and the beginning of the next phase unless other provisions for phasing are set forth in the approved master development plan. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.075 - Major changes to an approved master development plan. 
Except as provided in Section 17.22.080 of this chapter, any establishment, expansion, enlargement or alteration of a use which is not in substantial conformance with the terms or conditions of the approved master development plan, is prohibited absent an amendment to said plan. 
Final approval of an amendment to a master development plan shall be by the planning commission, unless appealed to the city council. The planning commission in granting approval of such an amendment must find: (1) that the proposed amendment is substantially consistent with the intent and content of the approved plan; (2) that the proposed amendment will be consistent with the general plan; and (3) that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed use, or detrimental to property and improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.080 - Minor changes to an approved master development plan. 
Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, an amendment to an approved master development plan shall not be required for the establishment, expansion or alteration of a use in the C-C district within, or contiguous to, an approved shopping center where the community development director finds that such development or use would pose a minor deviation from the approved master development plan, is in substantial conformity with the intent and provisions of the approved plan, and is limited to the activities listed in this section. In such cases, the community development director may approve the change through the ministerial site plan review process or, at his discretion, may require that an amendment to the master development plan be prepared for consideration by the planning commission as set forth in Section 17.22.075 of this chapter. Minor changes to an approved master development plan shall include: 
A.  An increase in existing building floor area from that approved on the development plan of not more than ten percent of the total project floor area, including the construction of minor accessory buildings or appurtenances, provided that any building expansion would not result in one commercial business or use exceeding a gross floor area of one hundred ten thousand square feet except as otherwise provided by and shown on the approved development plan; 
B.  An increase in building height of not more than one story so long as the total building height does not exceed thirty-five feet; 
C.  Minor changes to architectural facades, or other embellishments; 
D.  Revisions to parking layout; 
E.  A change in signing programs; 
F.  Revisions to site landscaping; 
G.  A change in property use to add or replace an existing use with one permitted in the C-C zone, if associated improvements do not exceed the limitations specified in subsections A and B of this section; 
H.  Essential public facilities and utilities including water and sewer lines, etc.; 
I.  Reconfigurations to building footprints so long as total building square footage remains the same; and 
J.  Minor revisions to building placement. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.090 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the C-C district subject to site plan review, and when located in a community shopping center approved pursuant to these regulations. 
1.  All uses permitted in the C-1 district; 
2.  Banks and other financial institutions without drive-through services; 
3.  On sites of at least ten acres, any other use included in the approved master development plan as a permitted use, that has been determined by the planning commission or city council to be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the general plan. Such uses may include uses listed in Sections 17.22.100 and 17.22.120 of this chapter; and 
4.  On sites of at least ten acres, more than one retail business operating in a single building or lease area designed for a single business, provided that all additional businesses are accessory to the principal business pursuant to Section 17.22.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.100 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-C district subject to a permit as provided for in Chapter 17.42, except as may otherwise be provided for sites of at least ten acres by Section 17.22.090 of this chapter: 
A.  Automobile service stations; 
B.  Buildings with more than five thousand square feet of gross floor area; 
C.  Cocktail lounges when carried on as clearly secondary operations in conjunction with a bona fide restaurant and subject to Chapter 17.38 of this title; 
D.  Indoor recreational uses, including, but not limited to, bowling alleys, pool and billiards, and skating rinks; 
E.  Day nursery, commercial or institutional, consistent with Section 17.28.060 of this title; 
F.  Drive-in restaurant; 
G.  Off-sale of liquor products, packaged; 
H.  Uses with a drive-through service; 
I.  Public and quasi-public buildings, including educational, religious, cultural, civic and recreational centers and similar uses, but excluding corporation yards, storage or repair yards, warehouses and similar uses; 
J.  Uses occupying more than five thousand square feet of gross floor area, except that, notwithstanding this provision, this subsection does not apply to those permitted uses allowed by an approved master development plan; and 
K.  Any use that the city council determines is consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the general plan and that is not expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.110 - Accessory uses and structures. 
A.  Accessory structures shall comply with all regulations applicable to the principal structure on a site. 
B.  Accessory Uses. A use shall be deemed accessory to a permitted use or conditionally permitted use allowed in the C-C district, if the accessory use: 
1.  Is subordinate to and serves a principal use; 
2.  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose devoted to the principal use; 
3.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use; and 
4.  Is located on the same lot as the principal use. 
C.  More than one retail sales or service business conducted within a single building or lease area. Accessory retail or service businesses operating within a single building or lease area shall not exceed forty percent, individually or combined, of the gross floor area approved for the principal business. All such businesses sharing a single building or lease area shall be disclosed to the community development director as early in the planning process as possible, but in no event, later than the time a request for a building permit for said building or lease area has been submitted. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.120 - Prohibited uses. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section, the following uses are prohibited in the C-C district: 
1.  Sales of used items or clothing; 
2.  Thrift shops; 
3.  Indoor or outdoor flea markets; 
4.  Indoor or outdoor farmer's markets; 
5.  More than one retail business operating in a single building or lease area designed for a single business. 
B.  A master development plan on sites of at least ten acres may establish any use or uses otherwise prohibited by this section as a permitted or conditional use, if approved by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.130 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 of this title apply to all land and structures in the C-C district except as may otherwise be modified by a development plan on sites of at least ten acres approved pursuant to Section 17.22.040 of this chapter. 
A.  Lot Area. Subsection M of this section applies. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width: No requirements. 
2.  Depth: No requirements. 
C.  Floor area ratio: 0.40 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  No building or structure in this district shall have a height greater than two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet. The height of new structures shall be compatible with adjacent buildings, and, where there are adjoining residences, the height of structures shall be stepped away from residences for privacy protection. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front Yard: Each lot shall have a front yard that is landscaped and maintained extending across the full width of the lot as follows: 
a.  Abutting Highway 101 or other state right-of-way — thirty feet. 
b.  Abutting a city street — twenty feet. 
2.  Side Yard: Each lot shall have side yards that are landscaped and maintained as follows: 
a.  Interior lot line — none. 
b.  Corner lot line — ten feet. 
c.  Adjacent to Highway 101 or other state right-of-way — thirty feet. 
d.  Adjacent to residential zone — twenty feet or equivalent to building height whichever is greater. 
3.  Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot as follows: 
a.  Abutting another private property — twenty-five feet or equivalent to building height whichever is greater. 
b.  Abutting alley — two feet, with no parking or access. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. No requirements. 
G.  Lot Coverage. Sixty percent. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Buffering shall be provided along the property lines of a shopping center when it abuts residential or other sensitive uses in order to protect these uses from light, glare, noise and heat that may be generated by the shopping center. Section 17.36.010 of this title applies. Additional standards are contained in the Community Commercial Design Handbook; these take precedence where in conflict with Section 17.36.010 of this title. 
I.  Off-Street Parking. Section 17.36.020 of this title applies. 
J.  Access. 
1.  there shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street. the access shall be approved by the city engineer. 
2.  the city engineer shall specify the location and number of means of ingress and egress to property by conditions established at the time of development plan review. 
K.  Signs Section 17.36.030 of this title applies. Additional sign standards are contained in the Community Commercial Design Handbook; these take precedence where in conflict with Section 17.36.030 of this title. 
L.  Loading. 
1.  The applicant for any use in this district shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that adequate loading space is provided to serve the use. The location of the loading area shall not create an impediment to on or off-site parking or circulation nor create a hazard to public safety. 
2.  Where a loading area abuts a residential use, loading shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. Otherwise, such area shall be located not less than one hundred feet from such use or be completely enclosed. 
M.  Size of New District. Two acre minimum. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.140 - Architectural and Landscaping Design/Community Commercial Design Handbook. 
Guidelines and standards for architectural character, building design and finish, signage lighting, walls and fences, site design, site amenities, and landscaping and screening for all development in the C-C district are set forth in the "Community Commercial Design Handbook." The "handbook" is adopted as formal city policy by separate resolution of the city council, and may be amended by resolution from time to time. It is intended that where guidelines and standards set forth in the "handbook" conflict with other provisions of the zoning ordinance, that the "handbook" shall prevail. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
17.22.150 - Site plan review. 
Before any parcel is created or any structure, or expansion thereof, is erected in this district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the community development director, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 of this title. 
(Ord. 632 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 2006)  
Chapter 17.24 - C-1 RETAIL CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose. 
The C-1 retail central business district is intended to (A) implement the Downtown Specific Plan, (B) preserve and enhance older architectural styles, (C) provide an increased variety and density of development, (D) promote pedestrian enjoyment and uses where feasible and (e) provide an area of intensive retail commercial activity. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses, when conducted wholly within a building (or as otherwise specifically allowed by this section), shall be permitted in a C-1 retail central business district: 
1.  Antique shops; 
2.  Apparel shops; 
3.  Artist supply stores and studios; 
4.  Auto parts (new); 
5.  Bakery, retail; 
6.  Barber and hair salons; 
7.  Book stores; 
8.  Cafes and restaurants, wine and beer only without cocktail lounges; 
9.  Ceramic studios; 
10.  Delicatessens; 
11.  Department stores; 
12.  Drug store; 
13.  Flower shop; 
14.  Fruit and vegetable stores; 
15.  Furniture and home furnishings; 
16.  Fur shops, dressmaking or millinery shops; 
17.  Grocery stores; 
18.  Gymnasiums; 
19.  Hardware, homeware, gift shop; 
20.  Hobby and toy shop; 
21.  Ice cream; 
22.  Institutions of a philanthropic nature, except correctional and mental; 
23.  Jewelry; 
24.  Laundromat and dry cleaners (nonflammable chemicals); 
25.  Leather goods; 
26.  Libraries; 
27.  Music, records, television, radio, (retail only); 
28.  Newspaper stands; 
29.  Personal and business service establishments; 
30.  Pet shop; 
31.  Photographic studios and supplies; 
32.  Professional and administrative offices; 
33.  Public parking lots; 
34.  Shoe repair; 
35.  Shoe store; 
36.  Specialty shops; 
37.  Sporting goods; 
38.  Tobacco shops; 
39.  Tailor; 
40.  Telephone booths; 
41.  Variety stores; 
42.  Video cassette rental; 
43.  Yardage, drapery. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.24.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may conditionally be allowed in a C-1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in each case. All uses are subject to the property development standards in Section 17.24.040: 
A.  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the main building; 
B.  Automotive service and repair establishments whose business is confined to minor service and repair work, does not include major repairs such as overhauls or replacements in motors, transmissions, welding or similar operations; 
C.  Banks and other financial institutions; 
D.  Bus terminals; 
E.  Cafes and restaurants with cocktail lounges (see Section 17.38.040); 
F.  Card rooms; 
G.  Lodges, clubs if located on second floor or above; 
H.  Medical clinics; 
I.  Minimarkets; 
J.  Mortuaries; 
K.  Movie houses; 
L.  Off-sale liquor stores; 
M.  Pawn shops; 
N—P.  Reserved. 
Q.  Pool halls; 
R.  Public and quasipublic buildings (including educational, religious, cultural or public) but not including corporation yards, storage or repair yards, warehouses and similar uses; 
S.  Radio and television broadcast studios; 
T.  Video games (subject to Chapter 5.16); 
U.  Any other retail business or service establishment which the planning commission finds to be consistent with the purposes of this chapter and the Downtown Specific Plan. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.24.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapter 17.36 apply to all land and structures in the C-1 district: 
A.  Lot Area. No requirements. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width: No requirements. 
2.  Depth: No requirements. 
C.  Population Density. No requirements. 
D.  Building Height. The maximum height of any building shall be thirty-five feet or two stories, whichever is less. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: No requirements; 
2.  Side yard: None required; provided, that if a side yard is contiguous to a residential district, then the yard shall not be less than ten feet. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained; 
3.  Rear yard: None required; provided, that if a rear yard is contiguous to a residential district and there is no alley, then such rear yard shall not be less than ten feet; provided further, that when a building abuts an alley and access to the same is from the alley, then such building shall not be located closer than thirty feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. No requirements. 
G.  Lot Coverage. No requirements. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Adequate buffering shall be provided between residential and nonresidential uses to protect the residential use from noise, light and glare that may be generated by the nonresidential use. The type, amount and location of said buffering shall be determined by the director during site plan review. See also Section 17.36.010. 
I.  Off-Street Parking. Section 17.36.020 applies. 
J.  Access. 
1.  There shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street. The access shall be approved by the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer shall specify the location and number of means of ingress and egress to property by conditions established at the time of review of the required site plan. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
L.  Loading. 
1.  The applicant for any use in this district shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that adequate loading space is provided to serve the use. The location of the loading area shall not create an impediment to on or off-site parking or circulation nor create a hazard to the public safety. 
2.  Where a loading area abuts a residential use, loading shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. Otherwise such area shall be located not less than one hundred feet from such use or be completely enclosed. Refrigeration units shall be shut off. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.24.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall have been submitted and approved by the director, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.26 - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose. 
The C-2 general services district is intended to provide a district for vehicular-oriented uses with architectural and landscaping controls to protect the amenities of the area and to allow for the heavier types of commercial and semi-industrial uses which do not depend on pedestrian traffic and are more appropriately located away from the central business district. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wholly enclosed buildings (or as otherwise allowed by this section): 
A.  Any use permitted in a C-1 district; 
B.  Print shop; 
C.  Automobile upholstery shops; 
D.  Large appliance repair and sales store (no outdoor storage); 
E.  Light manufacturing uses, such as cabinet shops, provided that there is no vibration, noise or odor emitted from the property; 
F.  Secondhand goods sales (all goods displayed, sold and stored within a completely enclosed building). 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.26.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the C-2 district: 
A.  Any uses permitted in a C-1 district subject to the approval of a conditional use permit; 
B.  Farm implement rental and service; 
C.  Automobile, recreational vehicle, boat sales; 
D.  Microwave facilities; 
E.  Car washes; 
F.  Building material sales; 
G.  Wholesale stores and incidental warehousing; 
H.  Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted or conditionally permitted use; 
I.  Any other use that the planning commission determines is similar to the above uses. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.26.040 - Property development standards. 
The following property development standards and those in Chapters 17.36 and 17.38 apply to all land and structures in the C-2 district: 
A.  Lot Area. No requirements. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. No requirements. 
C.  Population Density. No requirements. 
D.  Building Height. The maximum height of any building shall be thirty-five feet or two stories, whichever is less. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard: No requirements. 
2.  Side yard: None required; provided, that if a side yard is contiguous to a residential district, then the yard shall not be less than ten feet. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained. 
3.  Rear yard: None required; provided, that if a rear yard is contiguous to a residential district and there is no alley, then the yard shall be not less than ten feet; provided further, that when a building abuts an alley and access to the same is from the alley, then such building shall not be located closer than thirty feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. No requirements. 
G.  Coverage. No requirements. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. Adequate buffering shall be provided between residential and nonresidential uses to protect the residential uses from noise, light and glare that may be generated by the nonresidential use. Type, amount and location of the buffering shall be determined by the director during site plan review. See also Section 17.36.010. 
I.  Off-street Parking. The provisions of Section 17.36.020 apply. 
J.  Access. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking and loading facilities, the design of which shall be approved by the city engineer. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
L.  Loading. The following standards for loading space apply: 
1.  The applicant for any use in this district shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that adequate loading space is provided to serve the use. The location of the loading area shall not create an impediment to on or off-site parking or circulation nor create a hazard to public safety. 
2.  If a loading space abuts a residential use, loading shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. Refrigeration units shall be shut off. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.26.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the director, pursuant to Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.28 - H-C HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the H-C district is to provide a district for vehicular-oriented uses with sufficient architectural and landscaping controls to protect the amenities of the area. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.28.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the H-C district: 
A.  Banks and other financial institutions; 
B.  Bowling alleys, skating rinks and similar recreational facilities; 
C.  Building materials, supplies; 
D.  Car wash; 
E.  Caretaker's residence in conjunction with an allowed use; 
F.  Clubs, lodges, community centers; 
G.  Cocktail lounges, in conjunction with a restaurant; 
H.  Farm machinery sales and service; 
I.  Gasoline service stations/minimarkets; 
J.  General offices; 
K.  Grocery stores; 
L.  Minimarket; 
M.  Ministorage; 
N.  New and used motor vehicle sales and service; 
O.  Plant nurseries; 
P.  Recreational vehicle and boat sales and service; 
Q.  Restaurants, including drive-ins; 
R.  Small-animal veterinary hospitals; 
S.  Reserved. 
T.  Tire sales and service; 
U.  Truck sales and service; 
V.  Truck terminals; 
W.  Visitor accommodation facilities; 
X.  Any similar use which the commission find to be consistent with the intent of this chapter and the general plan. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.28.040 - Property development standards. 
The following are property development standards in the H-C district: 
A.  Lot Area. No requirement. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width: No requirements. 
2.  Depth: No requirements. 
C.  Population Density. No requirements; however, Chapter 17.40 applies for existing residences. 
D.  Building Height. The maximum building or structural height of all buildings is forty feet except that a height of up to fifty feet for buildings located outside of the downtown specific plan area boundaries is allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit. Notwithstanding the aforesaid provision, any portion of a building located within twenty feet of any lot in a residential (R-) district shall be limited to a maximum height of forty feet. 
E.  Yards. 
1.  Front Yard. Each lot in the H-C district shall have a front yard, extending the full width of the subject property, of not less than ten feet, except that a landscaped yard of less than ten feet width may be approved by the planning commission where the total landscaped yard area is the same as that which would result from application of the minimum yard requirement. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained. Parking shall not be permitted in a front yard area. 
2.  Side Yard. None required, unless an H-C district is contiguous to an R district; then, ten feet. 
3.  Rear Yard. None required, unless an H-C district is contiguous to an R district; then, ten feet; provided further, that when a building abuts an alley and access to the building is from the alley, then the building shall not be located closer than thirty feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. No requirements. 
G.  Lot Coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot by all structures shall not exceed sixty percent. 
H.  Fences, Walls, Hedges. A buffer shall be provided along the district boundary between the H-C district and any residential district. The amount, type and location shall be determined by the director at the time of site plan review. See also Section 17.36.010. 
I.  Off-Street Parking. Section 17.36.020 applies. 
J.  Access. 
1.  There shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street. The access shall be approved by the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer shall specify the location and number of means of ingress and egress to property by conditions established at the time of review of the required site plan. 
K.  Signs. Section 17.36.030 applies. 
L.  Loading. 
1.  The applicant for any use in this district shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that adequate loading space is provided to serve the use. The location of the loading area shall not create an impediment to or off-site parking or circulation nor create a hazard to public safety. 
(Ord. 643 § 1, 2007; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.28.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any structure is erected within this district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the director, pursuant to Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
CHAPTER 17.30 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 670, § 2, adopted May 5, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 17.30, §§ 17.30.010—17.30.060, and enacted a new Chapter 17.30 as set out herein. The former Chapter 17.30 pertained to the M industrial district and derived from Ord. No. 445, 1986. 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose. 
The industrial zones are intended to provide locations devoted primarily to industrial and related uses and development where manufacturing and other industries can locate and operate away from the restricting influences of non-industrial uses, while maintaining an environment reasonably free from offensive or objectionable, dust, noise, odor or other nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.020 - Industrial use districts. 
The following districts are intended to implement the general plan's industrial land use designation: 
A.  Business Park Zoning District (BP). The business park (BP) zone provides for and designates areas suitable for primarily light industrial uses, office uses, and limited commercial uses, including warehouse or large format retail, with all uses conducted primarily within enclosed buildings or structures. This district provides for both smaller office structures and as well as business park complexes or campuses characterized by enhanced architectural and landscaping treatment. 
B.  General Industrial Zoning District (M). The general industrial (M) zone provides for and designates areas suitable for a broader range of light industrial and commercial service type uses, including manufacturing, processing, wholesale distribution and warehousing and similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.030 - Allowable uses—Permitted and conditional uses. 
Table 17.30-1 below identifies allowable uses in the industrial districts, contingent upon compliance with all other provisions of this title and all other applicable regulations of this code. It is the intent of this chapter to group similar or compatible land uses and to categorize them as either a permitted use or a conditional use authorized by approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) in the respective industrial district. Uses not listed as permitted or conditional are not allowed except where the uses are first determined by the director or by the commission, upon referral by the director, as materially similar to those uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the zone. 
Permitted use—indicated as "P"; 
Conditionally permitted use—indicated as "C"; and 
Uses not allowed—indicated as "N." 
Certain uses listed in Table 17.30-1 lack notation indicating whether such uses are allowable or not allowed. These particular uses are allowed only as an accessory use that is clearly incidental to the principal use on the site, subject to any floor or lot area limitations and all other provisions of this chapter. 
TABLE 17.30-1 ALLOWABLE USES 
Principal Land Use 	BP 
District 	M 
District 	Additional Use Regulations 
Residential Uses 
Caretaker dwelling unit 	C 	C 	Section 17.38.045. 
Live-work unit 	N 	C 	
Public and Semi-Public Uses 
Ambulance service 	P 	P 	
Clubs and lodges 	P 	N 	
Day care center 			Applies to day care for adults or children. 
• Institutional 	C 	N 	Section 17.38.050. 
•  Commercial or non-profit stand-alone facilities 	P 	N 	Day care centers allowed only as an accessory use in "M" district. 
Government office 	P 	P 	
Hospital 	C 	C 	
Medical clinic—Urgent care and outpatient facility 	P 	C 	Excludes medical marijuana dispensaries. 
Open space, parks and recreational facilities 	P 	P 	
Public safety facility 	P 	P 	
Public corporation yard 	C 	P 	Section 17.30.060(D). 
Religious assembly 	C 	C 	
School—Trade or specialized training 	P 	P 	
School—Post secondary education 	C 	N 	
Social service facilities: 			
•  Substance abuse recovery and treatment facility 	P 	P 	
•  Community food center 	P 	P 	
•  Emergency shelter—50 beds or fewer 	P 	P 	Exclusive of disaster relief facilities. 
Section 17.30.070. 
•  Emergency shelter—50+ beds 	C 	C 	Exclusive of disaster relief facilities. 
Section 17.30.070. 
•  Social services agency—Welfare, charitable, emergency and relief, family, senior and youth 	P 	P 	
Transportation, Utilities and Telecommunications Facilities 
Antenna, wireless communication 	P 	P 	Endnote (1) 
Bus stop shelter 	P 	P 	
Bus or truck maintenance facility or fueling station 	N 	P 	
Broadcasting and recording studio 	P 	P 	
Park and ride lot 	C 	P 	
Parking structure, multi-storied or underground 	C 	C 	
Satellite earth station 	P 	P 	Endnote (1) 
Tower, communication 	C 	P 	Endnote (1) 
Transit station or terminal 	C 	P 	
Utilities—Major 	N 	C 	Includes power generation facilities, electrical substations and transmission lines, and similar large-scale facilities. 
Utilities—Minor 	P 	P 	Includes utility distribution lines/structures, drainage facilities, wells, water tanks, and pump stations, etc. 
All new utility lines shall be placed underground. 
Wind Turbine 			
•  Roof- or Building-Mounted 	P 	P 	Endnote (12) 
•  Freestanding tower 	C 	C 	Endnote (12) 
Agricultural Uses 
Crop production and similar agricultural activities 	N 	C 	Endnotes (2) and (3) 
Greenhouse 	N 	P 	Endnote (3) 
Animal husbandry 	N 	N 	Endnote (2) 
Stable and other equine-related facilities 	N 	N 	Endnote (2) 
Commercial Uses—Sales and Services 
Agricultural-related establishment—Sales and services 	P 	P 	
Animal services and related uses: 			
•  Animal boarding and kennel 	C 	P 	
•  Animal hospital/veterinary clinic 	C 	P 	Section 17.38.280 
•  Animal supply establishment, retail sales 	C 	P 	Includes feed stores. 
Section 17.30.060(D). 
Art studio 	P 	P 	
Auto and vehicular sales and/or service: 			
•  Automotive rental and leasing 	C 	P 	
•  Automotive repair, minor 	P 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
•  Automotive repair, major (including body work) 	C 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
•  Truck, boat and RV sales and Leasing 	C 	C 	Endnote (4) 
•  Automotive and vehicular storage 	C 	P 	Storage of operable vehicles only. 
Endnote (6). 
Section 17.30.060(D). 
•  Automotive towing and road service 	C 	P 	Endnote (6). 
•  Auto washing and detailing 	C 	P 	Chapter 13.52, Stormwater Quality. 
Building materials/home improvement sales and services, large format 	C 	C 	90,000+ square feet of floor and sales area. 
Section 17.30.060(D). 
Building materials/home improvement sales and services, small 	P 	P 	Less than 90,000 square feet of floor and sales area. 
Section 17.30.060-D. 
Business support service 	P 	P 	Includes printing, photo processing, photocopying, courier service, etc. 
Cabinet or woodworking shop 	P 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
Outdoor storage limited in BP district—Endnote (6). 
Catering service 	P 	P 	
Contractor's establishment 	P 	P 	Outdoor storage limited in BP district—Endnote (6). 
Equipment, construction, farm and heavy—Sales, services and rentals 	C 	P 	Endnote (6). 
Section 17.30.060(D). 
Equipment, small—Maintenance and repair 	P 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
Fitness/health club or gym 	P 	P 	
Food and beverage sales: 			
•  Convenience store 	N 	N 	
•  Restaurant, café, coffeehouse 			Allowed as accessory use only in industrial districts—Endnote (7). 
Drive-through/drive-in facilities not allowed. 
•  Supermarkets/grocery store 	N 	N 	
•  Specialty food shop 			Allowed as accessory use only in industrial districts. May be established as separate facility on same site as principally permitted use subject to floor area limitations—See Endnote (7). 
•  Mobile food vendor 	P 	P 	Chapter 5.40 of the SMC. 
•  Warehouse/large format retail 	C 	C 	Retail uses with 90,000 + square feet of floor and sales area. 
Laboratory, medical and dental 	P 	P 	
Landscaping materials sales and service 	C 	P 	Endnote (6) 
Nursery 	C 	P 	Endnote (6) 
Office: 			Administrative and business offices allowed as accessory use only in "M"- District—See Endnote (5). 
•  Business and professional 	P 		
•  Medical and dental 	P 	N 	
Personal storage (mini-storage) 	C 	P 	Endnote (6) 
Retail Sales 			Retail sales, other than those specific uses identified by this section as allowable uses, are allowed as accessory use only in industrial districts—Endnote (7). 
Retail—Warehouse/large format 	C 	C 	Retail uses with 90,000 + square feet of floor and sales area. 
Service station: 			
•  With accessory retail 	P 	P 	
•  With mini-mart 	C 	C 	
•  With vehicle maintenance and repair 	C 	P 	In the BP district, all work to be performed within an enclosed structure. 
Taxi and limousine service 	P 	P 	
Wine- or beer-tasting room 			Allowed as accessory use only in industrial districts. 
Entertainment and Recreational Uses 
Adult entertainment business 	N 	C 	Chapter 17.38 
Indoor sports and recreation, limited 	P 	P 	Limited types of sports and recreational uses dependent on warehouse structural format are allowed—e.g., rock-climbing, skate-boarding, indoor soccer, go-cart racing, etc. 
Outdoor sports and recreation, commercial 			Allowed as accessory use only in Industrial Districts. 
Live entertainment/dances 	N 	N 	Allowed as temporary use only pursuant to Section 17.42.015. 
Manufacturing, Processing and Other Industrial Uses 
Agricultural processing facility 	C 	C 	Exclusive of wineries (listed separately). 
In the BP district, all work performed within an enclosed structure. 
Slaughter facilities prohibited. 
Construction/corporation yard 	N 	P 	Public corporation yard allowed in BP district with CUP. 
Section 17.38.220. 
Crematory 	N 	C 	
Handcraft industry and small-scale manufacturing 	P 	P 	
Hazardous materials handling 	C 	C 	Endnote (8) 
Light manufacturing 	P 	P 	Endnotes (8) and (9) 
Laundry, commercial 	P 	P 	
Machine/welding/metal working shops 	C 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
Microbrewery 	C 	P 	Brewery that produces no more than 9,000 barrels of beer annually 
Outside uses, industrial 	N 	C 	
Printing and publishing 	P 	P 	
Recycling facilities: 			
•  Small collection facility 	P 	P 	Endnote (10) 
•  Large collection facility 	N 	C 	Endnote (10) 
•  Reverse vending machines 	P 	P 	
•  Processing facility 	N 	C 	
•  Salvage and dismantling facility 	N 	C 	Endnote (10) 
•  Composting 	N 	C 	Composting of plant materials only. 
Research and development 	P 	P 	All work performed within an enclosed structure. 
Truck Depot 	N 	C 	
Warehousing and storage: 			
Warehousing 	P 	P 	CUP required for any warehousing/sales of firearms. 
Endnote (11). 
Wholesaling and distribution 	P 	P 	CUP required for wholesaling of firearms. 
Waste facilities, municipal: 			
•  Transfer stations (municipal waste) 	N 	C 	
•  Waste treatment and disposal 	N 	C 	
Winery, large 	N 	C 	Wineries with production of more than 10,000 cases of wine annually. 
Winery, small 	C 	P 	Wineries producing 10,000 cases or less annually. 
Accessory and Support Uses 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	P 	P 	ATM's allowed only when completely enclosed in building. 
Accessory uses, facilities and activities customarily associated with or essential to allowed uses, and operated incidental to the principal use. 	P 	P 	Size and floor area limitations as specified by Endnotes (5), (6) and (7). 
 
Endnotes: 
(1) 	Design review approval required for co-location on existing towers, and for all satellite earth stations and new communication structures or expansion of such structures. 
(2) 	Stock yards are not allowed. Animal husbandry and stables are prohibited due to potential contamination of agricultural produce from E. coli bacterium. 
(3) 	Produce sales allowed as accessory use. 
(4) 	Vehicle sales or rentals and services in the industrial districts shall be limited to large vehicles only, including commercial trucks, buses, trailers, campers, boats and mobile homes. 
(5) 	In the M district, accessory business and administrative offices shall be limited to thirty percent of the gross floor area of all buildings on a site or two thousand five hundred square feet, whichever is less, when considered in aggregate with all other accessory and incidental uses. Exceptions may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit for large-scale industrial complexes provided that the aggregate total of all office, retail and restaurant ancillary uses does not exceed thirty-five percent of the gross floor area. 
(6) 	In the BP district, outside storage areas amounting to not more than ten percent of the total parcel or building site area is allowed as an incidental and accessory use. This size limitation does not apply to permitted or conditionally permitted uses involving the storage of plants, vehicles/large equipment for sale, storage or lease, or other for-sale goods and materials related to landscaping and building construction. All outdoor storage must be in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.30.060(D). 
(7) 	With the exception of those uses identified as permitted or conditionally permitted, retail sales, on-site restaurants and other food establishments involving the sales of pre-packaged foods and/or foods prepared onsite are allowed only as an incidental and accessory use in the industrial districts. Incidental uses are limited to thirty percent of the total square footage of all buildings on a site in aggregate, or two thousand five hundred square feet, whichever is less. Exceptions may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit for large-scale industrial complexes or operations where additional floor area for retail or food establishments are needed to serve the employee population, provided that the aggregate total of all such ancillary uses, including offices, does not exceed thirty-five percent of the gross floor area. Goods being sold as retail shall be directly related to the principal use(s) on the site. 
(8) 	A CUP is required for all uses involving the handling of hazardous materials that are subject to the requirement for a risk management prevention program as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, Section 25534. Semi-conductor manufacturing is an example of such a regulated use. 
(9) 	Light manufacturing includes but is not limited to: The manufacture, testing and assembly of electronic and communication equipment and products, optical equipment and devices, fabric products, food and beverage products, furniture and fixtures, and pharmaceuticals; metal products fabrication, and similar uses. The manufacture of food products excludes the processing and/or production of meat or fish products or fats and oils. 
(10) 	Small collections facilities shall not exceed five hundred square feet in size. Facilities larger than five hundred square feet shall be classified as large collection facilities. 
Salvage and wrecking operations shall not adjoin or be visible from U.S. Highway 101 or from any residential or commercial district. 
(11) 	Warehousing: With the exception of propane or gasoline engine or storage tanks, or any boat or vehicle containing these components, or incidental or other allowable outside storage pursuant to Endnote (6), all storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure in the BP district. All propane or gasoline components shall be stored in designated screened areas. No retail sales are allowed. 
(12) 	(a) Number of wind energy systems: One wind energy system allowed on each parcel; two or more wind energy systems may be allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit and compliance with development standards of this section. 
(b) Location: No free-standing wind turbine shall be located closer than three hundred fifty feet from any residential district. 
(c) Setback: The minimum setback from all property lines to the base of the tower shall be equal to one hundred fifteen percent of the total height of the wind energy system. 
	(d) Maximum height of roof or building-mounted systems: No more than fifteen feet above the structure ridgeline. Exceptions to height limitations may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit. 
 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.040 - Other prohibited uses. 
Uses not specifically identified in Table 17.30-1 above are prohibited unless determined to be materially similar to other permitted or conditionally permitted uses by the director or the commission upon appeal. Notwithstanding those uses designated as "permitted" or "conditional" in Table 17.30-1, the commission or council may deny certain uses which are determined to pose a danger or hazard to the public or will not comply with the pollution control standards specified in Section 17.38.240. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.050 - Property development standards. 
TABLE 17.30-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Development Regulation 	Industrial Business Park District 	M — Industrial District 	Additional Regulations 
Lot size—Minimum 	10,000 square feet 	1 acre 	
Lot width—Minimum 	75 feet (50 feet for cul-de-sac frontage) 	100 feet (70 feet for cul-de-sac frontage) 	
Lot depth—Minimum 	120 feet 	150 feet 	
Building setbacks— 
Minimum 
distance 			Section 17.08.050—Projections into required yard areas. 
 a.  Front yard 	20 feet 	10 feet 	Required front yard shall be landscaped except for driveways, walkways and parking for employees and customers, provided that any such parking is located within the interior 10-foot portion of the required front yard only. 
Reduction of landscaped front yard in BP District to 10 feet may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit. 
 b.  Interior side yard 	0 	0 	In the BP district, a minimum 15-foot landscaped setback is required for any side yard abutting a residential district. This landscaped setback shall be increased to 25 feet in the M district for any side yard abutting a residential or commercial district. 
 c.  Street side 	20 feet 	10 feet 	Required street side yard shall be landscaped except for driveways, walkways and parking for employees and customers, provided that any such parking is located within the interior 10-foot portion of the required front yard only. 
Reduction of landscaped street side yard in BP District to 10 feet may be allowed through approval of a conditional use permit. 
 d.  Rear yard 	0 	0 	Minimum landscaped yard shall equal that required for the front yard for rear yards abutting public or private streets or alleys, except that any rear yard that is a boundary between an M district and any residential district shall be a minimum of 15 feet. 
Height—Maximum 	50 feet 	50 feet 	Section 17.08.040—Exceptions to height limits allowed by use permit. 
Height—Maximum at property line 	35 feet 	35 feet 	An additional 1.5 feet of building height is allowed for each foot of interior side or rear yard setback provided. 
Floor area ratio (FAR)—Maximum 	0.6 	0.6 	Exception allowed for day care as accessory use—Floor area for day care may be excluded from FAR. 
 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.060 - Additional property development regulations. 
A.  Fences Walls, and Hedges. The requirements of Section 17.36.010 apply except as otherwise modified by this section. 
1.  Maximum Height. Eight feet shall be the maximum height for all fences, walls or hedges except in required front or street (corner) side yards where the maximum height shall be four feet subject to the sight visibility requirement of Section 17.36.010. 
2.  Minimum Standards for Fences Along Street Frontages. Fences or walls located within or adjacent to the required minimum front or street side yard and/or rear yard abutting a public street or highway right-of-way shall be constructed of either: (a) a solid architectural wall compatible wall compatible with the building colors and materials; or ( b) a solid fence with landscaping on the exterior side; or (c) a tubular steel or similar quality 'visually transparent' style, subject to design review approval by the director. 
3.  Minimum Standards for Fencing Adjacent To Residential Districts. Fencing located adjacent to a residential district or residential use (except where located within a required front or side street yard and/or abutting a public right-of-way) shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high masonry wall. 
4.  Exceptions Allowed. Exceptions to the standards of this subsection may be approved by the architectural review committee or commission. 
B.  Landscaping—Site and Parking Lot. Chapter 15.10 and Section 17.36.020 apply. 
C.  Screening. 
1.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, other than solar panels, shall be screened on all sides from view from right-of-ways or pubic use areas. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, air compressors, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, duct work, and transformers. Wind turbines in all industrial districts and operating mechanical equipment in the "M" district located more than one hundred feet from a park or school site or from a commercial or residential district boundary are excluded from this requirement unless otherwise required through design review or a conditional use permit. 
2.  Outdoor Storage and Loading Facilities. Screening is required for all outdoor storage areas and truck bays/loading dock areas in order to adequately minimize visibility from a public street or other public use area. 
D.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall be located outside the required front and street side and rear yards. Where outdoor storage areas for materials and equipment, other than for-sale items and goods, would be visible from a public right-of-way or from a similar public use area, these areas shall be entirely enclosed with a masonry wall or solid fence, a minimum of six feet in height, and with landscaping on the exterior side of wall or fence, subject to approval of the director. Stored materials shall not exceed the height of the wall except where such storage would not be visible from a public street or other public use area, subject to approval of the director or commission. For other outdoor storage areas not visible from a public right-of-way or public use area, other forms of screening may be used, such as chain link fencing with or without landscaping, subject to approval of the director or commission. 
E.  Trash Enclosures. In the BP district, all solid waste and recycling facilities shall be screened on all sides by a solid wood or masonry wall at least six feet in height. In the M district, all solid waste and recycling facilities that would be visible from a public street or from a residential or highway commercial district shall be screened on all sides by a solid wood or masonry wall at least six feet in height. 
F.  Access. There shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved public street to off-street parking and loading facilities The location, design and number of driveways and project-related frontage improvements shall be determined by the city engineer at the time of review of the required site plan, subject to approval by the director or commission pursuant to Chapter 17.44. 
G.  Off-street Parking. The off-street parking requirements of Section 17.36.020 apply except for the following parking reduction allowed by this section: 
Developments which provide additional secure bicycle parking over and above the minimum requirement may reduce the parking requirement by one vehicle space for every four additional bicycle spaces provided with a standard stationary bicycle rack. The maximum reduction resulting from the provision of bicycle parking that may be approved by the director or commission is two percent of required off-street parking. 
H.  Bicycle Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements of Section 17.36.020, all commercial uses having an off-street parking requirement of ten or more spaces shall provide secure bicycle parking at a minimum of ten percent of the requirement for off-street vehicle parking spaces. An exception to this requirement may be approved by the director or commission for those uses which provide services to customers off-site or which otherwise can justify a reduced requirement for bicycle parking. 
I.  Off-street Loading. With the exception of office uses, commercial and industrial uses with more than five thousand square feet of floor area shall provide off-street loading in compliance with the provisions of this section. Office uses constituting the principally permitted use and having a floor area greater than ten thousand square feet shall provide at least one off-street loading space in compliance with the dimension provisions of this section unless an exception is granted by the director or commission, based upon adequate supporting evidence, that a smaller loading space is adequate to serve the proposed use. Off-street loading shall be restricted for loading purposed only and not counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements. 
1.  Location. All truck loading/unloading facilities shall be located on the parcel where the primary business is located, shall be sited outside of the required front, side or rear setback areas and at least one hundred feet from any residential district, and shall be designed to ensure that all truck back-up maneuvering does not occur within any street right-of-way. The location of loading and disposal areas shall not obstruct or impede on-site or off-site parking circulation, nor create a hazard to the public safety or nuisance to adjoining properties. 
2.  Minimum Dimensions. A loading space shall not be less than twelve feet in width and forty feet in length, with a vertical clearance of not less than fourteen feet. 
3.  Number of Spaces. Commercial uses shall provide loading spaces at the rate of one space for each thirty thousand square feet of gross floor area unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that loading space at a lesser rate is adequate to serve the proposed use(s). Industrial uses shall provide loading spaces at the rate of one space for each forty thousand square feet of gross floor area unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that loading space at a lesser rate is adequate to serve the proposed use(s). 
4.  Screening. Truck bays and loading dock areas shall be screened through the placement of a solid wall or fence, landscaping, and/or structure location to substantially minimize visibility from a public street. 
5.  Noise Attenuation. Loading areas located within one hundred feet of a residential use or residential zone shall be completely enclosed within a structure, or have adequate noise attenuation from a barrier as determined through an acoustical study, or restrict operations between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. Truck refrigeration units shall be shut off while docked if audible at residences. 
J.  Outdoor Lighting. All exterior lighting shall face downward and be fully shielded to reduce nighttime glare and shall be turned off during the nighttime hours between eleven p.m. and six a.m. except as follows: 
1.  Outdoor lighting in conjunction with industrial uses that continue to be operational after eleven p.m. or before six a.m. may be allowed to remain on. Outdoor lighting used for security purposes to illuminate walkways, roadways, equipment and materials yards, and parking lots may remain lighted after eleven p.m. only when low-pressure sodium outdoor lighting or comparable low energy use fixtures are used. An exception to the use of low-pressure sodium outdoor lighting may be approved by the director in areas where color rendition is essential to the effectiveness of these specified activities (e.g., outdoor material handling areas). 
2.  Properties with existing nonconforming lighting shall be required to conform to the exterior lighting requirements of this section as a part of any permit for expansion of use, reuse or change in use. 
K.  Performance Standards. The pollution control standards of Section 17.38.240 shall apply to all uses in the industrial districts. 
L.  Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.43 apply. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.070 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Location Requirements. Emergency shelters shall not be located: 
1.  Immediately adjacent to any R-1 district; or 
2.  Within three hundred feet of another similar program and one thousand feet from an elementary school, middle school, high school, or public park. 
3.  The distance between an emergency shelter, and the uses and zones described above, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the building or structure, or a portion of the building or structure, in which the emergency shelter is located, to the boundary of the use or zone described above. 
4.  Exceptions to these locational requirements may be approved through the conditional use permit process in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.42 of this title. 
B.  Facility Requirements. Each emergency shelter shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  On-site area for outdoor client congregation, so that clients waiting for services are not required to use the public sidewalk for queuing; 
2.  Telephones for use by clients; 
3.  On-site personnel during hours of operation when clients are present. The manager's area shall be located near the entry to the facility; 
4.  Adequate interior and exterior lighting; 
5.  Secure areas for personal property; 
6.  Posted hours of operation near the facility entrance; and 
7.  Other features or measures as recommended by the police chief prior to zoning compliance approval by the director pursuant to Section 17.42.010 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.080 - Architectural design review. 
A.  New Construction, Alterations, Expansions and Outdoor Storage. In the BP district, site and architectural design review and approval by the architectural review committee shall be required for construction of new structures and expansion of existing structures, and for façade improvements to portions of existing structures that face streets and/or public use areas including alteration of roofs lines or the location of doors and/or windows. In the M district, site and architectural design review and approval is required for the construction of new structures or expansion of existing structures exceeding thirty-five feet in height. In all industrial districts, site and architectural design approval is required for uses that involve outdoor storage exceeding five percent of the building site or parcel area. 
B.  Master Sign Programs. Master sign programs shall be required for all multi-tenant structures or complexes in the industrial zones in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.43. Amendments to approved master sign programs which are in substantial conformance with said programs shall be approved by the director; amendments not in substantial conformance with approved programs shall be referred to the architectural review committee for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
17.30.090 - Site plan review. 
Before any structure is erected on any parcel in the M or BP district, a site plan shall have been approved by the director or designee in compliance with Chapter 17.49. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 2, 5-5-10)  
Chapter 17.32 - OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - Purpose. 
The OS open space district is designed to preserve a rural and natural atmosphere, to protect the environment and ecology of the area, and to preserve open space in an urban area for future generations. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in an OS open space district: Crop and tree farming, pasturage for livestock. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.32.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be conditionally allowed in an OS district, subject to the issuance of a use permit in each case: 
A.  Golf courses and related facilities; 
B.  Private parks and recreational facilities; 
C.  Public parks and recreational uses; 
D.  Any other use which in the opinion of the planning commission would be compatible with the purposes and objectives of the district. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.32.040 - Property development standards. 
There are no property development standards in the OS district. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.32.050 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected on any lot in this district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the director, pursuant to Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.34 - PF PUBLIC FACILITY DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.34.010 - Purpose. 
The PF public facility zone is intended to provide for the wide range of public uses likely to be located on public property. Public uses are those conducted by governmental or nonprofit agencies; however, this zone will also provide for complementary private and commercial uses which will provide a public benefit. The zone is further intended to protect neighboring private uses from potentially incompatible public uses. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.34.020 - Conditionally allowed uses. 
The following uses may be conditionally allowed in a PF public facility district, subject to the issuance of a use permit in each case: 
A.  Public parks and playgrounds, camping and picnic areas; 
B.  Public schools, and nonprofit private schools; 
C.  Governmental offices, meeting rooms and facilities; 
D.  Libraries, museums, galleries, exhibition buildings; 
E.  Churches; 
F.  Water and wastewater treatment plants; landfill and incineration sites; 
G.  Police and fire stations and training facilities; 
H.  Bus terminals, garaging and maintenance; 
I.  Highway and road maintenance yards; 
J.  Utility company and public agency corporation yards; 
K.  Transmitting, receiving and relay communications structures; 
L.  Hospitals and medical offices and facilities; rest homes and sanitariums; 
M.  Welfare and charitable services; 
N.  Recreation and community centers, child day care facilities, senior citizens centers; 
O.  Public automobile parking not associated with a principal use; 
P.  Entertainment and sports facilities, other than playing fields, including but not limited to theaters, auditoriums, stadiums and racetracks. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.34.030 - Site plan review. 
Prior to the erection of any structure or the commencement of any use in this district, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Chapter 17.44. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.36 - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.36.005 - Applicability. 
The standards set out in this chapter apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.36.010 - Fences, hedges and walls. 
A.  Dangerous Areas. A fence or wall shall be constructed along the perimeter of all areas considered by the council to be dangerous to the public health and safety. The height of such wall shall be determined by the council in relation to the danger or hazard involved. The fence or wall may be required when a use requires a permit or at the discretion of the council according to the danger or hazard involved. 
B.  Permitted Materials. 
1.  Fence materials may include wood, wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louvered glass, stake and other similar materials. 
2.  Wall materials shall include concrete, concrete block, wood or any other similar materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. 
3.  Barbed wire, aluminum, fiberglass metal siding shall not be used as fencing materials. An architectural approval as per Section 17.08.030 may be granted by the planning director to use such material based on the need for the type of fence, design compatibility of the fence, and approval of the adjoining property owner if on an interior property line. Nonconforming status shall not be provided for fences constructed of these materials. 
4.  All fences/walls shall be maintained so as not to create a public health, safety, welfare or visual problem. 
C.  Sight Distance Requirements. Adequate sight distance shall be maintained at all intersecting streets or highways, driveways intersecting a street or alley, and alleys intersecting a street. Building setback and fence height regulations may be modified by the director or the planning commission if it is determined that such action is necessary to insure adequate sight distance. Landscaping shall be maintained so as not to hinder sight distance. 
D.  Fencing Adjoining Public Alleys and Drainage Channels. A site plan approval may be granted for the construction of fences or walls conforming to Section 17.36.010 of up to eight feet zero inches in height on all residentially zoned property adjoining public alleys or drainage channels. Fences shall not extend into front or street side yards unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 542 § 2 (Exbt. A), 1994; Ord. 509 § 2, 1991: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.36.020 - Off-street parking. 
A.  Number of Spaces Per Use. The off-street parking requirements set out in Table 17.36.020 apply to the residential uses described in the table with respect to buildings erected and new uses commenced after February 17, 1974. For any use not specifically mentioned in this subsection, the planning commission shall determine the amount of parking required. All facilities shall be on-site unless specified differently. The parking requirements set forth in this section may be reduced below the stated requirements when the planning commission, or on appeal the city council, finds that because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the requirements would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties of the same kind in the vicinity, and where it finds that such variance or reduction is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section 
B.  Location. All off-street parking, whether in a garage or open area, shall be so located as to be accessible and usable for the parking of motor vehicles. In all residential zones, off-street parking shall not be located in any required yard or setback area. 
C.  Additional Parking Requirements. 
1.  Any parcel of land used for off-street parking, car or trailer sales after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be developed according to the city's specifications, and shall be enclosed by a solid fence when such areas are adjacent to any residential (R) district, the fence to be constructed six feet in height behind the front setback area, and three feet in height in any front setback area. 
2.  Parking required in any district must be on-site except that where buildings or structures in existence at the time the ordinance codified in this title was adopted cover a site to the extent that sufficient on-site parking cannot be provided, off-site parking may be allowed. 
3.  Joint use of parking facilities will be allowed under the following conditions: 
a.  When there is no conflict at time of use; 
b.  When there is sufficient parking for all uses. 
D.  Reduction Where Assessment District Is Included. Parking required in any C-1 or C-2 commercial district may be reduced below the stated requirements in any portion of such district included within a public parking district or assessment district for financing off-street parking facilities in proportion to the amount of assessment on each property owner. Cost of each parking space provided by the district shall be computed by dividing the number of such spaces into the total of the assessment levied against the property within the district. The assessment against individual property shall be divided by this cost per space, to determine the nearest whole number by which the parking requirements on said property may be reduced. Payment to the city for the remaining number of parking spaces required, if any, shall be made in an amount equal to the value of required parking on a per-parking-space basis. From time to time, the city council shall establish by resolution the value of off-street parking facilities on a per-parking-space basis, to be determined on the basis of the cost of acquisition and improvement of parking facilities as shown on the downtown specific plan. Funds collected by the city from such payment shall be deposited in a special fund and used only by the city to acquire and/or develop off-street parking and related facilities which are consistent with the proposals of the downtown specific plan. Funds paid toward these costs for in-lieu-of parking shall not be refundable, except where funds are not used within ten years. All in-lieu-of parking payments must be approved by the city council. All in-lieu-of parking fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license or permit with respect to the subject property. 
E.  Surfacing. Any off-street parking area shall be surfaced with a minimum of five inches of imported base material and a double application of asphalt and gravel to the city engineer's approval, so as to provide a durable and dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for safe loading and unloading and parking of vehicles. 
F.  Parking Lot Design. The following design standards shall apply to all areas used for off-site parking where there are more than ten parking spaces required: 
1.  Street Frontage. A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip with shade trees, unless zone district requires a fifteen-foot wide strip, except that a landscaped yard of less than ten feet may be approved by the planning commission where the total landscaped yard area is the same as that which would result from application of the minimum yard requirement. 
2.  Interior Landscaping. Five percent with one tree per two hundred square feet increment of the five percent. (Example: If a use requires twenty-four thousand square feet of parking area — roughly sixty-four to seventy parking spaces — required landscaping would be one thousand two hundred square feet (24,000 × .05 = 1,200). Required number of trees would be 6 (1,200 ÷200 = 6).) 
G.  Reduction of Covered Parking Requirements. In apartment projects where there are more than five units, covered off-street parking may be converted to uncovered parking subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
H.  Parking Stall Size. Parking stall size shall be measured pursuant to the current approved city public works department design standard for parking. Any request to allow for deviation from these standards, including any request for use of compact parking spaces in a project, shall only be permitted upon approval by the planning commission. 
Table 17.36.020 

OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Use 	Parking Requirement 
Single-family homes: 	Covered and enclosed parking area of at least four hundred square feet, minimum width of twenty feet, minimum driveway area of three hundred sixty feet. Any addition to an existing single-family home legally constructed prior to May 1, 2014 is exempt from the provisions of this requirement. 
Duplex and Multifamily dwelling units having not more than two bedrooms per unit: 	Two covered parking spaces per dwelling unit, and one uncovered guest parking space for every four units. 
Duplex and Multifamily dwelling units having more than two bedrooms per unit: 	Two covered and one uncovered parking space per dwelling unit, and one uncovered guest parking space for every four units. 
Planned Developments in any District where Permitted: 	Two covered parking spaces per unit, not in tandem, and one uncovered guest parking space for every four units. 
	In situations where the internal streets are twenty-five feet in width, there shall be no on-street parking. In addition, one guest parking space per residence shall be required. In situations where the internal streets are thirty-five feet in width, on-street parking on one side may be allowed. One guest parking space per four residences shall be provided. 
Roominghouses and boardinghouses 	One parking space per adult guest 
Churches, lodges, clubs, community centers, chapels 	One parking space for each four seats but not less than one space for each fifteen square feet of the largest meeting hall 
Schools, public, private, commercial Hospitals 	One parking space for each classroom and office 
Hospitals 	One parking space per bed plus one space per doctor, plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift 
Convalescent hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes 	One parking space for each seven beds plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift 
Retail stores, services and offices in any district 	Five parking spaces for each one thousand square feet of gross leasable area; parking may be off-site within three hundred feet when approved by the planning commission 
Drive-in restaurants, any district 	One space for each car to be served plus one space for each three seats 
Service stations 	Two spaces for each working bay plus one space for each employee on the largest shift 
Restaurants, bars, cocktail lounges 	One space for each three scats but not less than one space for each thirty square feet of gross floor area 
Bowling alley, billiard parlor 	Five spaces per lane; two spaces per table, plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift 
Warehousing, wholesale stores in any district 	One space for each one thousand stores in any district square feet of gross floor area; may be off-site within three hundred feet on approval of the planning commission 
Manufacturing, heavy industrial uses, heavy commercial uses 	Minimum of two spaces for every three employees on the shift having the largest number of employees, but not less than one space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area. Parking may be off-site within three hundred feet upon approval of the planning commission 
 
(Ord. No. 688, § 2, 3-4-2015; Ord. 643 § 2, 2007; Ord. 466 § 8, 1988; Ord. 455, 1987; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.38 - SPECIAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.38.010 - Adult entertainment. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. The city council finds that special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulations set forth in this section is to prevent a concentration of these uses in any one area. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
1.  "Adult entertainment business" means and includes the following: 
a.  "Adult book store," an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; 
b.  "Adult motion picture theater," an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty or more persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by their em-phasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
c.  "Adult mini-motion picture theater," an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
d.  "Adult hotel or motel," a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
e.  "Adult motion picture arcade," any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
f.  "Cabaret," a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
g.  "Model studio," any business where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity; 
h.  "Sexual encounter center," any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas; and 
i.  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  "Specified sexual activities" means and includes the following: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, beastiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: Analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, or zooerasty; or 
b.  The use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or ejaculation; or 
c.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
d.  Fondling or touching nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
3.  "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, pubic region, (ii) buttocks, and (iii) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
C.  Conditional Use Permit Required. An adult entertainment business is not permitted in any zone unless a conditional use permit is obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.42. No adult entertainment business shall be granted a conditional use permit unless the lot upon which such business is proposed to be located: 
1.  Is classified in zone C-2 or a less restrictive zone; 
2.  Is not within five hundred feet of any lot located in any of the R residential zones; 
3.  Is not within one thousand feet of any lot upon which there is located another adult entertainment business; and 
4.  Is not within one thousand feet of any lot upon which there is located a church, a school in which minors are enrolled, a child care facility, a public building, a park, a playground or any recreational facility where minors congregate, including recreational facilities that are privately owned and operated as well as those that are owned and operated by a public agency. 
All measurements of distance under this section shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. Measurements between adult entertainment businesses under subdivision 3 of this subsection shall be between the boundaries of the respective lots on which the businesses are or are proposed to be conducted which are closest to one another. For purposes of subdivision 4 of this subsection, measurement shall be between the closest boundaries of the lot on which an activity described in subdivision 4 is located and the lot on which an adult entertainment business is proposed to be conducted. 
D.  Nonconforming Adult Entertainment Businesses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Chapter 17.40 or elsewhere in this title, all adult entertainment businesses that were lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance codified in this title and were rendered nonconforming by the application thereto of this chapter shall be discontinued or shall be brought into full conformance within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; provided, that any such nonconforming use may continue for up to one additional year upon the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.42, upon a finding and determination that the owner of the business, because of his inability to avoid liability under a written lease of the business premises which extends for more than one year beyond the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or because of a substantial investment in leasehold improvements to the premises which he cannot recover except by use of the premises, would suffer undue hardship if he were not allowed to continue the business at that location for the longer period. 
E.  Advertisements and Displays — Prohibitions. No adult entertainment business shall advertise or display portions of, or posters concerning, any of its stock-in-trade (such as books, magazines or motion pictures) in such a way as to render such advertisement or display visible from any public street, thoroughfare, private residence or business premises if such advertisement or display contains photographs or language depicting or referring to specified sexual activities or to specified anatomical areas. 
F.  Violation a Public Nuisance. In addition to the criminal penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 17.50, the violation of any of the provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided by law. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.020 - Antennas. 
Antennas for personal use, including television, citizens band, ham radio, or satellite receiving dishes, are permissible, provided that: 
A.  They are not located in a required front yard, or street side yard; 
B.  A building permit is required for the installation of an antenna or satellite dish. Prior to the issuance of the building permit, it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the building official that: 
1.  The antenna or dish is properly designed, constructed and installed to withstand wind pressure and will not create a public health or safety problem, 
2.  If roof mounted, that the roof is capable of supporting the structure; 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, an architectural review application shall be submitted to and approved by the architectural review committee for roof mounted satellite dishes and antennas that extend more than six feet in height above the highest peak of the roof, excluding chimneys and other architectural features; 
D.  The antenna or dish will not create glare on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.030 - Boardinghouses. 
The following standards apply to boardinghouses: 
A.  Conditional Use Permit Required. A boardinghouse is allowed in the R-3 district subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
B.  Standards — Conditions. The following standards and requirements apply to boardinghouses: 
1.  There shall be one parking space per tenant and two spaces for the manager. Tandem parking is not permitted. 
2.  An on-site resident manager is required. His phone number shall be on file with the police department. 
3.  The building shall meet the requirement of the latest editions of the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Building Codes as adopted by the city. 
4.  If an existing structure is to be used, a registered civil engineer shall certify that the building is structurally sound and capable of withstanding earthquake motion. 
5.  Hotplates are not permitted. 
6.  A business license is required. 
7.  The conditional use permit shall be valid for a maximum period of five years, at which time a new application is required. 
8.  No signs advertising the use are permitted. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.040 - Cafes—Restaurants—Cocktail lounges. 
A.  Cocktail lounges which are carried on as a clearly secondary operation in conjunction with a bona fide restaurant operation may be permitted in any district in which they are listed as permitted or conditionally permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The cocktail lounge shall be designed as an integral part of the restaurant within which it is located. 
2.  The cocktail lounge shall be entered only from within the restaurant. There shall be no outside entrance to the cocktail lounge except for emergency use only. 
3.  The cocktail lounge shall be operated only during the hours that the restaurant is open for business. 
4.  The area of any cocktail lounge shall not constitute more than twenty-five percent of the total floor area of the dining room and cocktail lounge. 
5.  The cocktail lounge may not utilize outdoor advertising except in conjunction with the restaurant. 
B.  Cafes, restaurants and cocktail lounges may have an outside eating or service area provided that it does not exceed fifty percent of the floor area within a building. 
C.  A wine-tasting facility may be allowed in an H-C district subject to a conditional use permit. "Wine tasting facility" means the providing of wine samples in order to promote the sale of wine of a particular winery or wineries. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.045 - Caretakers' residences. 
One permanent accessory dwelling is permitted for purposes of housing a caretaker where allowed by certain commercial or industrial zones, subject to the following standards and approval of a conditional use permit (Chapter 17.42). 
A.  Supplementary Statement. The application shall include a statement with explanation of the need for caretaker quarters and the responsibilities of the caretaker/resident. 
B.  Status of Caretaker. The resident of the dwelling shall be the owner, lessor, manager or any employee with sufficient knowledge of the underlying industrial or commercial use to capably undertake caretaker responsibilities. 
C.  Type of Use Requiring a Caretaker. The principal use of the site must require a caretaker for security purposes, or for care of people, plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions on the site, or for needed housing for the owner or operator of a business. 
D.  Allowable Location for a Caretaker Dwelling. In C-H, C-1, C-2, C-C, P-F and M zones, such dwelling shall be located on the second floor, or to the rear of a principal building. In the C-H and I zones, such dwelling may be located in accordance with the needs of the applicant. In all zoning districts, a caretaker residence is to be located on the same lot of record or contiguous ownership as the use requiring a caretaker. 
E.  Type of Dwelling Unit Allowed. Caretaker residences shall be a standard site-built home, or an apartment-type unit if the caretaker residence is to be integral with a principal structure. The unit shall be located to the rear of the building or located on the second floor of the building. 
F.  Parking Requirement. For existing developed sites, none provided sufficient usable area available to accommodate all resident vehicles on-site. For sites being developed with new structures, standard parking requirements shall apply. 
G.  Standards Modification. Standards set in the above noted subsections may be modified by the planning commission through the conditional use permit approval process. 
(Ord. 519 § 2 (Exbt. A), 1993)  
17.38.050 - Condominiums—Townhouses. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to condominium, townhouse, cooperative housing and similar residential developments, including both new structures and the conversion of existing structures; the provisions are in addition to those set forth in Chapter 17.14 of this title. "Condominium," as used in this section, refers to all such developments. 
B.  Intent and Purpose. It is the expressed intent and purpose of the city to apply the regulations contained in this section to condominiums and other similar developments described in this section because the element of permanent ownership or interest in the individual dwelling units, or the air space occupied thereby, makes such developments essentially different in nature from apartments or other multifamily dwellings in which the dwelling units are rented or leased. 
C.  Types of Condominiums. Residential condominiums shall be classified as follows: 
1.  Horizontal, one in which single-family dwelling units are constructed either as separate structures or as self-contained units within a common structure having individual entrances and utility connections, no opening in any wall common to two or more units, and no part of any unit on top of part of any other unit; 
2.  Vertical, any condominium in which any part of any dwelling unit is on top of any part of any other dwelling unit. 
D.  Outdoor Common Area. The outdoor common area of a residential condominium, exclusive of all structures, shall provide not less than five hundred square feet of open space per dwelling unit; provided, however, that the open space requirement may be met in whole or in part by any equivalent open ground area which is a part of any individual dwelling unit. 
E.  Separation Between Structures. In any condominium in which residential uses are proposed in an R-3 district, each main structure shall be separated from any other main structure on the same lot by a distance of not less than one-half of the sum of the height of the two buildings and in no case less than twenty feet. 
F.  Minimum Setbacks. The side yard setback of any residential main structure on any condominium lot on a public street is five feet. 
G.  Use Permit Application. A use permit is required for all condominium developments. The use permit application shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A legal description of the property and a map to a workable scale showing existing conditions, including boundaries, topography and landscaping, structures and other improvements located thereon, road and utility easements, and such other information as may be requested by the planning director; 
2.  Dimensioned schematic development plans, including a site plan, a parking plan, typical floor plans, building elevation plans showing natural and transverse grades, a landscaping plan, and such other information and drawings as may be requested by the planning director. The plans submitted shall show private open space areas, as well as common areas, and shall indicate how air spaces are to be divided; 
3.  A statement of provisions to be made for fire protection, including access for fire and other emergency equipment; 
4.  A copy of the tentative subdivision map for the project; 
5.  A copy of the declaration of restrictions proposed for recordation under the provisions of Section 1355 of the Civil Code, including provisions for management of the project; 
6.  In the case of a condominium conversion, the names and addresses of all tenants of the existing building or buildings; 
7.  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and a copy of the bylaws of the corporation; 
8.  Any other information deemed necessary or desirable for the purpose of assisting the planning commission in its determination on the application, and of conditions to be imposed. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.060 - Day nurseries. 
Day nurseries may be operated in any district in which they are listed as permitted only when the lot on which it is established is occupied by no more than one dwelling unit. Day nurseries shall be identified as one of the categories indicated below. 
A.  A small day nursery regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for one through six children not related to the caregiver in the caregiver's own home for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. A small day nursery is considered accessory to a permitted and established single-family residential use in agricultural and residential zoning districts. 
B.  A large day nursery regularly provide care, protection and supervision for seven through twelve children not related to the caregiver in the caregiver's own home for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. Operation of a large day nursery is permitted only as specifically provided for by district regulations. 
C.  An institutional day nursery regularly provides care, protection and supervision for more than twelve children when operated in conjunction with and on the same site as a public or private school, church or other institutional use which is permitted and established in the district. Operation of an institutional day nursery is subject to approval of a conditional use permit. 
D.  A commercial day nursery regularly provides care, protection and supervision for more than twelve children in specified districts. Access shall be only from a collector or arterial street, or a local street if the street is developed primarily with business. Play areas shall be separated from contiguous residential yards by a six-foot-high solid masonry wall. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.080 - Drive-through facilities. 
A conditional use permit is required for a drive-through lane, window or other facility. The lane or facility shall be designed so as not to create an impediment to on-site or off-site vehicular or pedestrian circulation or parking. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.090 - Driveway standards. 
A driveway shall be paved. In situations where the required parking is located to the rear of the main dwelling, the driveway shall be not less than ten feet in width and open for a height of eight feet. All driveways shall be built in accordance with city standards. Driveways for panhandle lots shall be not less than twelve feet in width. A turnaround shall be provided to prevent vehicles from backing. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.100 - Easements. 
No building or structure shall be constructed which may be in conflict with a recorded easement. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.110 - Energy conservation standards. 
A.  Lot design shall provide, to the extent feasible, for passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities and for other measures that conserve nonrenewable energy resources. Design measures to accomplish these objectives may include, but are not limited to, the arranging of streets, lots, buildings, and landscaping to (1) provide solar access for active solar water and space heating systems and passive space heating, (2) minimize solar heat gain in the summer, and (3) take advantage of prevailing breezes. 
B.  In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the original parcel, and to other design and improvement requirements. Such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable zoning. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.120 - Hazardous uses. 
A.  Use Permit Required. All of the uses listed in this section, and all matters directly related to them, are uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their inclusion in any class of use set forth in the various districts defined in this title, and therefore the authority for a location of the operation of any of the uses designated in this section is subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.42. In addition to the criteria for determining whether or not a use permit should be issued, the planning commission shall consider the following additional factors to determine that the characteristics of the listed uses will not be unreasonably incompatible with uses permitted in surrounding areas: (1) damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration; (2) hazard from explosion, contamination or fire; (3) hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character of traffic or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. The uses referred to herein are as follows: 
1.  Airports and landing fields; 
2.  Cemeteries; 
3.  Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles as follows: 
a.  Amusement parks and racetracks; 
b.  Circuses or carnivals, Fourth of July celebrations or similar short-term special events, except when conducted on a city owned public park and when having first received administrative approval of a city park activity/special event permit; 
c.  Public buildings, parks and other recreational facilities; 
d.  Recreational facilities, privately operated. 
4.  Hospitals, medical offices, rest homes and sanitariums; 
5.  Garbage dumps; 
6.  The mining of natural mineral resources, together with the necessary buildings and appurtenances incident thereto; 
7.  Removal or deposit of earth, other than excavations or deposits in connection with construction of buildings, roadways or public or home improvements. 
B.  General Performance Standards. The following general performance standards apply to hazardous uses: 
1.  Fire and explosion hazards: All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in industry and as approved by the fire department. All incineration is prohibited except any incineration conducted by the city which otherwise conforms with applicable state and federal regulations. 
2.  Radioactivity or electrical disturbance: Devices which radiate radio-frequency energy shall be so operated as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the boundary line of the property upon which the device is located. Further, no radiation of any kind shall be emitted in quantities which is dangerous to humans. 
(Ord. 568 § 1, 2000; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.130 - Historical structures. 
In order to conserve structures of potential local historical significance, plans for additions/alterations to, or the removal of, structures built prior to 1936 and/or associated with a local historical event or person, or exhibiting a significant historical architectural style shall be referred to the planning commission for approval if in the opinion of the planning director or building official referral is necessary. The decision of the planning commission is appealable to the city council. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.140 - Home occupations. 
"Home occupation" means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof. The following criteria apply for the evaluation of a home occupation: 
A.  There shall be no employment of help other than the members of the resident family. 
B.  There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses. 
C.  Except when actually being shown to business visitors for the purpose of sale, all goods and merchandise held for sale shall be stored in a closed closet or compartment on the premises, located either in the dwelling unit or in an accessory structure, having an interior capacity of no more than nine hundred sixty square feet. 
D.  The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic or vehicle parking beyond that normal to the district in which it is located. 
E.  It shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to exceed one ton capacity, owned by the operator of such home occupations, which shall be stored in an entirely enclosed garage. 
F.  There shall not be any generation of noise, light, odor, vibration, or electrical interference beyond the property line of the subject property. 
(Ord. 486 § 2, 1990: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.160 - Landscaping. 
A.  All landscaping, where required, shall be maintained in a healthful growing state free from weeds, litter and debris. 
B.  Although no specific plant species is proposed, it is preferred that native plants be selected because of their tolerance to local climatic conditions and their resistance to drought. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.170 - Through lots. 
For through lots the director shall determine which frontage or frontages shall be considered as the "lot front" or "lot frontages" for purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.180 - Front lot line. 
A.  On an interior lot, the front lot line is the property line abutting the street. 
B.  On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street. 
C.  On a through lot, or a lot with three or more sides abutting a street, or a corner lot with lot lines of equal length, the director shall determine which property line or lines shall be the front lot line for purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.190 - Rear lot line. 
In the case of an irregular, triangular or goreshaped lot, the rear lot line shall be a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten feet. A lot line which is bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot line. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.200 - Side lot line. 
On a lot with three or more sides abutting a street, all lot lines abutting such street or streets, other than the front lot line or lines, may be side lot lines. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.210 - Mobile homes on permanent foundations. 
A.  Applicability. This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 65852.3 of the Government Code and applies only to mobile homes placed on permanent foundation systems on lots zoned for single-family dwellings. 
B.  Permitted Use. A mobile home is permitted as a residential dwelling on any lot zoned for single-family residential use, provided it meets all of the requirements of this section. 
C.  Approval by Architectural Review Committee. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other permit or entitlement shall be issued for the establishment or placement of a mobile home as a residence on any parcel of land under the provisions of this chapter, except within an approved mobile home park, unless and until such use has been approved by the architectural review committee. 
D.  Eligibility. A mobile home qualifies under the provisions of this section only if: 
1.  It has been certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C., Section 5401, et seq.), and has not been altered in violation of that act; and 
2.  It is placed on a permanent foundation system approved by the building inspector which complies with the provisions of this section and with all applicable building codes and regulations, specifically including the provisions of Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code. 
E.  Criteria To Be Applied. In order to approve an application for the establishment or placement of a mobile home pursuant to this chapter, the architectural review committee must find that the proposed mobile home meets all of the following criteria for neighborhood compatibility: 
1.  It must comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable to residential structures. 
2.  It must have a minimum width of twenty feet. 
3.  The mobile home and accessory structures, such as garage or carport, must be covered with an exterior material customarily used in new residential structures in the surrounding areas, which shall extend to the ground; provided, that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. 
4.  The finish floor shall be a maximum of twenty-five inches above the exterior finish grade of the lot. 
5.  The roof must have a pitch of not less than two inches vertical rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run and must consist of shingles or other material customarily used for new residential construction in the surrounding area. 
6.  It must have porches and eaves, or roofs with eaves, which are comparable to those found in new residential structures in the surrounding area. 
The architectural review committee may not impose more stringent criteria or conditions than those contained in this subsection. 
F.  Building Permit Requirements. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the establishment or placement of a mobile home on a foundation system pursuant to this section, the owner or contractor shall provide the building inspector with all of the documents and information, and shall pay all of the fees, required by Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, in addition to complying with all other requirements for a building permit. 
G.  Mobile Home as Fixture — Prohibition on Removal. Once installed on a foundation system in compliance with the provisions of this section and with Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, a mobile home shall be deemed a fixture and a real property improvement to the property to which it is affixed. Physical removal of the mobile home shall thereafter be prohibited without the consent of all person or entities who, at the time of such removal, have title to any estate or interest in the real property to which the mobile home is affixed. 
H.  Appeal. Any action taken or decision made by the architectural review committee upon an application for the establishment or placement of a mobile home on a permanent foundation system pursuant to this section may be appealed by the applicant pursuant to Chapter 17.46. An owner of real property situated within three hundred feet of the proposed mobile home site has the same right of appeal. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.220 - Outdoor storage. 
A.  Adequate visual screening shall be provided for all outdoor storage areas. The screening shall be approved by the city. 
B.  No storage is permitted in any required front or street side yard. 
(Ord. 525 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.230 - Planned developments. 
A.  Planned developments are intended to promote efficient use of the land through increased design flexibility and quality site planning. The planned development concept allows departure from standard property development regulations when development is planned as a unified, integrated whole and incorporates outstanding design features and amenities. Planned developments can provide for maximum effective density and improved aesthetics through increased flexibility in building siting, creative use of permanent open space, and the preservation of significant natural features. Mobile home parks shall be considered a planned development and shall meet the requirements of Section 17.38.230(C)(3). 
B.  Whenever property is proposed to be developed as a planned development, the following general principles apply: 
1.  Planned developments may include any combination of detached or attached units. 
2.  District property development standards, except as related to population density, may be modified or waived where it is determined that such modification or waiver will produce a more functional, enduring and desirable environment, and no adverse impact to adjacent properties will result therefrom. 
3.  Population density shall be calculated on gross acreage, less public streets. 
4.  Community sewer and water is required for development. 
5.  The design of a planned development shall ensure compatibility and harmony with existing and planned uses on adjacent properties. Design elements to be considered include, but are not limited to, architecture, distance between buildings, building setbacks, building height, off-street parking, open space, privacy, screening and landscaping. 
6.  Off-street parking shall be provided consistent with the parking standards of Section 17.36.020 for planned developments and shall be integrated into the development to minimize exposure and impact on neighboring development. Notwithstanding this aforesaid provision, an exception to the number or type or arrangement of parking spaces may be approved for planned developments consisting of condominiums or townhouses provided that parking sufficient for occupants of the development and their guests will be provided and provided that said exception is consistent with the following criteria: 
a.  Where a tandem parking arrangement is proposed: 
i.  Each unit shall have no more than two bedrooms, and 
ii.  The required number of guest parking spaces shall comply with Section 17.36.020 or equivalent on-street parking shall be provided; 
b.  Where enclosed parking sufficient for two cars per unit is provided, the parking arrangement may be either side-by-side or tandem. Where two-car garages are proposed for all residential units, a reduction in guest parking of up to twenty percent of the total guest parking requirement may be allowed, with said reduction pro-rated based upon the proportion of housing units having two-car garages; 
c.  Where inclusionary affordable housing is proposed consistent with Chapter 17.41, exceptions to the parking requirements of Section 17.36.020 may be approved, and compliance with the aforesaid criteria is not required. 
7.  The developer shall provide for perpetual maintenance of all common land and facilities under common ownership through means acceptable to the city. 
8.  Conservation of natural site features, such as topography, vegetation and watercourses shall be considered in project design. 
9.  Energy conservation, and utilization of renewable energy sources, should be given prominent consideration. 
10.  Streets serving the development must be adequate to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed project. 
C.  In addition to the requirements of subsections A and B of this section, the following criteria apply: 
1.  Planned residential developments shall provide common open space free of buildings, streets, driveways or parking areas. The common open space shall be designed and located to be easily accessible to all the occupants of the development and usable for open space and recreational uses. 
2.  Planned residential developments greater than twenty acres in area may include: 
a.  Commercial, educational, religious and professional uses. Such uses must be compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the development; 
b.  Mobile home development, when located and designed to be compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the development; 
3.  Mobile home planned residential developments may be permitted when developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  The minimum development size is three acres; however, a smaller size may be permitted when developed as a portion of a larger development in accordance with subdivision (1)(b) of this subsection. 
b.  Density of development shall be consistent with the general plan. 
c.  Development is restricted to single-family mobile homes. 
d.  The planning commission or the city council may require that mobile homes be recessed where a determination is made that such condition is needed to ensure compatibility and harmony with existing and planned uses on adjacent properties. Where such finding is made, the following applies: 
i.  All mobile homes shall be recessed below level grade to the extent that the floor elevation is no greater than eighteen inches nor less than six inches above grade. The requirement may be modified if it is determined by the director that a greater or lesser elevation is needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants. 
ii.  The area between the floor elevation and the ground shall be skirted or otherwise enclosed and properly sealed to preclude water from entering under the mobile home. 
iii.  Whenever the soil is excavated below a mobile home, a retaining wall shall be installed extending six inches above grade. 
e.  No access drive shall be less than twenty-five feet in width, or thirty-two feet in width if car parking is permitted on one side of the access drive, and not less than forty feet in width if car parking is permitted both sides of an access drive. 
f.  A minimum fifteen-foot wide landscaped setback shall be provided along all public street frontage. 
i.  The landscaped setback shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect, and landscaping shall be installed by a licensed landscape contractor. 
ii.  The landscaping shall be maintained by the operator of the park to be in a healthful growing state free from weeds and debris. 
iii.  The landscaped setback shall include a solid masonry wall with a staggered setback at a maximum of every thirty-five feet and street trees spaced at a maximum of thirty-five feet on center. 
g.  Guest parking spaces required by Table 17.36.020 shall be evenly distributed throughout the project. In situations where guest parking adjoins a mobile home space, a solid masonry wall shall be provided. 
(Ord. 644 § 1, 2007; Ord. 466 §§ 3, 4, 1988; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.240 - Pollution control. 
A.  Noise. The following performance standards for noise control apply in all residential, commercial, and industrial districts: 
1.  At the boundaries of any lot or parcel of land the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the dB-A values given in Table 17.38.240 A, after applying the correction shown in Table 17.38.240 B. 
2.  Measurements shall be made as follows: 
Table 17.38.240 A 
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL AT LOT LINE IN DECIBELS 
Residential 	Commercial 	Industrial 
dB-A-55 	dB-A-65 	db-A-68 
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of one p.m. and seven a.m., one or more of the corrections in Table 17.38.240 B shall be applied to the octave band levels given in Table 17.38.240 A: 
Table 17.38.240 B 
Type or Location of Operation — Character of Noise 	Correction in Decibels 
1. Daytime operation only 	Plus 5 
2. Noise source operated less than: 	
a. 20% of any 1-hour period 	Plus 5 
b. 5% of any 1-hour period 
(Apply one of these corrections only) 	+10 
3. Noise of impulsive character such as hammering 	Minus 5 
4. Noise of periodic character such as hammering or screeching 	Minus 5 
 
B.  Vibration. No vibrations shall be permitted so as to cause a noticeable tremor, measurable without instruments at the lot line. 
C.  Air Pollutants. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases or other forms of air pollution which can damage the health of humans or animals, or to vegetation or other forms of property, is permitted. 
D.  Glare. No direct or reflected glare, whether produced by floodlight, high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding, or other means, so as to be visible from any boundary line of property on which the glare is produced, is permitted. 
E.  Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge at any point into any public sewer, storm drain, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, is permitted, except in compliance with standards approved by the California Department of Public Health or such other governmental agency or agencies as has jurisdiction over such activities. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.250 - Rest homes. 
A.  There shall be only limited medical care not involving a physician residing on the premises of any rest home. There shall be no surgery or other similar activities such as are customarily provided in hospitals. 
B.  The population density standards of the district in which the facility is proposed shall apply. For this purpose the resident family and six persons residing in the facility shall be counted as one family in determining the required lot area. One additional person may be permitted for each one thousand square feet of lot area exceeding the minimum lot size. 
C.  The maximum number of persons calculated in subsection B of this section applies regardless of the number of the licensee's family, or persons employed as facility staff, who shall not be included in determining the number of residents. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.260 - Second residential units. 
A.  Second Residential Unit Defined. "Accessory dwelling unit" means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as an existing single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in Section 179581.1 of the Health and Safety Code, and a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
B.  Locations Permitted. Accessory dwelling units are allowed in the R-1, R-2 and R3 districts, subject to the permit requirement and compliance with the development standards of this chapter. 
C.  Permit Required. An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed or placed attached to or detached from an existing single-family dwelling upon the issuance of a permit in accordance with this chapter. The planning director shall approve a permit for an accessory dwelling unit meeting the development standards of this chapter. 
D.  Development Standards. The requirements for approval of an accessory dwelling unit are as follows: 
1.  The lot size must be at least the minimum square feet otherwise required for development of a lot in the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  The living area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed six hundred fifty square feet. The increased floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing single-family residence's living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of twelve hundred square feet. Both attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall include a maximum of one bedroom, one bathroom, one kitchen and one living/dining room. 
3.  No passageway or entrance within view of a street shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. 
4.  No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage. 
5.  Both the existing single-family residence and the accessory dwelling unit shall contain laundry connections within them. 
6.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this code (or in any code adopted by reference in this code), an accessory dwelling unit may be connected to the city sewerage system through a side sewer shared with the existing residence on the site, or it may have its own side sewer. In either case the connection of the accessory dwelling unit to the city sewerage system is subject to the requirements of this code to the same extent as though it were the only dwelling unit on the site, including the obtaining of applicable permits, the payment of connection charges (where applicable), the payment of user charges. Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. Separate metering of utilities is not required for attached units, but is required for detached units. 
7.  The owner of the property must reside in one of the two residential units on the site. 
8.  Occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to a maximum of two persons. 
9.  The accessory dwelling unit may be rented, but it shall not be offered for sale apart from the other residence, nor shall the lot or parcel be subdivided to create a separate building site unless approved under the subdivision ordinance of this city. No accessory dwelling unit may be offered for rental terms of less than thirty days. 
10.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the accessory dwelling unit shall not increase an existing or create a new encroachment upon any required front, side or rear yard space, increase building height or coverage beyond the standards prescribed for the district in which it is located, or decrease the distance between structures that is required. 
11.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, accessory dwelling units shall comply with all uniform building codes adopted, and to all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. An accessory dwelling unit may consist of a manufactured housing as long as such housing is permitted in the district in which it is proposed to be located and meets the standards for such housing. 
12.  One parking space, in addition to the number required for the existing unit, shall be provided. Such additional space may be a tandem space or offstreet within setback areas provided that the city approves the location of such a space. Tandem parking and the location of offstreet parking within setback areas shall be approved by the city unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based on specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions, or unless such parking is not permitted anywhere else in the city. 
13.  If a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and offstreet parking spaces must be replaced, the replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the lot, including but not limited to, covered spaces, uncovered spaces, tandem spaces (if allowed elsewhere in the city), or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
14.  The parking requirements set forth in section D.12 above do not apply to accessory dwelling units meeting any of the following criteria: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
c.  The accessory dwelling unit is an attached accessory dwelling unit. 
d.  There is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
15.  Detached units shall be permitted only on corner lots, or on lots more than one hundred sixty feet deep. 
16.  Fees will be charged for the construction of an accessory dwelling unit in accordance with Title 14 of the City of Soledad Municipal Code and state law. All fees must be calculated to account for the proportionate impact on services based on the size of the accessory dwelling unit or number of plumbing fixtures. 
17.  Fire sprinklers are not required for accessory dwelling units if they are not required for the existing single-family residence. 
E.  Attached Accessory Dwelling Units—Special Circumstances. Notwithstanding compliance with the standards and requirements of subsection D above, an attached accessory dwelling unit located within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory structure shall be approved, provided that the accessory dwelling unit has independent exterior access and the side and rear setbacks meet all applicable side and rear setbacks for fire safety. Any attached accessory dwelling unit described in this subsection D shall not be required to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, and no connection or capacity fee shall be charged. 
F.  Recordation of Deed Restriction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the owner of the lot or parcel on which it is to be constructed shall execute and deliver to the planning director, for recordation pursuant to the provisions of Section 27281.5 of the Government Code, a deed restriction in a form satisfactory to the city attorney giving notice of the requirements of this chapter and of the conditions and requirements of the conditional use permit authorizing the second unit. 
G.  Periodic Review. The code enforcement officer shall from time to time conduct a review of all accessory dwelling units within the city, with particular attention to the following concerns: 
1.  A change in ownership of the lot or parcel of land on which the two residential units are situated. 
2.  A change in the occupancy of the residential units which is not in compliance with this section. 
3.  Any other failure to comply with this section. 
If upon such review it appears that in a particular case a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred, the code enforcement officer may take such action as deemed necessary to correct any violation. 
H.  Compliance with State Law. This section is intended to comply with the requirements of Section 65852.2 of the Government Code and any amendments thereto. All accessory dwelling units approved by this section are deemed to not exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit is located, and all accessory dwelling units are a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 2, 5-3-2017)  
17.38.270 - Security and public safety. 
Security lighting shall be provided for carports in multifamily projects consisting of three or more units. Lighting fixtures and their location shall be approved by the building official and police chief. Lighting shall be directed so as not to create glare or illuminate adjoining property. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.280 - Small-animal veterinary hospital or clinic. 
"Small-animal veterinary hospital or clinic" means a completely enclosed building designed, arranged and intended to be used for the medical treatment and care incidental thereto of small animals such as dogs, cats and other similar household pets. These shall not include the medical treatment or care of bovine animals, horses, sheep, goats or swine. The building shall be designed and constructed so that sound emitted through exterior walls or roofs or enclosed areas in which animals are kenneled or treated does not exceed sixty-five decibels. There shall be no incineration permitted. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.290 - Storage tanks. 
A.  Aboveground tanks shall be adequately screened by berms, landscaping, fencing or walls. Adequate security measures such as fencing and lighting shall be provided to prevent unauthorized entry. 
B.  Below-ground tanks shall meet all the requirements of the city, the Monterey County Health Department and other applicable agencies. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.300 - Street improvements. 
Whenever a parcel is subdivided, or a new main building is constructed, or the value of on-site improvements exceeds thirty-three percent of the value of the existing on-site improvements, curb, gutter and sidewalks shall be installed. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.310 - Swimming lessons. 
A.  Swimming lessons for up to three individuals may be given at one time. 
B.  Lessons for more than three individuals shall require a conditional use permit. 
C.  Swimming pools used for swimming lessons shall be inspected periodically by the Monterey County health department. 
D.  The use shall not create a noise nuisance for the surrounding property. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.320 - Swimming pools 
The following requirements apply to all swimming pools, and to ponds more than eighteen inches deep, in a residential (R) district: 
A.  Location. Such pools or ponds shall be constructed at least fifty feet from the front line and at least ten feet from the side line of the lot. The planning commission may by use permit allow a different location, but in no case shall the foregoing requirements be reduced by more than fifty percent. Filter and heating systems shall not be located closer than twenty feet to any dwelling other than the owner's. 
B.  Enclosure. All swimming pools and ponds shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height, designed to resist climbing. All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.330 - Utilities. 
A.  All apartments and other multiple dwellings, including condominium, community housing projects and planned community developments, but excluding hotels, motels and other accommodations for transients, shall provide for independent services of water, gas and electricity to each dwelling unit. Separate shutoffs for each dwelling unit shall be provided. 
B.  All dwelling units erected, constructed or remodeled after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall contain the water, plumbing and electrical or gas utility connections and outlets necessary to operate and maintain home laundry facilities, consisting of not less than one washer and one dryer (1) for each structure duplex, or (2) for each four or fewer units in any apartment house or multifamily dwelling. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.38.340 - Parking and storage of vehicles, boats and equipment in R zoning districts. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the parking and storage of vehicles, boats, trailers, and equipment in R zoning districts in order to minimize adverse aesthetic impacts that large, numerous or inappropriate vehicles have in residential districts by limiting the type of such vehicles, their n umbers and the locations such vehicles may be parked or stored. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Disabled-inoperative vehicle "means any vehicle unable to run under its own power, unlicensed or determined to be unsafe to operate. 
2.  "Driveway" means a private road leading from the public street to the principal structure, residence, garage, carport or parking area. 
3.  "Equipment" means any mobile equipment not used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and which is only incidentally operated or moved over a highway, including, but not limited to ditch-digging apparatus, asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than truck-tractors, leveling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carryalls, scrapers, power shovels, draglines, self-propelled cranes, earth moving equipment, forklifts, drill rigs and similar commercial machines. 
4.  "Recreational vehicle (RV)," means any travel trailer or other vehicular portable structure designed to be used as a temporary occupancy for travel or recreational use, including, but not limited to, motor homes, truck slidein campers, fifth wheel trailers, tent trailers, animal trailers, trailers used for transportation of recreational vehicles, any type of three or four wheeled sport racing vehicle, boats, boat trailers, rafts, aircraft, dune buggies, snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles and vehicle dollies. Such term does not include mobile homes regulated under Section 17.38.210. 
5.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
6.  "Vehicle storage" means parking or placing any of the items described in this section for a period in excess of three consecutive days, or six days in any calendar year. 
C.  Parking and Storage not Allowed in Certain Yard Areas. No portion of any required front yard, exterior side yard of a comer lot, or rear yard of a double frontage lot except as hereafter provided, shall for any period of time in excess of three consecutive days or six days in a calendar year be used for the unenclosed parking or storage of the following: 
1.  Motor vehicles, except in fully operational condition and currently registered and licensed for operation on public streets and highways, and when parked on the driveway of the property; 
2.  Recreational vehicles; 
3.  Disabled/inoperative vehicles; 
4.  Trailers of any kind or type. Camper units detached from the truck or other motor vehicles for which they are designed or customarily used shall be considered trailers for the purpose of this section; 
5.  Boats and boats on trailers; 
6.  Equipment as defined in subsection (B)(3); 
7.  Commercial vehicles of over ten thousand pounds gross weight, or in excess of twenty feet in length; 
8.  Parts of any items of property described in one through five of this section. 
Any of the foregoing items of property, which have been stored on a site or yard described herein for less than three consecutive days or six days in any calendar year and then removed, shall not again be stored on such site or yard in that same calendar year unless in compliance with either subsection D or E of this section. 
D.  Vehicle Storage Exceptions in the Single Family Residential (R-1) District. Subject to first obtaining a Certificate of Zoning Compliance approved by the planning director and payment of applicable fees, not more than one boat, or one trailer and boat combination, or one utility trailer may be allowed when it has been determined by the planning director that due to lack of feasible access, the vehicle cannot be parked or stored in the interior side yard or rear yard area and where the trailer, or boat trailer combination meet the following criteria: 
1.  The trailer/boat combination or utility trailer shall not exceed twenty feet in length or ten feet in height; and 
2.  Is parked or stored entirely upon the paved or designated driveway area, and not encroaching upon the public sidewalk; and 
3.  Is maintained in a clean condition and not containing refuse, or materials; and 
4.  Is covered with a secure tarp, or fitted fabric cover in good condition. 
E.  Temporary Extension of Time/Hardship. Upon demonstration of hardship, and subject to first obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.42.015, the storage of the items of property described in subsections B and C of this section may be allowed in front, side or rear yards of sites for a period of time not to exceed forty-five days in any calendar year. 
F.  Vehicle Storage in Multifamily Residential Districts. Storage described in this section is not permitted, unless an area for such storage has received previous formal approval by the city or first obtains approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. 
G.  Disabled/Inoperative Vehicles. No vehicles shall be repaired in the required front yard, street side yard or rear yard of double frontage lots or on driveway portions of a lot except in bona fide emergency situations. Any such repairs shall be complete within two calendar days. Repairs shall be limited to light work such as minor tune-ups and shall not involve significant parts removal or replacement. More extensive repairs may be conducted when out of public view within a garage or when enclosed by a solid wood fence. 
(Ord. 568 § 2, 2000)  
17.38.350 - Cardrooms. 
Cardrooms established pursuant to Chapter 5.36 shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All cardrooms shall comply with the cardroom licensing procedures as defined and required in Chapter 5.36 of this code; 
B.  A conditional use permit shall be required for each licensed cardroom with more than two card tables. The conditional use permit may be revoked by the planning commission if the use is found to be in violation of Chapter 5.36 of this code or other city regulations, or may be modified by the planning commission if deemed necessary. 
C.  The planning commission may require the installation of a robbery alarm or other security measures on the premises if circumstances warrant. The planning commission may rely on recommendations by the police department regarding whether, and to what extent, security measures may be required. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2007)  
17.38.360 - Medical marijuana regulations. 
A.  Purpose and Authority. The purpose of this chapter is to enact a complete and total prohibition of medical marijuana dispensaries, including mobile dispensaries, medical marijuana cultivation, and medical marijuana deliveries in the city. By adopting the following regulations, the council will achieve elimination of the harms caused or threatened by cultivation and distribution of marijuana. The city council enacts this chapter in accordance with the authority granted to cities by the California Constitution and California state law. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
1.  "Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
2.  "Medical marijuana cultivation" means the growing of marijuana for medical purposes pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, by any person, including but not limited to a qualified patient, person with an identification card, or a primary caregiver. Cultivation includes the cultivation, till, work or development of marijuana, both female and male parts at all stated of growth, including but not limited to mature or immature plants, clones, seedlings or germinating seeds. Cultivation also includes the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof. 
3.  "Medical marijuana dispensary" is inclusive of medical marijuana cooperative/collective or medical cannabis dispensary and means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is cultivated, provided, sold made available or otherwise distributed by any means to three or more of the following; any individual, including but not limited to, a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law; a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
4.  "Qualified patient," "primary caregiver," "person with an identification card" and "identification card" shall have the same meanings as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
C.  Cultivation of Medical Marijuana Prohibited. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any parcel of real property in the city shall cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana plants of any type, indoors or outdoors, or within public view, within any zoning district in the city. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana cultivation facility in any zoning district. 
D.  Marijuana Deliveries and Dispensaries Prohibited. A medical marijuana dispensary, including any portion of operations allowing for the delivery of marijuana by any means, is prohibited in all zones, districts, properties, and areas within the city. No person or entity shall operate or permit to be operated a medical marijuana dispensary in or upon any property or premises in the city. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana dispensary in any zoning district. 
E.  Enforcement. Violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of chapter or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 2, 2-3-2016; Ord. No. 696, § 2. 1-6-16)  
Chapter 17.39 - DENSITY BONUS 
Sections: 
 
17.39.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the density bonus ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.020 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 65915 of the Government Code for the purpose of providing incentives to developers to provide affordable housing for persons of low and very low income and for senior citizens. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.030 - Density bonus entitlement. 
When an applicant for the development of five or more housing units agrees or proposes to construct at least (a) twenty percent of the total housing units for lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or (b) ten percent of the total housing units for very low income households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, or (c) fifty percent of the total housing units for qualifying residents, as defined in Section 51.3(c) of the Civil Code, the city shall either: 
(1)  Grant a density bonus and at least one of the concessions or incentives identified in Section 17.39.060 of this chapter, unless the city council makes a written finding that the additional concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 17.39.130 of this chapter; or 
(2)  Provide other incentives of equivalent value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.040 - Density bonus defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "density bonus" means a density increase of at least twenty-five percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the zoning ordinance and the land use element of the general plan as of the date of filing of an application for development. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to ten percent or twenty percent of the total. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.050 - Limitation on entitlement. 
If a developer agrees to construct both twenty percent of the total housing units for lower income households and ten percent of the total housing units for very low income households, the developer shall be entitled to only one density bonus and at least one additional concession or incentive identified in Section 17.39.060 of this chapter or in Section 65913.4 of the Government Code; provided, however, that the city, in its discretion, may grant more than one density bonus. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.060 - Concession or incentive defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "concession or incentive" means any of the following: 
A.  Reduction in minimum lot size required for senior citizens projects only; 
B.  Increase in maximum lot coverage allowed; 
C.  Reduction in minimum property line or street setbacks required; 
D.  Reduction in amount of landscaping required; 
E.  Reduction of minimum distance between buildings on the same property; 
F.  Reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required; 
G.  Allowing additional increases in density; 
H.  Allowing mixed use (e.g., residential/commercial, residential/office-professional or residential/industrial), if compatible with the proposed housing development and with existing or planned development in the vicinity; 
I.  Other regulatory concessions, including modification of zoning and architectural design requirements, but only to the extent that such requirements exceed the minimum building standards approved by the State Building Standards Commission as provided in Paragraph 2.5 (commencing with Section 189-01) of Division 3 of the Health and Safety Code; 
J.  Other financial incentives, including waiver or reduction of applicable fees and charges, the provision of required infrastructure, the use of redevelopment funds, or other forms of direct financial assistance. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.070 - Application for concessions or incentives. 
A developer may submit to the city a preliminary written proposal for the development of housing pursuant to this chapter prior to the submittal of any formal requests for general plan amendments, zoning amendments or subdivision map approvals. Within ninety days of receipt of a proposal, the city shall notify the developer, in writing, of the procedures to be followed in complying with the requirements of this chapter, which shall include city council approval. Such procedures shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.080 - Evaluation of application. 
The planning commission shall evaluate and make its written recommendation to the city council upon an application for concessions or incentives pursuant to this chapter, based on the following criteria: 
(a)  The requested concessions or incentive must be economically necessary in order to make the set-aside unit or units affordable as required by this chapter. The materials submitted by the developer must clearly indicate how the requested concession or incentive would make the project economically feasible. 
(b)  The requested concession or incentive shall not result in a net profit of greater than twenty percent in comparison to the profit that would be made from the development without the density bonus and without the concessions and incentives available to the development under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The requested concession or incentive shall not be materially detrimental to public health, safety and welfare, nor injurious to property and/or improvements in the vicinity of the development. 
(d)  The requested concession or incentive shall not result in an overall development pattern that is incompatible with other structures in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.090 - Filing and processing of applications. 
Applications for additional concessions and incentives shall be made in writing to the planning director of the city, who shall determine whether or not the application is complete and complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. The application shall specify the concession or incentive requested and shall clearly indicate how the additional concession or incentive is necessary in order to ensure that the development will provide a reasonable economic return while still allowing the set-aside housing units to be affordable as required by this chapter. At a minimum, the application shall include an itemized accounting of projected costs and revenues of the development, both with and without the additional concessions and incentives required. Project revenues shall include moneys from the sale or rental of all units, including the density bonus units. Project costs shall not include the "lost opportunity" cost of the set-aside units, i.e., the amount that would have been generated had the set-aside units been rented or sold at market rate. Project costs may include items that are required solely as a result of the inclusion of the density bonus units and would not have been required without such units. The planning director shall, within sixty days after the date on which he certifies the application as complete, respond to the request for additional concessions and incentives in one of the following ways: 
(a)  By recommending approval of the request; 
(b)  By recommending a different or modified additional concession or incentive in lieu of one or more requested in the application; 
(c)  By recommending disapproval of the request. 
If a different or modified additional concession or incentive is recommended, the planning director shall indicate how the recommended concession or incentive has an equivalent effect in terms of the affordability of the set-aside units. If disapproval of the request is recommended, the planning director shall indicate why the requested concession or incentive is not necessary in order to make the set-aside units affordable. The written recommendation of the planning director shall be presented to the planning commission within forty-five days after the date on which the application is determined by the planning director to be complete and in compliance, as hereinabove in this section set forth. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.100 - Planning commission action. 
Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning director upon an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall give notice of such hearing pursuant to the provisions of Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. Following the hearing, the commission shall make its written recommendation to the city council with respect to the application. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.110 - City council action. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission concerning an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing upon the application and shall give notice of such hearing pursuant to the provisions of Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. Following the hearing, the council shall do one of the following: 
(a)  Approve the request contained in the application. 
(b)  Approve a different or modified additional concession or incentive in lieu of one or more requested in the application; or 
(c)  Disapprove the request. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.120 - Provisions applicable to all density bonus development projects. 
The following provisions shall apply to both rental and ownership density bonus projects: 
(a)  All set-aside units shall have a bedroom mix and amenities representative of the project as a whole. 
(b)  The total number of housing units allowed under a density bonus shall be calculated by dividing the number of square feet of land available by the number of square feet required per housing unit under the applicable zoning designation, and multiplying the result by 1.25. If the result, including the density bonus, contains a fraction of a unit, the number of allowable units shall be determined by rounding that number down to the next lowest full unit. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall be binding upon future owners of properties within the development. Prior to the issuance of the first building permit for a project, the developer shall record deed restrictions in favor of the city which subject the rental, sales or resale of set-aside units to the provisions of this chapter for a period of thirty years (or a longer period of time for developments that receive federal, state or local construction or mortgage assistance, mortgage insurance or rent subsidies), except that the rental, sale and resale restriction for units for which no additional concession or incentive is granted shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for a period of ten years. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.130 - Provisions applicable to rental density bonus development projects. 
The following provisions shall apply only to rental density bonus projects: 
(a)  Set-aside units shall be subject to the affordability requirements of this chapter for a period of thirty years (or a longer period of time for developments that receive federal, state or local construction or mortgage assistance, mortgage insurance or rent subsidies), beginning when the units are first available for occupancy, except that set-aside units for which no additional concession or incentive is granted shall be subject to the conditions of this chapter for a period of ten years. 
(b)  Those units targeted for lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, shall be affordable at a rental that does not exceed thirty percent of sixty percent of area median income; those units targeted for very low income households as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of area median income. 
(c)  The owner shall submit annually, and within thirty days of occupancy of a set-aside unit, a certificate of compliance, which shall include the name, address and income of each tenant currently occupying a set-aside unit; also a report of the occupancy of all set-aside units for the year prior to the submission of the certificate of compliance. 
(d)  The owner shall maintain and keep on file annual sworn and notarized income statements and current tax returns for all tenants occupying the set-aside units. 
(e)  The city shall have the right to inspect the owner's project-related records at any reasonable time and shall be entitled to audit the owner's records once a year. 
(f)  No subletting of rental set-aside units shall be allowed unless the sublessee qualifies as a very low or low income or senior citizen household and the combined income of all persons occupying the subleases premises, adjusted for family size, does not exceed the income limits set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
17.39.140 - Provisions applicable to ownership density bonus development projects. 
The following provisions shall apply only to ownership density bonus projects: 
(a)  At least twenty percent of the units allowed prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be sold to low income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or at least ten percent of the units allowed prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be sold to very low income households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, or at least fifty percent of the units allowed prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be sold to senior citizens, as defined in Section 51.3(c) of the Civil Code. 
(b)  All ownership set-aside units shall be occupied by their purchasers; no renting or leasing shall be allowed. 
(Ord. 501 § 2(1) (Exbt. A) (part), 1991)  
Chapter 17.40 - NONCONFORMING USES 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Continuance of existing uses. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, uses of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title may be continued, although the particular use, or the building or structure, does not conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which the particular building or structure is located or use is made; provided, however, no nonconforming structure or use of land may be extended to occupy a greater area of land, building or structure than is occupied at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. If any nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned, any subsequent use of such land or building shall conform to the regulations specified for the district in which such land or building is located. If no structural alterations are made therein, a nonconforming use of a nonconforming building may be changed to another use of the same or more restrictive classification or a more restrictive nonconforming use, the occupancy thereafter may not revert to a less restrictive use. If any use is wholly discontinued for any reason except pursuant to a valid order of a court of law, for a period of one year, it shall be conclusively presumed that such use has been abandoned within the meaning of this title, and all future uses shall comply with the regulations of the particular district in which the land or building is located. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.40.020 - Limitations to applicability of provisions. 
This chapter does not require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this chapter requires any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.40.030 - Use of lands without buildings or structures. 
If any lands upon which no building or structure of any kind is located are used for a purpose which is not in compliance with the regulations of the district where such lands are located, such use may continue for a period of five years from the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. After the expiration of the five-year period, such lands shall be used only in conformance with the regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.40.040 - Enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration permitted when. 
Any building or structure existing at the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title which is nonconforming either in use, design or arrangement shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration is in compliance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance for the district where such building or structure is located; provided, however, any such nonconforming building or structure may be maintained, repaired or portions thereof replaced so long as such maintenance, repairs or portions thereof replaced do not exceed twenty-five percent of the building's appraised valuation, as shown on the latest assessment roll of the city. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.40.060 - Applicability of provisions following redistricting. 
This chapter applies to structures, land and uses which become nonconforming after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title due to redistricting of any lands under this title. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.41 - INCLUSIONARY HOUSING 
Sections: 
 
17.41.010 - Title. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be known collectively as the inclusionary housing ordinance of the city of Soledad. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the public welfare by increasing the production and availability of affordable housing units, and to establish inclusionary housing requirements which implements general plan policies guiding land use and housing development. It is the intent of the city of Soledad to provide for a minimum of twenty percent of new housing units be affordable to moderate, low and very low income households (eight percent moderate income, six percent low income and six percent very low income). 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
"Affordable" means housing which can be purchased or rented by a household with very low, low, or moderate income. Units designated for purchase by lower income households shall be affordable according to income limits established by the state department of housing and community development for the county of Monterey. Units designated for rent by lower income households shall be affordable at rents that do not exceed thirty percent of sixty percent of area median income. Units designated for rent by very low income households shall be affordable at rents that do not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of the area median income. 
"Affordable housing agreement" means a written agreement between the developer, city and possibly additional parties which specify the terms and conditions under which affordable housing requirements are to be met. 
"Affordable housing fund" means a fund established and administered by the city, containing in-lieu fees and other funds held and used exclusively to increase and improve the supply of affordable housing. 
"Affordable housing project" means a development project in which one hundred percent of the dwellings to be built will be sold or rented in conformance with the city's affordable housing standards. 
"Building valuation" means the total value of the construction work for which a construction permit is required, as determined by the building official using the Uniform Building Code. 
"Commercial mixed use project" means a development project involving primarily non-residential uses, including retail, office, commercial, industrial, and manufacturing uses as further described in the zoning regulations. 
"Density" means residential density as defined in the appropriate sections of this code. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase of at least twenty-five percent over the maximum density otherwise allowable under the zoning regulations. 
"Development project" means an activity for which a subdivision map or construction permit is required, including new buildings and building additions or remodels, but not including changes in ownership, occupancy, management or use. 
"Director" means the community development director or his/her authorized representative. 
"Equity build-up" means a property's sales price at first resale, less the initial purchase price and less the city's equity share as described in Section 17.41.210 of this chapter. 
"Expansion area" means a land area proposed for annexation to the city or annexed after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Inclusionary housing unit" means a dwelling which is built under the provision of this chapter, and which meets the city's affordable housing standards. 
"In-lieu fee" means a fee paid to the city as an alternative to the production of inclusionary housing, to be used in the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of affordable housing. 
"Low" or "lower income households" shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code, Section 50079.5; provided the income of such persons and families shall not exceed eighty percent of the median income within the county. 
"Market value" means the highest price a willing buyer would pay and willing seller would accept, both being fully informed and in an open market, as determined by an appraiser or other qualified professional. See also Section 17.41.210 of this chapter. 
"Moderate income households" mean and include those persons and families whose incomes exceed eighty percent but are less than or equal to one hundred twenty percent of the median income within the county. 
"Real property" means land and improvements, if any, including anything permanently affixed to the land, such as buildings, walls, fences and paved areas. 
"Residential project" means development projects which result in the subdivision of land and/or the construction or conversion of dwellings, including, but not limited to: Single-family detached homes, apartments, condominiums, live/work studios, manufactured homes, and group housing. 
"Very-low income" shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code, Section 50105; provided that such income level shall not exceed fifty percent of the median income within the county. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.040 - Applicability and exclusions. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to development projects consisting of five or more lots or new dwelling units, and to commercial development projects consisting of two thousand five hundred square feet of gross floor or larger. 
B.  The following types of development projects are excluded: 
1.  Residential developments of four units or less; 
2.  New commercial developments of less than two thousand five hundred square feet gross floor area; 
3.  Residential and commercial building additions, repairs or remodels, provided that such work does not increase the number of existing dwellings by four or more units; or result in an increase in gross floor area of two thousand five hundred square feet; 
4.  The conversion of less than five dwelling units to condominiums within any five-year period; 
5.  Commercial condominium conversions which do not result in the creation of new dwellings; 
6.  Affordable housing projects; 
7.  Emergency projects, or projects which the city council determines are necessary to protect public health and safety; 
8.  Development projects which the city council determines are essentially noncommercial or nonresidential in nature, which provide educational, social, or related services to the community and which are proposed by public agencies, nonprofit agencies, foundations and other similar organizations; 
9.  Projects which replace or restore a structure damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster within three years prior to the application for the new structure(s); 
10.  Projects for which an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map exists, or for which a construction permit was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which continue to have unexpired permits. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.050 - General standards. 
A.  Methods of Meeting Requirements. New development projects shall satisfy the inclusionary housing requirements of the city's housing element. To meet the requirements, the developer may suggest one or more of the following methods, subject to approval of the city of Soledad: 
1.  Construct the required number of affordable dwelling units; 
2.  Dedicate real property for affordable housing; 
3.  In-lieu fees; 
4.  Use a combination of the above methods, to the approval of the city council; 
5.  Inclusionary units should be similar in size and design to market rate units within the development. 
B.  Affordable Housing Standards. Affordable dwelling units constructed must meet city affordable housing standards, and must be consistent with affordability policies in the general plan housing element. 
C.  Concurrent Development. The required inclusionary units shall be constructed concurrently with market rate units unless the developer and the city council agree within an affordable housing agreement to an alternative development schedule. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.060 - Procedures. 
A.  Fractional Numbers. In determining the number of dwellings that are required to be built, fractional units less than 0.50 shall be rounded down to the first whole number unit, and fractional units of 0.50 or greater shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number unit, as calculated by the director. 
B.  Timing. The inclusionary housing requirement shall be met prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first unit in a building, or the first building in a complex to be constructed or remodeled; or for subdivisions, prior to final map approval; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise agreed to by the city council as part of the tentative map, rezoning, conditional use permit or other development approval. 
C.  Affordable Housing Agreement. To meet the requirements, the developer may enter into an agreement with the city, the city's housing authority, nonprofit housing provider, or other qualified housing provider approved by the city council to construct, refurbish, convert, operate and maintain the required affordable housing. Such affordable housing agreements shall be to the approval of the city council and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.070 - In-lieu housing fee. 
A.  Payment of In-Lieu Fee. Developer and city council may agree to allow payment of a fee to the city in lieu of constructing affordable dwellings to meet this requirement. The developer shall submit a report identifying all overriding conditions impacting the project that prevent the developer from meeting the requirements of this section. 
B.  Amount and Method of Payment. The dollar amount and method of payment of the in-lieu fee shall be as approved by the city council. 
C.  Timing. In-lieu fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy of the first dwelling within a residential development; or for residential subdivisions to be built out by others, prior to final subdivision map approval; or prior to occupancy for new commercial buildings or remodels; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise provided by written agreement between the developer and city, to the approval of the community development director. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.080 - Affordable housing fund. 
A.  Affordable Housing Fund Established. The city hereby establishes an affordable housing fund. Such fund shall be administered by the finance director and shall be used exclusively to provide funding for the provision of affordable housing and for reasonable costs associated with the development of affordable housing, at the discretion of the city council. 
B.  In-Lieu Fees. In-lieu fees collected shall be deposited into the affordable housing fund, to the satisfaction of the finance director. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.090 - Real property dedication. 
A.  Irrevocable Offer to Dedicate Real Property. At the discretion of the city council, an irrevocable offer to dedicate real property equal or greater in value to the in-lieu fee which would otherwise be required may be offered to the city, or to a housing provider designated by the city, instead of providing the required number of affordable dwellings or paying in-lieu fees. In considering an offer to dedicate real property, the city council must find that the dedication of real property will provide an equal or greater public benefit than constructing affordable units or paying in-lieu fees, based on the following criteria: 
1.  Valuation of the land and/or improvements to be dedicated relative to other methods of meeting the requirement; 
2.  Suitability of the land and/or improvements for housing, including general plan conformity, size, shape topography and location; and 
3.  Feasibility of developing affordable housing, including general plan consistency, and availability of infrastructure. 
B.  Real Property Valuation. The valuation of real property offered in-lieu shall be determined by the community development director, based upon an appraisal made by a qualified appraiser mutually agreed to by the developer and the city. Costs associated with the appraisal, title insurance and transfer, recordation and related costs shall be borne by the developer. 
C.  Agreement and Timing. The real property dedication shall be by deed or other instrument acceptable to the city, and shall be completed by recordation with the recorder of the county of Monterey or to occupancy release of the first residential unit or commercial building in the development; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise provided by written agreement between the developer and the city. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.100 - Incentives. 
A.  Eligibility for Incentives. The developer may be eligible to receive, or to request development incentives in return for constructing affordable housing in connection with a development project, as part of a city planning application. Such incentives may include density bonus, waiver/modification of development or zoning standards, priority of application processing prior to applications which do not include affordable units, deferral of city required fees for payment until issuance of the certificate of occupancy or other incentives or concessions agreed to between the developer and city council. Incentives or other forms of financial assistance may be offered by the city to the extent that resources are available for this purpose and to the degree that such incentives or assistance will help achieve the city's housing goals. 
B.  Affordable Housing Agreement. Any incentives provided by the city, beyond those incentives to which a developer may be automatically entitled to shall require city council approval and shall be set out in an affordable housing agreement. The form and content of such agreement shall be to the approval of the city attorney and the community development director. Developers are further encouraged to utilize other local, state or federal assistance, when available, to meet the affordable housing standards. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.110 - Project application. 
A.  Method of Application. An applicant/developer proposing a project for which affordable housing is required shall submit a statement with the standard planning application, describing the inclusionary housing proposal. The developer's statement shall include: 
1.  A brief description of the proposal, including the method chosen to meet the inclusionary housing requirement, number, type and location of affordable units, term of affordability, preliminary calculation of in-lieu fees, or offer of land dedication; 
2.  How the proposal meets general plan policies and inclusionary housing requirements; 
3.  Plans and other exhibits showing preliminary site layout, grading, building elevations, parking and other site features, location of affordable dwelling units and (where applicable), market-rate dwelling unit; 
4.  Description of incentives requested, including exceptions from development standards, density bonuses, fee waivers or other incentives; and 
5.  Other information which the community development director determines necessary to adequately evaluate the proposal. 
B.  Director Response. After receiving a complete planning application, including an affordable housing proposal, the director shall respond to the applicant or developer's affordable housing proposal. The city response shall identify: 1) affordable housing issues and concerns; 2) incentives which the director can support when making a recommendation to the decision-making body; and 3) procedures which will need to be followed to comply with the inclusionary housing requirements. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.120 - Conditions of development approval. 
A.  Submittal of an Affordable Housing Agreement. Applicants and developers for development projects subject to this chapter shall, as a condition of development approval, prepare and submit an affordable housing agreement for city approval. The draft agreement shall be reviewed by the community development director and city attorney for compliance with project approvals, city policies and standards, and applicable codes. Following approval and signing of the agreement by the parties, the final agreement shall be recorded and relevant terms and conditions shall be recorded as a deed restriction on those lots or affordable units subject to affordability requirements. The affordable housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. 
B.  Agreements for Construction of Affordable Units. For development projects meeting their inclusionary requirement through construction of affordable dwelling units, the affordable housing agreement shall specify: 
1.  The number and location of affordable units; 
2.  The size (square footage), number of bedrooms, and design of the affordable units; 
3.  Terms of affordability; 
4.  Schedule for construction of the affordable units; 
5.  Incentives or other assistance to be provided by the city; 
6.  Where applicable, the procedures to be used for qualifying tenants or buyers, setting rental/sales costs, renting or selling units filling vacancies, and managing the units; and 
7.  Other terms or conditions requested by city. 
C.  Agreements for Real Property Dedication. For development projects meeting their inclusionary housing requirement through real property dedication, the agreement shall specify: 
1.  The method of conveyance, schedule, and appraised value of the proposed dedication; 
2.  Calculation of housing in-lieu fees otherwise applicable to the project at the time of recordation; 
3.  Title report and insurance; 
4.  Description of location, condition, improvements, and other relevant factors applying to the property; and 
5.  Other information required by the city. 
D.  Payment of In-Lieu Fees. An affordable housing agreement shall not be required for projects which meet their inclusionary housing requirement through the payment of in-lieu fees. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.130 - Program requirements. 
Only households qualifying as very low, low or moderate income, pursuant to the affordable housing standards, shall be eligible to rent, purchase or occupy inclusionary units developed or funded in compliance with this requirement. For sale inclusionary housing units shall be owner occupied for the term of the affordable housing agreement. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.140 - Construction of units to avoid overconcentration. 
The following principles shall apply to the development of inclusionary housing: (1) The development proposal shall provide for the dispersal of inclusionary units to the maximum extent feasible. (2) Multifamily buildings may contain any proportion of inclusionary units, but no inclusionary housing development should be located to or in the immediate vicinity of another inclusionary housing development. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.150 - Eligibility screening. 
The city or other housing provider designated by the city shall screen prospective renters or buyers of affordable units. Renters or buyers of affordable units shall enter into an agreement with city or other housing provider to comply with the affordable housing standards. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.160 - Affordability restrictions. 
Developers of affordable units for sale shall specify the type of affordability restriction to be applied. These restrictions may include, inclusionary housing agreements, promissory notes, deeds of trust, resale restrictions, rights of first refusal, options to purchase and/or other documents, which shall be recorded against the inclusionary units. The developer may participate in a shared equity purchase program. Affordable rental units shall be available in perpetuity. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.170 - Affordability term. 
The term of the covenant shall be at least forty-five years from the date of the covenant. If an owner occupies the unit for the full term, the controls expire and the owner may sell the unit to any buyer for any price. However, if the owner sells the unit during the term of the covenant, the new owner will be required to sign and record a new covenant which begins a new forty-five-year period of price and occupancy restrictions. This requirement will continue for each new owner of the unit, but in no event will the total period of controls exceed ninety years. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.180 - Shared equity purchase program. 
Under this program, the qualified buyer of designated affordable dwelling unit shall enter into a shared equity agreement with the city. Such agreement shall be recorded as a second trust deed against the purchase property, at no interest, securing and stating the city's equity share in the property. The city's equity share shall be calculated by the community development director, and shall be the decimal percentage of the property's value resulting from: 
A.  The difference between the property's market value and the actual price paid by the homeowner, divided by the market value, and/or when applicable; 
B.  The amount of subsidy provided by the city to the homeowner to purchase the property, divided by the property's market value. 
Upon sale, the city's equity share shall be repaid to the city from the proceeds of the sale, less the city's percentage share of title insurance, escrow fees and documentary transfer taxes, at the close of escrow. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.190 - Early resale of shared equity properties. 
In the event of "early resale," owners of properties subject to the shared equity purchase program shall either 1) pay an equity recapture fee to the city as described in the schedule below, in addition to the city's equity share, or 2) sell the property to another eligible household. "Early resale" means the sale, lease or transfer of property within five years of the initial close of escrow. If owner chooses to pay the equity recapture fee, the recapture fee shall be paid to the city upon resale at close of escrow, based on the following schedule: 
Year 	% of Equity 
Build-up Recaptured 
0—2 	100% 
3 	75% 
4 	50% 
5 	25% 
6 and after 	0% 
 
The recapture amount shall be determined prior to the calculation of escrow closing costs. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.200 - Subordination of city financing. 
A.  When the city provides low interest financing to assist affordable housing projects and the buyers of individual units, the city's financing is almost always secured by a deed of trust recorded subordinate to financing from other institutions. Often the owners wish to refinance the senior institutional financing to obtain a lower interest rate while keeping the city's loan in place. In such cases, the new lender requires the city to subordinate its deed of trust to the new financing, so the new financing retains priority in the event of default. 
B.  Generally the city will approve subordination requests when: 
1.  The borrower is refinancing solely for the purpose of obtaining a lower interest rate; 
2.  The borrower is taking no cash out of the transaction; 
3.  The new institutional loan is fully amortized with no balloon payment; and 
4.  The subordination does not place the city loan at greater risk. 
C.  Generally the city will not approve subordination requests when: 
1.  The senior institutional financing is deferred or only partially amortized, and the borrower proposes to take cash out of the transaction; 
2.  The new institutional financing may result in negative amortization (unless the city is satisfied that there is adequate owner equity (at least twenty to twenty-five percent) and excellent credit history); 
3.  The subordination places the city loan at significantly greater risk; 
4.  The borrower is not in full compliance with the city's affordability requirements; or 
5.  The refinancing exceeds the value of affordability as determined by the calculation of value and resale price. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.210 - Calculation of value and resale price. 
The affordable units must remain affordable to very low, low or moderate income households in the community. Affordability is assured upon the sale of any affordable unit through the covenant, which sets forth the formula for calculating the maximum allowable price at any given time and/or upon resale. 
A.  Standard Value/Resale Formula. To set the price of the unit at any given time or upon resale, staff starts with the price paid by the current owner and increases that price by the percentage increase in area median income (AMI) during the period in which the owner owned the property. Below is a formula to calculate the value of the unit: 
(FMV of market home - affordable unit value) × (2.222% × (year affordable unit built - year affordable unit sold) = home value/equity) 
For purposes of this section, fair market value of market home shall mean the appraised value of a home equivalent in size and number of bedrooms and bathrooms of that of the affordable unit. The value of the affordable unit may be determined for purposes of resale, refinancing, and/or accessing a line of credit on the home. At no time shall refinancing of the unit or access to a line of credit exceed the value of the affordable unit. The owner of the affordable unit is responsible for the full cost of the appraisal. The city must certify the appraisal but reserves the right to challenge the market rate value. 
B.  Mid-Year Adjustment. The value of the unit is typically established annually. To allow for some projected increase in valuation/sales price within a calendar year, the following calculation shall be allowed: 
Standard allowed percentage × # of months = mid-year percentage rate 
For example, if an affordable unit was sold in August, and the standard allowed percentage is 2.222% the mid-year adjustment would be calculated as follows: 
2.222% × (9 months/12 months) = 1.666% 
If the seller had bought the affordable unit for two hundred fifty thousand dollars, the mid-year adjustment would amount to an increased value of four thousand one hundred sixty-five dollars. 
C.  Sale Prior to Expiration of Forty-Five Year. If the owner sells the unit during the term of the covenant, the new owner will be required to sign and record a new covenant which begins a new forty-five-year period of price and occupancy restrictions. 
To sales price of the unit cannot exceed either 1) the value of the unit as determined through calculation of value and resale price in subsection A of this section, or 2) a price established by agency which will make such home available for purchase at affordable housing costs to household of very low, low or moderate income, or 3) HCD's income guidelines for very low, low or moderate, income, whichever is applicable, at the time of sale. The maximum allowable sale price in each category must be affordable to a hypothetical buyer in that income category. The price is set such that the buyers' monthly payments for mortgage, taxes and insurance do not exceed forty-three percent of the buyer's target income (See Exhibit A). 
The formula to calculate the unit value includes assumptions for interest rate, property taxes and insurance, which can be updated annually based on market changes. It also varies with changes in the AMI, which is updated annually. 
To determine the value of the homes based on the monthly mortgage as calculated in Exhibit A, a calculation will have to be determined working backwards assuming a forty-three percent debt to equity ratio. A mortgage lender will calculate the value of the home based on the mortgage as outlined in the schedule with a debt to equity ratio. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.220 - Management and monitoring. 
Inclusionary rental units shall be managed and operated by the property owner, or the owner's agent, for the term of the affordable housing agreement. Sufficient documentation shall be submitted to ensure compliance with this chapter, to the satisfaction of the community development director. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.230 - Enforcement and appeals. 
A.  Enforcement. No final subdivision map shall be approved, nor building permit issued, nor shall any other development entitlement be granted for a development project which does not meet these requirements. No inclusionary unit shall be rented or sold except in accordance with these requirements and the affordable housing standards. 
B.  Appeals. The community development director shall administer and interpret these requirements, subject to applicable codes and city procedures. Decisions of the director are appealable, subject to the zoning ordinance appeal provisions. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
17.41.240 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of the provision to other persons or situations shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 620 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 17.42 - ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATES—CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS—VARIANCES 
Sections: 
 
17.42.010 - Certificates of zoning compliance. 
No person shall occupy or use a building, structure or site, or carry on any activity in any such building, structure or site, other than a dwelling unit, until the planning director has issued a certificate of zoning compliance certifying that in all respects the building and site, and the activity to be conducted therein, is in full conformance with the provisions of this title for the district in question, including all of the conditions attached to the issuance of a conditional use permit or a variance, as well as to all conditions attached to an approval by the architectural review committee, when such approval is required. The certificate shall be issued upon the completion of the building or structure, or prior to the commencement of any use of land not requiring the construction of a building. No separate application need be made for said certificate. Whenever the use of a building or land shall change from the activity for which a certificate of zoning compliance was issued to a different use, a new certificate of zoning compliance shall be secured. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.015 - Temporary use permit. 
A.  Purpose. To ensure the protection, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, while still providing for their pleasure and convenience. The planning director may issue a permit for the establishment of temporary uses within the city in accordance with the following procedure and conditions; however, at the discretion of the planning director, or at the request of the planning commission, any application may be referred to the planning commission for consideration. 
B.  Temporary Use Permit Required. Prior to the establishment of any temporary uses identified in subsection C of this section on any lot or parcel in the city, a temporary use permit shall be obtained from the community development department: 
1.  Temporary use permit requests shall be submitted to the community development department no later than thirty days prior to the event to allow proper review by affected city departments; 
2.  Temporary use permits shall be issued no more than four times within a calendar year to any individual, agency, business or corporation. 
C.  Allowable Temporary Uses. The following uses, and uses determined by the planning director to be similar, may be allowed subject to first obtaining a temporary use permit: 
1.  Sales offices for the sale of new homes, when located on the site of an approved residential subdivision; 
2.  Commercial carnivals, circuses, musical concerts and similar events and congregations of people when conducted on private property and when involving more than one hundred people; 
3.  Commercial Christmas tree lots, Halloween pumpkin sales, Fourth of July fireworks, food stands, promotions and sales taking place on public or private properties; 
4.  Commercial car washes, of no more than four days each month at any location; 
5.  Street closures, farmers markets, or craft shows of not more than four days per month, taking place on public property or private properties, in appropriately zoned commercial areas and when having obtained any other necessary approvals including, but not limited to, the following: Obtaining a business license, health department permit, or ABC temporary license where applicable. Requirements shall be determined upon internal city review of the temporary use permit application; 
a.  Events taking place on public property within the city of Soledad shall require proof of insurance in an amount specified by the city attorney naming the city of Soledad as additionally insured, 
b.  For-profit entities shall be required to pay the temporary use application fee and any other associated fees required to process the temporary use permit request, 
c.  For-profit entities shall be required to pay for any services provided by the city, 
d.  Non-profit entities shall be exempt from the payment of temporary use permit fees. However, non-profit entities shall be required to present the city of Soledad with proof of IRS non-profit status. 
D.  Exempt Temporary Uses. The following temporary uses are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit, but shall obtain and sign an over the counter regulations form available at the city of Soledad city hall and may be subject to additional fees and requirements as deemed applicable: 
1.  Celebrations and similar events including vendors and services, and congregations of people when conducted on a city park and when having obtained a city park reservation; 
a.  For-profit entities are required to meet the city of Soledad's insurance and business license requirements, 
b.  Non-profit entities are required to show proof of insurance, as well as documentation of IRS non-profit status, 
c.  Parties of twenty people or less, held by private citizens, are not required to meet the city of Soledad's insurance requirement, and need only obtain a city park reservation; 
2.  Contractors construction yards located on the site of an approved construction project; 
3.  Contractors mobile office, when located on the site of an approved construction project; 
4.  City co-sponsored events in combination with non-profit entities requesting in-kind services; 
a.  All fee waiver requests shall be reviewed and determined by the city council, 
b.  Events requesting the use of city staff or equipment for "in-kind" services shall be reviewed and determined by the city council; 
5.  Temporary use activities conducted entirely within a structure or yard area that is legally occupied by an existing business or organization including churches and educational facilities; however, for-profits may be required to obtain a city of Soledad business license prior to the commencement of the event; 
6.  Car washes not exceeding two days per month at any location; 
7.  Emergency facilities and offices providing for public health needs, disaster coordination for such events as earthquakes, fires, floods, etc. 
E.  Permit Applications and Issuance. Applications for temporary use permits initiated by for-profit entities shall be subject to the fee established for a Class I use permit and shall be submitted on forms maintained by the community development department. Information requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis at the time of application: 
1.  Temporary use permit requests shall include a written statement of operations sufficient for the planning director to fully understand the request including but not limited to the following: A site plan illustrating the location and arrangement of the proposed use, internal and external pedestrian and vehicular access, signage, lighting, the placement of trash receptacles, restroom facilities, proposed security measures, and potentially affected adjacent land uses; 
2.  A temporary use permit may be issued for a maximum period of one year upon a written report, accepted by the applicant, containing the findings set forth in Section 17.42.050 and incorporating such conditions as determined by the planning director to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
F.  Conditions of Site Following Use. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use and shall thereafter be used in compliance with these regulations. The planning director may require a bond or other financial security to ensure compliance with this subsection. Upon determination that the site has been restored to its original condition, the full amount of the security shall be returned to the applicant within thirty days of the termination of the use. If the site has not been restored to the original condition, the city shall have the right to apply up to the full amount of the security to the cost of site cleaning and restoration. 
(Ord. 608 § 2, 2004: Ord. 568 § 3, 2000)  
17.42.020 - Application for conditional use permit or variance. 
Application for a conditional use permit or a variance may be made to the planning commission by the owner of record of property for which the conditional use permit or variance is sought, or by an agent having written authorization from the owner to do so, on a form prescribed by the planning commission and shall be accompanied by maps, drawings and information required to demonstrate that the conditions under which such a permit may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter apply to the subject property. Application for a conditional use permit or variance shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount specified from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.030 - Public hearing and notice. 
Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the planning director shall set a date for a public hearing by the planning commission, which shall be held within forty-five days after the date of filing of the application. Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant, to owners of record of real property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to occupants of said real property, if other than the owner. The notice shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The address or location of the subject property; 
C.  The time and place of the hearing; 
D.  A brief description of the permit or variance being sought; 
E.  Reference to the application on file for particulars; and 
F.  A statement that any interested person may appear and be heard. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.040 - Action by planning commission. 
At the time and place set for the hearing the planning commission shall hear evidence for or against the application, and may continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing the commission shall make findings and render its decision on the application, and notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to any other person requesting notice. A conditional use permit shall take effect ten days following the mailing of the notice of decision, unless an appeal of the decision is filed as provided in Chapter 17.46. 
(Ord. 608 § 3, 2004: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.050 - Use permits—Planning commission granting authority—Findings required. 
An application for a use permit may be granted by the planning commission if it finds: 
A.  That the proposed use will be consistent with the general plan and all applicable specific plans adopted by the city; and 
B.  That under the circumstances of the particular case the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, or detrimental to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.060 - Variance—Findings and conditions. 
The planning commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this title applicable within any district if, from the application and the evidence presented at the public hearing, it finds: 
A.  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the subject property that do not apply generally to property in the same district and in the vicinity; 
B.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, and to prevent unreasonable property loss or unnecessary hardship; and 
C.  That the granting of the application will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.42.070 - Duration—Revocation—Transferability. 
A.  A conditional use permit or variance becomes null and void if not used within one year following its effective date, or within such shorter time as is specifically prescribed as a condition of the conditional use permit or variance. The planning commission may, without hearing, extend the time for a maximum period of one additional year only, upon application filed with it before the expiration of the one year or shorter period. 
B.  In any case where the conditions of a conditional use permit or variance have not been or are not being complied with, the planning commission shall give written notice to the permittee of intention to revoke the conditional use permit or variance and shall set a date for a public hearing upon such proposed revocation. The notice shall be served on the owner of the subject property by mailing the notice to the owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, and specify the time and place when and where it will be held. Following the hearing, and if the planning commission finds that there is good cause therefor, the commission may revoke the conditional use permit or variance. 
C.  Unless specifically provided otherwise as a condition of a conditional use permit or variance, a valid use permit or variance granted pursuant to this chapter is transferable to the successors in interest of the original grantee.  
17.42.080 - Penalty for use permit and variance violations—Continuing violations. 
The violation by any person of any provision or condition of a use permit or variance granted under the terms of this title is an infraction, punishable as provided in Section 1.04.030 of this code. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such a violation is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.43 - SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
17.43.010 - Purpose and scope. 
A.  Purpose. The city finds that control of the size, design, and location of signs is necessary to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform sign regulations in the city to: 
1.  Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by regulating the design, character, location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination, and maintenance of signs; 
2.  Eliminate traffic safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists caused by signs that would create distractions or reduce visibility; 
3.  Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; 
4.  Generally limit commercial signage in order to protect the aesthetic environment from the visual clutter associated with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, while providing channels of communication to the public; 
5.  Allow the communication of information for commercial and noncommercial purposes without regulating the content of noncommercial messages; 
6.  Allow the expression of political, religious, and other noncommercial speech at all times and allow for an increase in the quantity of such expression in the period preceding elections; 
7.  Respect and protect the right of free speech by sign display, while reasonably regulating the structural, locational, and other noncommunicative aspects of signs, generally for the public health, safety, welfare, and, specifically, in promoting traffic and pedestrian safety and community aesthetics; and 
8.  Enable the fair, consistent, and efficient enforcement of the sign regulations of the city. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this section apply to all permanent and temporary signs located in the city. Where this section is inconsistent with any other provision contained in this code, the provisions of this section shall control except as otherwise provided by this title. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, in all cases where the inconsistency relates to the structural safety of a sign, the provisions of the California building codes as adopted by the city shall be controlling. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.020 - Sign permits required. 
A.  Requirement for Sign Permit. No person shall erect any temporary or permanent sign upon any billboard, fence, post, pole, tree, building or other structure within the city, without first obtaining a sign permit from the community development director issued in conformity with the provisions of this section, except as otherwise provided. For purposes of this section, an existing sign that is moved shall be considered to be a new sign. Every sign permit expires and becomes null and void if installation of the sign is not commenced within six months from the date the permit is issued, unless associated with an active building permit or discretionary approval. 
B.  Application for Permit. An application for a permit for each sign or master sign plan shall be made to the community development director in such form and containing such information as the director may prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner, lessee, or person having possession of the property upon which the sign is to be located. 
C.  Master Sign Plan Required. Approval of a master sign plan by the architectural review committee is required for a shopping center, business park or buildings with three or more nonresidential tenants on a single site. The master sign plan shall conform to all provisions of this chapter except as may otherwise be provided herein. Once approved, all individual business or tenant signs in that center, complex or building shall conform to the master sign plan. 
D.  Permit Fee. Fees for issuance and/or renewal of sign permits shall be paid to the director in accordance with a schedule of fees established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
E.  Waiver of Permit Fees and Bond Requirements. Permit fees and removal bond requirements may be waived by the city council with respect to temporary signs conforming to the provisions of this section when erected or posted by nonprofit civic, religious, educational, charitable, historical or cultural groups or organizations in connection with public events conducted by or participated in by such organizations. Such signs shall remain subject to the permit requirement, but any number of such signs may be covered by a single permit. The permit shall require the permittee to remove all signs posted or erected thereunder within a period of time stated in the permit, or to pay all costs incurred by the city in removing the same. The permit application shall include the agreement of the person signing the application, and of the organization he or she represents, binding them jointly and severally to pay such costs to the city, on demand. 
F.  Permit Issuance and Design Approval. It is the duty of the community development director, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to examine the plans and specifications and other submitted data, and the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be located. If it appears that the proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this section and other laws and ordinances of the city, the community development director shall approve the application, except that the director shall refer to the architectural review committee for approval: (1) signs that are considered to be of such unusual style, composition or configuration as to require design approval by that body; or (2) signs in a H-C highway commercial, C-C community commercial or M-Industrial district or on lots exceeding one acre in area in any district as provided by Section 17.43.080 herein. 
G.  Architectural Review Committee Review and Action. The architectural review committee shall review the plans, specifications, and data submitted to it by the community development director and shall recommend, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the other laws and ordinances of the city. 
H.  Exceptions Allowed. Exceptions to the maximum height and sign area provisions of this chapter may be approved by the community development director or architectural review committee provided that such exception is for a permitted sign and does not exceed the maximum height and/or area limitation by ten percent, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
I.  Revocation of Permit. Any permit issued under this section may be revoked by the planning commission, or the city council if the city council was the approving body, when it is shown by satisfactory proof that the application for the permit contained any material misrepresentation of fact, or that the sign was erected or used in any manner not in substantial compliance with the plans, specifications or location as shown in the application and accompanying data, or that it was erected or used in a manner not in substantial compliance with any condition, restriction, provision or modification imposed by the architectural review committee in approving the application. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.030 - Sign area measurement. 
Sign area shall be determined by measuring the area or square footage within the smallest rectangle or rectilinear perimeter of a sign face, excluding the sign framework, base or supporting structure, unless the base or supporting structure of the sign is part of the message presentation. The area of a pylon sign shall be the sum of the square footage of the individual cabinet signs, excluding air gaps. In computing the area of a double-face sign, only one face shall be included, provided that the two faces are approximately of the same size and approximately parallel to each other and not more than two feet apart at any point. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.040 - Requirements for temporary signs. 
A.  Bond Required. Except as otherwise provided, issuance of a temporary sign permit shall require a cash or surety bond in favor of the city to guarantee the removal of each sign within the time limitations specified in the permit, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Bond Forfeiture. Signs that are not removed within seven days of the time specified in the permit may be removed by the community development director, in which case the bond is forfeited. 
C.  A temporary sign permit authorizes the erection and maintenance of the sign or signs for a period not to exceed thirty days. Within five days of expiring, a temporary sign permit, other than for special events and grand openings, may be renewed for one additional maximum period of thirty days. Shorter limitations on length of display may be enacted by other provisions of this section. No more than one temporary sign permit with extension may be issued to a business during a six-month period for banners advertising special promotions or sales. 
D.  Temporary signs shall be affixed to the principal building and shall not project above the roofline. Temporary signs on windows shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the total window area. 
E.  Temporary signs not relating to a business conducted on the premises shall not exceed four square feet in area per sign, or five in number. 
F.  The city shall not grant additional sign permits for election signs nor allow additional election signs under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.050 - Exempted signs. 
A.  No permit or removal bond is required for any of the following types of signs, but such signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
1.  Public signs and notices required or specifically authorized by law, statute or ordinance, which may be of any type, number, size or location as required or authorized by such law, statute or ordinance; 
2.  Government signs for control of traffic or other regulatory purpose, street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, city entrance identification signs, signs for designation or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or to a public service, property or facility, and signs of public service companies; 
3.  Decorations commonly associated with any national, state, or local holidays or city-sponsored events; provided, that such decorations shall be displayed for a period not exceeding forty-five consecutive days, and no more than sixty days in any one calendar year; 
4.  Address numbers and nameplates with letters not exceeding six inches high in residential districts and two feet high in other districts; 
5.  One sign not to exceed two square feet in area for any main building; 
6.  A sign posted or erected on private property on behalf of candidates for public office or measures on election ballots as permitted by Section 17.43.160; 
7.  Signs four square feet or less in area which provide direction or instruction, which are located entirely on the property to which they pertain, and which do not in any way advertise a business; also signs four square feet or less in area identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrance and exit signs, and those of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.060 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the following signs are prohibited: 
1.  Moving signs or structures having a visible moving part or visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or kinetic means, including intermittent electrical pulsation, or by action of normal wind currents. However, an exception is allowed for any such sign not exceeding twenty-five square feet in area, and, consistent with any applicable state standards. The planning commission or city council may approve other exceptions to this prohibition if all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The sign will be consistent with the character of the neighborhood; 
b.  The sign will not result in a distraction to drivers; 
c.  The sign will not cause reflection or glare onto any residential property; 
2.  Banners, pennants, searchlights, twirling signs, sandwich boards, balloons or other gas-filled figures, except those which are temporary and for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section; provided, that no such permit shall be issued for a period longer than thirty days; 
3.  Roof signs, including any temporary sign located on or extending above the roof of a building, except that an exception to this prohibition may be approved by the planning commission or city council through approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.42 of this title; 
4.  Any sign affixed to a vehicle and protruding more than one foot from the surface of the vehicle, or affixed in such a position or manner that the vehicle is rendered inoperable; 
5.  Any sign which does not identify or relate to any business or other activity being conducted on the premises; 
6.  Signs constructed in such a way that any light bulb or filament, other than neon tubing or other self-illuminating material of equivalent or less intensity, is visible from the front of the sign or from beyond the property line; 
7.  Signs displaying obscene, indecent, or immoral matter or untruthful advertising matter; 
8.  Signs which purport to be, or are, an imitation of, or resemble, official traffic signs or other safety signs and attempt to govern traffic or other public activity in public streets, rights-of-way, or other public places. This does not include traffic or directional signs installed on the premises to control traffic within the premises. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.070 - Restrictions on location. 
All signs shall comply with the following location requirements: 
A.  Public Property. 
1.  No person shall paint, mark, attach, post, or otherwise affix any sign to or upon any public property within the city, and any person responsible for doing so is liable for all costs incurred by the city for the removal thereof, which are a debt to the city. "Public property," as used in this section, includes public rights-of-way, including streets, sidewalks, planter strips, curbs, bridges, overpasses, underpasses, street lamp poles, electric light or telephone or telegraph poles and wires appurtenant thereto, street signs, traffic signs, public informational or directional signs and fire hydrants; publicly owned parking lots; publicly owned landscaped areas; public parks and playgrounds and all buildings and facilities appurtenant thereto; and all other public places and property of a similar nature. 
2.  The provisions of this section shall not apply, however, to the painting of house numbers on street curbs, to the installation of a metal plaque or similar device in a sidewalk or wall to commemorate an event of historical or local importance, or to the installation of sidewalks of terrazzo or similar construction containing a design or an admixture of colors, or both, provided that in each such case all permits required by this chapter are first obtained; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to marquee signs or to projecting signs which comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Fire Escapes, Etc. No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of the sign or its support is attached to or will interfere with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe, or obstruct any required stairway, door, ventilator or window. 
C.  Marquees, Etc. No sign shall be placed on the top or on any nonvertical surface of any marquee, porch, walkway covering, or similar covering structure adjacent to a building. 
D.  Traffic Interference. No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it will or reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead vehicular traffic, within a triangular area formed by the curb lines and a line connecting them at points thirty-five feet from the intersection of the curb lines, unless the sign is in compliance with the provisions of this section and has a clearance of at least ten feet above curb grade and no part of its means of support has a single or combined horizontal cross-section exceeding eight inches. 
E.  Vehicle Signs. If a sign exceeding eight square feet is posted or otherwise displayed on a vehicle and is left on either private or public property for longer than seventy-two hours, the sign shall be tantamount to a sign affixed to real property and the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.080 - Regulations by district. 
Excluding temporary signs and exempt signs, no permit shall be issued for, and it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain any sign of a type not authorized for the district in which it is located, or in number greater than authorized for the district in which it is located, or containing an area greater than authorized for the district in which it is located, according to the following provisions: 
A.  Residential Districts. 
1.  For all residences, permissible signs include an address sign, and one wall sign not to exceed two square feet per main building. 
2.  Apartments, PUD residential developments, planned mobile home parks, and condominium townhouse developments, permissible signs are those permitted in the site plan or development plan approved pursuant to the provisions of the subdivision ordinance, or as part of a discretionary or other permit approval. In all other cases, one wall sign or one freestanding sign, as permitted by this section, not to exceed fifteen square feet in area, for identification of the premises; and freestanding signs not exceeding five feet in height nor four square feet in area, as required for directing traffic on the property. 
B.  Nonresidential districts, except as noted, permissible signs include: 
1.  One projecting sign as permitted by subsection (A)(3) of Section 17.43.110; 
2.  In addition, wall or marquee signs, as permitted by Section 17.43.090, or freestanding signs as permitted by Section 17.43.120, having a combined total area of not more than one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage on a public street; 
3.  Shopping centers, office and other multi-tenant buildings outside of the downtown specific plan area. Shopping centers and office buildings and complexes, shall be considered as one entity, except that each separate business therein having its own entrance may be considered as a separate entity and shall be allowed one wall or marquee sign at the front of the business premises, and, if there is a second entrance to the premises from a public road, walkway, or parking area, one additional sign on the wall having the second entrance. The total area of a front sign shall not exceed 1.25 square foot for each lineal foot of frontage, up to a maximum of two hundred fifty square feet, and shall not occupy more than seventy-five percent of the height or length of a building fascia. The area of any additional sign for premises having a second entrance shall not exceed one-half of the area of the front sign placed on the same premises; 
4.  Multi-tenant buildings or centers located in commercial districts outside of the boundaries of the downtown specific plan area, or in industrial districts, or on lots which exceed one acre in size in any district outside the downtown area. Permit applications shall be reviewed and, decided on a case-by-case basis by the architectural review committee, which shall be guided by the general requirements set forth in this section; 
5.  Within the downtown specific plan area: 
a.  Tenant spaces of less than six thousand square feet: Maximum wall sign area twenty-five square feet for single-occupant buildings, and fifteen square feet per business occupant for multiple-occupant buildings, 
b.  Tenant spaces of six thousand square feet or greater: Maximum wall sign area is one square foot of sign per lineal foot of longest property frontage, and one-half square foot of sign area per lineal foot of side street frontage; 
6.  Open Space Districts. Permitted signs include one wall or freestanding sign, not exceeding eight square feet in area, to designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the sign is situated, or to identify such premises. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.090 - General requirements for wall signs. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every wall sign shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Maximum Area. Except as otherwise provided by Section 17.430.080, the maximum wall sign area for each building face is one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage, up to but not exceeding two hundred fifty square feet. 
2.  Thickness or Projection. No part of such sign, including light box or other structural or operating part, shall project more than one foot from the face of the wall on which it is mounted. 
3.  Height. No structural or operating part of the sign shall extend beyond the top level of the wall upon which it is mounted. Any wall sign which projects over any public or private walkway shall have an overhead clearance of at least ten feet. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.100 - Window signs. 
A.  Window signs appurtenant to the business or activity being conducted on the premises are permitted, subject to approval by the architectural review committee and the following regulations and limitations: 
1.  Window signs will be considered as wall signs for the purpose of computing the total area of wall signs on a building. 
2.  Where individual letter, neon tube, or other borderless copy is mounted so that the window frame is visually the frame of the sign, the area of the sign will be considered the area of the window within which the copy is mounted. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.110 - Requirements for projecting signs. 
A.  Projecting signs shall be permitted only in commercial and industrial districts, and then only when approved by the architectural review committee. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every projecting sign shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Maximum Area. The maximum projecting sign area for each building face is twenty-five square feet. 
2.  Maximum Height. No part of any projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension exceeding twelve feet, nor shall it extend above the top level of the parapet wall upon or in front of which it is situated. Any projecting sign which projects over any public or private walkway shall have an overhead clearance of at least ten feet. 
3.  Number. There shall be no more than one projecting sign for each place of business or each building face fronting on a public street. 
B.  Multisided projecting signs constructed back-to-back, with faces on both sides of a single panel, shall count as only one sign, both as to number and area, i.e., only one side need be counted. Every other projecting sign having multiple sides or faces, including a sign constructed in the form of a cylinder or sphere or similar figure, shall be limited in total area to that set forth in this subsection. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.120 - Requirements for freestanding signs. 
A.  Freestanding signs over five feet in height shall be permitted only in commercial and industrial districts and then only when approved by the architectural review committee. 
1.  Maximum Area. The maximum area of all such signs shall be twenty-five square feet for frontage of up to one hundred lineal feet, plus one square foot for each additional lineal foot of building frontage, up to a maximum of two hundred square feet. 
2.  Maximum Height. No such sign shall exceed thirty feet in height in the C-1 district, or sixty feet in height in the CC, HC, C-2, and M, districts, measured from ground level. 
3.  Location. No such sign shall be located closer than five feet to a front, side or rear property line. 
4.  Number. Other than permitted monument signs, only one freestanding sign shall be allowed for each place of business or occupancy. In the case of a shopping center, industrial park, or similar development, the entire development shall for this purpose be considered a single place of business. 
5.  Multisided Signs. Freestanding signs constructed back-to-back, with faces on both sides of a single panel, shall count as only one sign, both as to number and area, i.e., only one side need be counted. Every other freestanding sign having multiple sides of faces, including a sign constructed in the form of a cylinder or sphere or similar figure, shall be limited in total area to that set forth in this subsection. 
B.  Monument signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  In commercial districts within the downtown specific plan area: Maximum area for monument signs is twelve square feet; maximum height is six feet. 
2.  In industrial districts and commercial outside the downtown specific plan area: Maximum area is thirty-two square feet; maximum height is eight feet. 
3.  Maximum number of signs allowed per business or multi-tenant center: One sign per each street frontage with one additional sign for every additional two hundred fifty feet of street frontage. 
4.  For shopping centers and other multi-tenant centers or buildings, the total area of monuments signs is in addition to the maximum allowable sign area. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.130 - Signs on awnings. 
Where appurtenant to a permitted use, and in circumstances where a retractable or fixed awning has been permitted, signs may be placed on the awning subject to approval by the architectural review committee and to the following regulations and limitations: 
A.  Signs consisting of one line of letters not exceeding twelve inches in height may be placed on the hanging border of an awning. The area of an awning sign shall be included in the computation of the total area of wall signs on the building to which the awning is attached. Signs placed elsewhere on the awning are not permitted. 
B.  Signs on awnings shall be painted on or placed flat against the awning material and shall not project more than two inches from the awning surface. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.140 - Wall graphics. 
Special Permit Required. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, wall graphics and graphic decorative displays which occupy a major part or all of a building wall or facade and comprise an integral part of the building color scheme or design, including those incorporating signage advertising a business being conducted on the premises, may be allowed by special permit issued by the architectural review committee, as follows: 
A.  Application for such permit shall contain such information as the architectural review committee requires and shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A detailed sketch, drawn to scale, showing the colors to be used and showing the facades of other buildings within a lateral distance of one hundred fifty feet of the site or to the nearest corner, if such corner is less than one hundred fifty feet distant; 
2.  The written consent of the owners and occupants, or their authorized representatives, of not less than fifty percent of the property situated on the same street and within three hundred feet of the sign, the percentage to be computed on the basis of frontage footage rather than area; and 
3.  The prescribed permit fee. 
B.  Upon receipt of such application the architectural review committee shall hold at least one public hearing upon the same and shall give at least ten working days' prior written notice thereof by mail to each owner and to each occupant of real property situated within three hundred feet of the site. 
C.  If at the conclusion of the public hearing the architectural review committee finds the proposed graphic display to be consistent with the general and specific plans adopted for the district in which the site is located, and consistent with the purposes and objectives of this title, it may issue a permit upon such conditions as it may deem proper, including conditions requiring periodic renewal. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.150 - Special purpose signs. 
Signs for the special purposes set forth in this subsection are permitted, subject to permit requirements and the following specific requirements: 
A.  For-Sale or For-Lease Signs. In all districts, signs may be erected on real estate advertising such real estate for sale or lease, provided they are in compliance with the provisions of this section. In residential districts such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area. In all other districts, the area of such signs shall not exceed seventy-five square feet. In lieu of a temporary sign permit for each sign, an annual permit for such signs may be issued to any person; such signs shall not be limited in number, but the fee charged for the permit shall be based on the maximum number of signs specified in the permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, on any residential property, one "for sale by property owner sign" not exceeding two square feet in area is exempt from the permit requirements of this subsection. A temporary sign permit is required for any "for sale by property owner" sign between two and six square feet in area. 
B.  Directory Signs. In all districts where group occupancies in office or commercial buildings are permitted, directory signs may be erected displaying the names of the occupants of a building. Such signs shall be situated at least two feet inside the front property line, shall not exceed eight feet in height, and shall have a total area not exceeding seventy-five square feet. 
C.  Construction Project Signs. Signs may be erected in conjunction with construction projects for the purpose of publicizing the future occupants of the building or the architects, engineers, contractors and lenders participating in the project. In residential districts no such sign shall exceed twelve square feet in area, nor shall any such freestanding sign exceed five feet in height. In other districts the maximum sign area shall not exceed seventy-five square feet. All such signs shall be removed before a final release and certificate of occupancy is issued by the building official. 
D.  Directional Signs Greater Than Four Square Feet. Directional signs may be erected to facilitate or control the efficient and safe movement of pedestrians or vehicles on private property. Such signs shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not display the name or insignia of any person, firm, product or service. Each such sign shall be located on the property to which it pertains, shall have an area of not more than eight square feet, shall not exceed four feet in height, and shall be located at least five feet from the nearest property line. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.160 - Requirements for election signs. 
The purpose of this section is to achieve a fair and reasonable accommodation between the public's interest in full and vigorous debate of election issues and candidates, and the community's interest in public order, cleanliness and community aesthetics. 
A.  Size. Election signs shall be eight square feet or less. No more than one election sign shall be attached per sign post or stake in order to avoid circumstances in which multiple signs are affixed to a single sign or post creating an overall display in excess of eight square feet for any single candidate or combination of candidates. Similarly, it shall be prohibited to assemble several eight square foot or less signs, either edge-to-edge or where separated by minimal space, to create a display for a single candidate or combination of candidates in excess of eight square feet. 
B.  Time Limit. Election signs may be displayed in connection with an election for up to seven days following the election to which they relate. After said election, signs shall be removed except that, if an election sign pertains not only to a primary election but also to a succeeding general election, it may be displayed until seven days after the date of the general election. 
C.  Location. 
1.  No person shall erect or display or cause or authorize any person to erect or display any election sign on public property. Public property shall include but not be limited to: Public rights-of-way, public buildings, easements, public telephones, and walkways. Election signs on public property will be removed without notice. 
2.  No person shall erect or display, or cause or authorize any person to erect or display, any election sign on any property not owned or controlled by such person, unless authorized to do so by the owner or other person in control of such property. 
D.  Election signs shall not be regulated by Section 17.43.040 (Temporary Signs) of this code, and the city shall not grant additional sign permits or allow additional election signs under the provisions of Section 17.43.040 (Temporary Signs) of this code. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.170 - Classification of signs. 
Every sign erected or proposed to be erected shall be classified by the community development director in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any sign which does not clearly fall within one of the classifications provided in this section shall be placed in the classification which the sign, in view of its design, location and purpose, most nearly approximates, and the decision of the community development director in this regard is conclusive. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.180 - Construction and maintenance. 
All signs are subject to the following construction and maintenance requirements: 
A.  Safety Requirements. All signs shall be constructed, erected and maintained in compliance with the appropriate detailed provisions relative to construction, structural integrity and safety contained in the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Electrical Code, the Uniform Sign Code, and other applicable codes adopted by reference in Chapter 15.08 of this code, as well as in compliance with construction standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Maintenance Requirements. Every sign shall be kept in good and presentable condition at all times. Defective or deteriorated parts shall be replaced and painting, repainting, cleaning and other work of maintenance and repair shall be performed as needed to preserve the appearance and material condition of the sign. 
C.  Unsafe Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated, dilapidated or otherwise unsafe condition. The community development director may revoke the permit for any sign which is in violation of any of the requirements of this section and may proceed to abate the same if the owner or other person in control of the premises fails to correct the violation after being given notice to do so. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.190 - Abandoned signs. 
No person shall maintain, or permit to be maintained, on any premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign which has been abandoned. Any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a period of three months or more, and any sign which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present use of the premises, and any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer obtains, shall be presumed abandoned; provided, that such presumption shall not apply to premises in regular use on a seasonal basis. The community development director may revoke the permit for any abandoned sign and may abate the same if the owner or other person in control of the premises fails to do so after being given notice to abate. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.200 - Nonconforming signs. 
This section applies to every sign in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which violates or does not conform to the provisions of this section. 
A.  Amortization. Within the following time periods, all nonconforming signs within the city shall be altered, removed, or otherwise made to comply with the provisions of this section: 
1.  Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences, two years; 
2.  All other signs, five years; provided, that the following time periods apply to signs legally erected pursuant to a valid sign permit issued within two years immediately preceding the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title: 
a.  Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences, three years from permit date; 
b.  All other signs, seven years from permit date. 
3.  If a sign becomes nonconforming subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, either by reason of the annexation to the city of the territory within which the sign is located or by the amendment of this section to render such sign nonconforming, the period within which such sign must be altered, removed, or otherwise made to comply with the provisions of this section shall commence to run upon the effective date of such annexation, or of such amendment, or the date upon which the sign otherwise becomes nonconforming. 
B.  Alteration or Removal. Nonconforming signs shall either be made to conform with the provisions of this section or abated within the applicable period of time hereinabove in this section set forth. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the owner or person having control of the property upon which a nonconforming sign is located to maintain the same, or to allow the same to be maintained, on the property. The Community Development Director may revoke the permit for any such sign and may abate the same if the owner or other person in control of the premises, after being given notice to bring the sign into conformity or to abate the sign, does not do so. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.210 - Abatement procedures. 
When under any provision of this section a sign is required to be abated, the following procedures shall be followed: 
A.  Manner of Abatement. Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences shall be abated by removal of the paint constituting the sign or by permanently painting over it in such a way that the sign thereafter is or becomes invisible. Other signs shall be abated by removal of the sign, including the dependent structures and supports; or, pursuant to a sign permit duly issued, by modification, alteration or replacement thereof in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Notice to Owner. Except in cases of emergency, as provided in this subsection, before taking any abatement action, the community development director shall cause to be mailed to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located a notice informing the owner of the nature of the violation and ordering that the sign be abated within ten days after the date of mailing of the notice. The notice shall be addressed to the owner at his or her last-known address or at the owner's address as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll for the city. Such notification to the owner shall be deemed to be notification to the owner of the sign. The mailing of the notice shall be done primarily as a convenience to the owner, and the failure of the owner to receive the notice in no way impairs the effectiveness of the provisions of this section or the validity of any proceedings taken for the abatement of the sign. In case of emergency, when it is determined by the community development director that a sign is unsafe and an imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with the property owner or the owner of the sign, the foregoing notice requirement does not apply and the community development director may proceed immediately with the abatement of the sign. 
C.  Abatement by City. If the owner or other person having control of the property upon which a sign subject to abatement is located fails to abate the same within the period of time specified in the notice to the owner, the director may cause the sign to be abated as provided in this subsection, at the owner's expense. Any sign removed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal, and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with such removal, constitute a debt owed to the city by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property and may be recovered in an appropriate court action by the city, together with its costs of suit and attorneys' fees in the action. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
17.43.220 - Appeals. 
Appeals from decisions made or actions taken under the provisions of this section shall be made as follows: 
A.  Appeals to the Architectural Review Committee. Any affected person may appeal the action or decision of the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this section, to the architectural review committee by filing written notice of appeal with the secretary of the planning commission within fourteen days of the date of such action or decision. The secretary thereupon shall set the matter for hearing by the architectural review committee at the next available meeting, and shall cause written notice of hearing to be mailed to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal no less than five days prior to the date of hearing. 
B.  Appeals to City Council. Any affected person may appeal the action or decision of the architectural review committee or the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of this section, may appeal to the city council by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the date of such action or decision. The city clerk thereupon shall set the matter for hearing by the city council at the next available meeting, and shall cause written notice of hearing to be mailed to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal, and to the applicant (if the applicant is not the appellant) at the address stated in the application, not less than five days prior to the date of hearing. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 660 § 3 (Exbt. B) (part), 2008)  
Chapter 17.44 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.44.005 - Applicability. 
When a site plan review is required by this title, the procedures set out in this chapter apply. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.44.010 - Site plan. 
The purpose of the site plan is to enable the director to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformity with the intent and provisions of this division and to guide the building official in the issuance of permits. 
A.  Contents. The applicant shall submit twelve prints of the site plan to the director. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate clearly and with full dimensions the following information: 
1.  Lot dimensions; 
2.  All existing and proposed buildings and structures: Location, elevations, color scheme, size, height, and proposed use; 
3.  Yards and space between buildings; 
4.  Walls and fences: Location, height and materials; 
5.  Off-street parking: Location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking area, and internal circulation patterns; 
6.  Access: Pedestrian and vehicular service, points of ingress and egress and internal circulation; 
7.  Signs: Location, size and height; 
8.  Loading: Location, dimensions, number of spaces and internal circulation; 
9.  Lighting: Location, general nature and holding devices; 
10.  Street dedications and improvements, as provided in Section 17.44.020; 
11.  The location and type of landscaping; and 
12.  Such other data as may be required to permit the director to make the required findings. 
B.  Approval or Disapproval. Within twenty days after the director determines that the application is completed the director shall approve, with conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or disapprove the site plan. In approving the plan, the director shall find that: 
1.  All provisions of this title are complied with; 
2.  The following are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected, and there will be no adverse effect on surrounding property: 
a.  Facilities and improvements, 
b.  Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation, 
c.  Setbacks, 
d.  Height of buildings, 
e.  Location of services, 
f.  Fences/walls, 
g.  Landscaping; 
3.  Proposed lighting is so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties; 
4.  Proposed signs will not by size, location, color or lighting interfere with traffic or limit visibility; 
5.  Proposed development has adequate fire and police protection; 
6.  Proposed development can be adequately served by city sewer and water; 
7.  Drainage from the property can be properly handled; 
8.  Proposed development is consistent with general and specific plans and the redevelopment plan. The director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission. 
D.  Appeal to the City Council. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal in writing, setting forth his reason for the appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within five days after the planning commission's decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the council's next regular meeting after the appeal is filed. The council shall review the site plan and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove based on the findings listed in subsection B of this section. The decision of the council is final. 
E.  Distribution. The approved site plan, with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, shall be dated and signed by the director. One copy of the site plan and conditions shall be mailed to the applicant. 
F.  Revisions. Revisions by the applicant to an approved site plan shall be made pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. 
G.  Expiration of Site Plan Approval. 
1.  An approved site plan becomes void in the event there has not been substantial development of the site, or a portion of the site for an approved phased development, within twelve months after the approval of the site plan. Substantial development of one or more increments of a phased development shall extend the expiration date of the site plan for the remaining phases, except that the final phase shall be substantially developed within five years. 
2.  A project shall be considered indivisible unless the director approves a request by the applicant that the project be developed in phases or the director requires phased development. Such determination shall be based on the finding that upon construction of the required on-site and off-site improvements serving each phase, it can function independently of later phases. 
3.  An occupancy permit for a building, structure or use as shown upon an approved site plan shall not be issued until all proposed buildings, structures and other stated improvements in an indivisible project or phase of a divisible project are completed, or the director authorizes its issuance upon making a finding that all on-site and off-site conditions relating to the building, structure or use have been or will be met. 
(Ord. 524 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.44.020 - Street dedications and improvements required. 
Because of changes that may occur in the local neighborhood due to increases in vehicular traffic generated by facilities requiring a site plan review, and upon the principle that such development should be required to provide street dedications and improvements as near as practicable in proportion to the increased vehicular traffic, but should not be required to provide such street facilities for nonrelated traffic, the following dedications and improvements may be deemed necessary by the director and may be required by him as a condition to the approval of any site plan: 
A.  When the Development Borders or is Traversed by an Existing Street. 
1.  Minor streets, local streets and culs-de-sac: Dedicate all necessary right-of-way to widen street to its ultimate width as shown on any master or precise plan of streets and highway; install curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights and required utilities; and grade and improve from curb to existing pavement. 
2.  Major and collector streets: Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen the street to its ultimate width as established to any precise plan, precise plan of streets and highways, or where the ultimate right-of-way lines are otherwise determinable and the grades have been established or can be determined; install curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, required utilities; and grade and improve the shoulder and on traffic lane abutting the development. In no case shall a person be required to dedicate or improve the right-of-way for a distance in excess of thirty feet as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line. 
3.  Major thoroughfares (expressways, freeways, the state highways): Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen the thoroughfare to its ultimate width as established by any precise plan, specific plan of streets and highways, or where the ultimate rights-of-way lines are otherwise determinable and the grades have been established or can be determined, except in cases where access does not exist. Setback all facilities the required distance from the ultimate property line as shown on any master or specific plan; install curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, and required utilities. In no case shall the required improvements or right-of-way dedication apply for distances in excess of thirty feet as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line. 
B.  Frontage and Other New Roads. All frontage roads or new roads of any class made necessary by the development shall be dedicated and fully graded and improved with curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, required utilities, grading and paving: Provided, that where the street involved is indicated as an eventual major street or major thoroughfare upon any master or precise plan of streets and highways, the amounts of grading and paving shall not exceed required for such existing streets under subdivision 1 of subsection A of this section. Where a frontage road is provided and improved, the improvements in subdivisions 2 and 3 of subsection A of this section will not be required. 
C.  Standards. All improvements shall be to city standards. 
D.  Building Permit. Before a building permit shall be issued for any such building or structure, the director shall determine that: 
1.  The proposed building is in conformity with the site plan and approved conditions; 
2.  All required on-site (outside the city right-of-way) and off-site (within the city right-of-way) improvements shall have either been completed, or if not completed, the permittee has entered into an agreement with the city to complete the work within six months from the date of the issuance of the permit. The director may extend the completion date for one additional six-month period upon written request of the permittee upon a showing of good cause therefor. Such an agreement shall be secured either by cash deposited with the city, a cash deposit in an irrevocable escrow approved by the director, or other financial security approved by the director as the equivalent thereof. Such security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent of the estimated cost of completion to be determined by the director. In the event such work is not complete within the period provided or any extension thereof, the city shall be authorized to take all necessary action to enforce the agreement including the use of the security to cause the completion of all required improvements. Moneys deposited with the city or an escrow may be partially released to the depositor by the director during the progress of the work so long as the same ratio of security is maintained on deposit to secure all uncompleted work; and 
3.  All of the required dedications have been given. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.45 - HISTORIC RESOURCES 
Sections: 
 
17.45.010 - Purpose. 
The city finds that it is of value and importance to the general welfare of the community to recognize and protect the historic and cultural resources of the city in order to safeguard the heritage of the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
A.  Identify, protect, enhance and perpetuate structures, buildings, landmarks, sites, places and objects within the city, which are of historic, archaeological, architectural and/or engineering significance to the community; 
B.  Enhance the city's cultural and historical heritage and aesthetic character, thereby making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work; 
C.  Foster civic and neighborhood pride in the city's historical accomplishments; 
D.  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to visitors and tourists as well as to residents; and 
E.  Establish special standards in order to help ensure the preservation, maintenance or rehabilitation of significant historic structures. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.020 - Terms and definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Adobe" shall mean an unburnt, sun-dried, clay brick; or a building made of adobe bricks. 
"Alteration" shall mean any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, of any designated historic resource which involves exterior changes to or modification of a structure, its surface texture, or its architectural details; relocation of structures onto, from or within a designated property or site; or other changes to the property or site affecting the significant historical or architectural features of a designated historic resource. For purposes of this chapter, "alteration" includes, but is not limited to, the kind, color and texture of building materials, architectural details, and the style and type of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other affixed fixtures. 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" shall mean the California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. and its related guidelines as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Demolition" means any act(s) that destroy in whole or in part, a building, structure or improvement. 
"Good repair" shall mean to preserve against decay and deterioration to reduce the incidence of demolition by neglect. 
"Historic district" shall mean any geographically-defined area or neighborhood which has a special character, historical interest, aesthetic value, or archaeological significance or which, collectively, represents one or more architectural periods or styles typical of the history of the city, and which constitutes a distinct section of the city that has been designated a historic district pursuant to this chapter. 
"Historic resource" shall mean a building, structure, object, historic district (as defined herein), site, place, or cultural feature or other improvement designated as historically significant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Historic resource officer" shall mean an employee of the city responsible for promoting the preservation of historic resources and historic resource objectives of this chapter and serving as the liaison between the historic resources commission and public, city staff, and other historic preservation agencies. The community development director, or his or her designee, shall serve as the historic resource officer. 
"Historic resource professional" shall mean any individual meeting the secretary of the interior's professional qualification standards, 36 CFR 61.4. For the purposes of this chapter, a historic preservation professional may include licensed architects, architectural historians, historians, archaeologists or historical engineers that have experience in working with history and cultural resources. 
"Historical resource assessment report" shall mean a report prepared by a historic resource professional. The report shall include, but not be limited to, background information establishing the historic significance and value of a potential historic or cultural resource. 
"Improvement" shall mean any building, structure, place, fence, gate, landscaping including trees, wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical feature of real property. 
"Property owner" shall mean the person appearing as the owner of such improvement, natural feature, or site on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county of Monterey. 
"Relocation" shall mean the removal of a historic resource from its original site to a new site. 
"Soledad historic resources registry" shall mean the city-maintained official list of historic resources designated by the city for public recognition and benefits. 
"Structure" as used in this chapter shall mean a building or any other man-made object affixed on or in the ground, or attached to something having location on the ground. 
"Substantial deterioration" shall mean the physical conditions of a structure or improvement which threaten the structural or historical integrity of the resource. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.030 - Historic resources commission. 
A.  The city planning commission shall serve as the historic resources commission for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Meetings of the historic resources commission shall convene as needed on the same date of any regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.040 - Duties of historic resources commission. 
The historic resources commission shall have the following powers and duties under this chapter: 
A.  Hear and render decisions on applications to designate historic resources within the city; 
B.  Hear and render decisions on applications to alter historic resources; 
C.  Hear and render decisions on applications to demolish potentially significant historic structures or buildings pursuant to Section 17.45.150 of this chapter; 
D.  Hear and render recommendations to the city council on applications to demolish a historic resource; 
E.  Serve as an advisory body to the city council on methods and incentives to preserve Historic Resources within the city; 
F.  Maintain a local register of historic resources within the city; 
G.  Recommend architectural design guidelines to the city council for the preservation of historic character, to be used in the review of applications for alteration of a designated historic resource; 
H.  Investigate and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local, or private funding sources, incentives and other mechanisms available to promote historic preservation in the city; 
I.  Review and comment on the decisions and documents prepared under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and other public agencies when such decisions or documents may affect any type of designated historical resource or potentially significant historical resource in the city; and 
J.  Perform any other historic-related functions that may be designated by resolution or minute motion of the city council. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.050 - Designation request. 
Historic resources shall be designated and approved by the historic resources commission in the following manner: 
A.  Request to Designate Historic Resource. The historic resources commission, on its own initiative, or by the directive of the city council, or by written request by the owner of the structure or improvement, or by any resident of the city, or by any person that owns property in the city, may initiate a request for a historic resource designation. An application for a proposed historic designation shall be filed with the community development department. 
B.  Application and Supporting Material Required. The proposed designation shall be submitted on an application as prescribed by the community development director and shall be accompanied by adequate supporting historical and architectural information in order that the historic resources commission can render an informed determination concerning designation of a structure, improvement, district, site or place as a historic resource. 
C.  Majority Consensus of Property Owners Required. An application for a historic district as a historic resource designation shall also include a written statement of support, with original signatures, demonstrating a majority consensus of fifty-one percent or more of affected property owners. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.060 - Findings and determination. 
Designation of a historic resource shall be based on supporting evidence and the following findings by the historic resources commission and shall officially be made part of the public record. 
A.  Eligibility Criteria for Historic Resource Determination. In making a determination whether a structure, property feature, residential or commercial area or neighborhood shall be designated a historic resource, the historic resources commission shall find that the building, structure or improvement, or any combination thereof in a site, place, or district, is at least fifty years old and meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  It possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and association; 
2.  It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, civic, aesthetic, archaeological, architectural or engineering history; 
3.  It is identified with persons or events significant in local, regional, state, or national history; 
4.  It embodies distinctive characteristics of an architectural style, type, period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; 
5.  It is representative of the work of a notable builder, designer, or architect; 
6.  It contributes to the significance of an historic area by being a geographically definable area, possessing a concentration of not less than fifty percent of historic or scenic properties or thematically-related grouping of properties which contribute to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan or physical development; or 
7.  It is one of the few remaining examples in the region, state or nation possessing distinguishing characteristics of an architectural or historic type or specimen. 
B.  Finding of Reasonable Use. The designation of a structure, place or improvement as a historic resource will not deprive the owner or owners of all reasonable use of his or her property. 
C.  Disapproval. No proposal for designation once considered and disapproved by the historic resources commission shall be reconsidered except upon the affirmative vote of not less than a super-majority (quorum plus one) of commission members. Any decision to reconsider shall be treated as a new proposal for designation. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.070 - Notification by city to property owner or owners of pending designation of historic resource. 
A.  This section shall apply when either the city council or historic resources commission submits an application that proposes the designation of a historic resource owned by either a private individual or individuals or any entity other than the city. 
B.  The community development director shall notify the property owner or owners of the pending historic resource designation. Notification shall be conducted in the following manner: 
1.  Written notification to the property owner shall be made no later ten calendar days after an application has been deemed complete by the community development director; and 
2.  Written notification to the property owner shall be delivered via certified U.S. Postal Service with a return receipt request. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.080 - Public hearing procedure to designate historic resource. 
The historic resources commission shall schedule a public hearing on all proposed historic resource designations as specified under Section 17.45.050 of this chapter. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held within ninety calendar days after the community development director deems an application complete. Public hearing noticing shall be provided in the following manner: 
1.  At least thirty calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the historic resources commission, written notice of the hearing shall be sent to the owner of the structure or property feature proposed as a historic resource or the owners of buildings, structures and properties within a proposed historic resource. Written notice shall be provided via certified U.S. Postal Service with a request return receipt; 
2.  At least ten calendar days prior to the historic resources commission's scheduled public hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a local newspaper; 
3.  At least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing, notices of the public hearing shall be posted in at least three highly visible locations near the structure, property feature, or residential or commercial area proposed as a historic resource; and 
4.  At least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing, notice of date, place time and purpose of said hearing shall be provided by first class mail to property owners within three hundred feet of the property proposed for designation as a historic resource and to any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city clerk or designee. 
B.  Failure of property owners to receive notice of such public hearing shall in no way affect the validity of any action taken. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.090 - Notice to property owner(s) following historic resource designation. 
The historic resources commission shall notify the property owner or property owners following approval by the historic resources commission of an application to designate a structure, property landmark or neighborhood or commercial area as a historic resource. Notification shall be conducted in the following manner: 
A.  The community development director or designee shall notify the property owner(s) in writing that the structure, property landmark, neighborhood or commercial area is designated a historic resource; 
B.  The notification shall clearly state the type of historic resource, address, parcel number and photographs of the designation approved and the property's owner right to appeal as specified under Section 17.45.160 of this chapter; 
C.  The community development director or designee shall mail no later than ten calendar days from the historic resources commission approval written notice via certified U.S. Postal Service and request a return receipt; and 
D.  Failure of any property owner to receive notice shall in no way affect the validity of any action taken. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.100 - Entry in city registry of historic resources. 
A.  Adopted resolutions designating historic resources shall collectively be identified and included in the city registry of historic resources. 
B.  The community development director shall be the official custodian of the city registry of historic resources and maintain a copy for public display and review. 
C.  Absent an appeal of a designated historic resource pursuant to Section 17.45.160, "Appeal process," the designated historic resource shall be entered into the city registry of historic resources. 
D.  Any amendment, additions, or deletions to the city registry of historic resources shall be made by the community development director following actions pursuant to this chapter to designate, relocate or demolish a historic resource. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.110 - Alteration or relocation of historic resource. 
A.  Approval Required. Any proposed alteration or relocation of a historic resource or any building, structure or improvement within a historic district designated as a historic resource, shall be subject to review and approval by the historic resources commission except as otherwise provided by this section. All alterations shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing Historic Buildings, or the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitation Historic Buildings. 
B.  Findings Required. A determination by the historic resources commission to either allow the alteration or relocation of a historic resource shall be based upon one or more of the following findings: 
1.  The exterior alterations are being made primarily for the purpose of restoring the historic resource to its original appearance or in order to substantially aid in the preservation or enhancement of the historic resource consistent with the purposes as set forth in this chapter; 
2.  The exterior alteration is consistent with the architectural character of the historic resource and with the historical, architectural, or aesthetic value of the structure and its site; 
3.  With respect to any structure or property located within a historic district, the proposed work is consistent with the historical, architectural and aesthetic character of the district and conforms with any standards for said district as may be adopted by the commission; 
4.  The applicant has demonstrated that the proposed alteration is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property pursuant to Section 17.45.180 of this chapter; 
5.  The applicant has adequately demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate and substantial economic hardship that denies the applicant the ability to make reasonable beneficial use of the property, or the ability to obtain a reasonable economic return from the property; or 
6.  With respect to a proposed relocation, the relocation of the historic resource will substantially aid its long-term preservation or enhancement. 
C.  Administrative Approvals. The community development director or designee may review and approve minor exterior alterations. Minor exterior alterations are those alterations which will obviously not affect either the exterior architectural characteristics or the historical integrity of the historic structure, its site or surroundings. The director shall determine, based on the merits of the proposal, whether an alteration or relocation shall be administratively approved or scheduled for consideration and action by the historic resources commission. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.120 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
A.  Prevention of Deterioration and Decay of Historical Resource. The owner or other person or entity acting as agent of the owner of a historic resource, or of an improvement, building, or structure in an historic district designated a historic resource, shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions or elements of such improvement, building or structure, and all interior portions, the maintenance or repair of which is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature. Such building elements include but are not limited to: Features so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property; deteriorated or inadequate foundation; deteriorated or inadequate flooring; members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling or roof supports, or other horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective materials or deterioration; fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration; deteriorated, crumbling or loose exterior plaster; deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken windows and doors; defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; inadequate electrical or plumbing systems; any fault, defect, or deterioration in the building that renders it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight, and/or damage from vandalism. 
B.  Enforcement by Building Official. It shall be the duty of the city building official to enforce this section to prevent the "substantial deterioration" of any exterior portion of such a historic structure, building or improvement and to also prevent the substantial deterioration of any interior portions thereof which are essential to the integrity and preservation of any exterior portion. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.130 - Historic preservation incentives. 
A.  State Historic Building Code. The State Historic Building Code (Part 8, Title 24, C.C.R.) may be applied to all buildings and structures designated as historic resources at the discretion of the building official. 
B.  Other Incentives. The historic resources commission shall investigate developing an incentive program to encourage historic preservation, investment in historic properties, and to aid property owners with potential financial burdens associated therewith. Upon recommendation by the historic resources commission and approval by the city council, program elements shall be made available to property owners who preserve designated historic resources and, in the case of direct city expenditures, the program shall ensure that the cost of incentives is a reasonable use of public funds. Incentives such as those found in the Federal Historic Preservation Tax Certification, Conservation Easements, the California Mills Act and others as deemed appropriate may be considered for adoption or application by the city. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.140 - Procedures for demolition of historic resource. 
A.  Any person proposing to demolish a building or structure designated as a historic resource or a building or structure located in an historic district designated as a historic resource, shall file an application for a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15.08 of this code along with a photograph of the structure and other information as may be required by the community development director or designee. 
B.  Except where a historic structure is considered unsafe and dangerous pursuant to Section 17.45.170 of this chapter, no demolition permit shall be issued without the concurrent or tandem issuance of a building permit for a replacement structure or structures for the property in question. 
C.  If not already completed and on file with the city, the preparation of an historical resource assessment report shall be required prior to scheduling a public hearing on a demolition application. 
D.  Following receipt of a completed application to demolish a historic resource or any building, structure or improvement within a historic district designated as a historic resource, the application shall be forwarded to the historic resources commission for consideration and a recommendation to the city council. The commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.45.080 of this chapter and recommend city council approval or denial of said application based upon public testimony, historical resource evidence and other pertinent information in the public record. 
E.  Recommended approval or approval of a demolition permit for a historic resource or a structure located therein shall be based upon the following findings: 
1.  That the historic resource no longer has significant aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or engineering interest or value of an historical nature and, therefore, demolition is consistent with the purposes of this chapter; 
2.  That the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed demolition is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property pursuant to Section 17.45.180 of this chapter; or 
3.  That the applicant has demonstrated that denial of the demolition permit application will result in immediate and substantial economic hardship to the owner of said structure, building and/or property, or that there are no reasonable alternatives to the demolition as of the time of the hearing. In determining whether or not extreme hardship exists, the commission shall consider evidence which demonstrates the following: 
a.  Denial of the demolition application will diminish the value of the subject property so as to leave little or no value for its intended use; 
b.  Sale or rental of the property at a reasonable rate of return is not feasible or is impractical; and/or 
c.  Utilization of the property for lawful purposes is prohibited or impractical. 
F.  The resolution adopted by the historic resources commission memorializing the commission's action concerning the demolition permit shall be forwarded to the city council. 
G.  The city council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.45.080 of this chapter at a regularly scheduled meeting to consider the demolition of a historic resource. 
H.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the city council either shall either approve or deny the demolition permit subject to the findings of this section. 
I.  The city council may also continue the public hearing for a demolition permit for up to one hundred twenty calendar days to consider the feasibility of relocation of the historical structure. During this waiting period, the applicant shall advertise the proposed demolition in a paper of general circulation in the county of Monterey at least two times during the first thirty calendar days following the public hearing before the city council. Such advertisement shall include the structure address and information concerning relocation arrangements. Evidence of this publication must be submitted to the community development director at least ten calendar days prior to the continued public hearing. 
J.  The city council's determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.150 - Demolition of building or structure fifty years of age or older. 
A.  Applications for the demolition of a potentially significant historic building or structure that is fifty years of age or older shall require completion of a historical resource assessment report at the owner or applicant's expense. 
B.  If the historical resource assessment report concludes that the building or structure does not qualify as a historical resource under this chapter, the demolition permit application may be approved by the building official. 
C.  If the historical assessment report concludes that the building or structure does qualify as a historical resource under the provisions of this chapter, review and approval of the application by the historical resources commission is required pursuant to Section 17.38.130 of this title. 
D.  Following receipt of a complete application to demolish such a structure or building, a public hearing before the historical resources commission shall be scheduled for consideration and action on the application in accordance with the public hearing provisions of Section 17.45.080 of this chapter. 
E.  A decision to approve a demolition permit shall be based upon the following findings: 
1.  That the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed demolition is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property pursuant to Section 17.45.180 of this chapter; 
2.  That the applicant has demonstrated that denial of the demolition permit application will result in immediate and substantial economic hardship to the owner of said structure, building and/or property, or there are no reasonable alternatives to the demolition as of the time of the hearing; or 
3.  That the economic benefits of demolition outweigh the loss of a potential historic resource to the community; and 
a.  That neither repairs nor stabilization of the structure are feasible; and 
b.  That the replacement building(s) or structure(s) will enhance the character of the neighborhood in which it is located; or 
F.  In determining whether or not extreme economic hardship exists, the commission shall consider evidence which demonstrates the following: 
1.  Denial of the demolition application will diminish the value of the subject property so as to leave little or no value for its intended use; 
2.  Sale or rental of the property at a reasonable rate of return is not feasible or is impractical; and/or 
3.  Utilization of the property for lawful purposes is prohibited or impractical. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.160 - Appeal process. 
Any decision by the historic resources commission concerning designation of a historic resource or historic district, or a proposed alteration of a historical resource pursuant to Section 17.45. 110 of this chapter, or a proposed demolition of a potentially significant historic building or structure, pursuant to Section 17.45.150 of this chapter, may be appealed in writing to the city council. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any property owner may appeal in writing the decision of the historic resources commission to the city council. 
B.  The appealing party shall have the burden of proof to provide evidence for overturning the determination made by the historic resources commission. 
C.  The appealing party shall have thirty calendar days from the date of receipt to initiate an appeal. 
D.  Failure of any property owner to receive notice shall in no way affect the validity of any action taken. 
E.  If no appeal is filed with the city clerk within thirty calendar days following the decision of the historic resources commission, such decision shall be final. 
F.  Following receipt of a written appeal, a public hearing before the city council shall be scheduled and conducted within thirty calendar days of receipt of notice of appeal in accordance pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.170 - Revocation of historic resource designation. 
Once so designated as a historic resource pursuant to this chapter, revocation of a historic resource designation shall be undertaken as follows: 
A.  A property owner may submit a written request to the community development director for the revocation of historic resource designation on his/her property stating the reasons for such request. 
B.  The historic resources commission shall receive the written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting and schedule a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.45.080 of this chapter. 
C.  The historic resources commission shall consider testimony presented by the property owner or owners and the public and make a recommendation to the city council to approve or deny the requested revocation. 
D.  The city council shall hold a public hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting to consider the revocation request and recommendation of the historic resources commission. 
E.  Revocation of a historic resource designation shall be based on one or more of the following findings: 
1.  That the historic resource no longer has significant aesthetic, architectural, or engineering value of an historic or cultural nature; and 
2.  That the revocation of a historic resource designation is consistent with the stated purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.180 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent any measure of construction, alteration, removal, or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure or other feature, or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the building official and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary, by the building official, to correct the condition; provided, however, only such work as is absolutely necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire, or other calamity, or by act of God to such an extent that, in the opinion of the building official, it cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.190 - Time extensions. 
If any action under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (Pub. Res. Code sections 21000 et seq.), the time in which such action must be taken shall be extended in order to comply with the provisions of said Act. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
17.45.200 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  General. It shall be the duty of community development director, or the community development director's delegate, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Violation. It is unlawful for a person or entity to alter or demolish or cause to be altered or demolished any historic resource or portion thereof in violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Civil and Criminal Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain violations of the provisions of this chapter by undertaking the alteration, grading, removal, demolition, or partial demolition of an historic resource without first obtaining the written approval of the community development director, the historic resources commission, planning commission or city council as provided in this chapter, or to defy any order or decision rendered by the community development director, the historic resources commission, planning commission or city council. 
1.  Any violations of this chapter shall be enforced as provided by Chapter 1.04 of this code. 
2.  Notwithstanding the aforesaid, any person or entity who demolishes a historic resource in violation of the provisions of the chapter, shall be liable civilly for payment of a sum equal to the replacement value of the building or structure in kind, or up to an amount set at the discretion of the court. 
3.  As part of the enforcement proceeding, violators may be required to reasonably restore the building, structure, object or site to its appearance or condition prior to the violation, under the guidance of the historic resources commission and/or direction of the building official. 
D.  Injunctive Relief. The city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain a violation or correct a violation, or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration, reconstruction, or replacement in kind of any historic resource demolished, altered or partially demolished, or allowed to fall below minimum maintenance standards in violation of this chapter. 
E.  New Construction. A lot which is the site of alteration or demolition of an historic resource in violation of this chapter shall not be developed in excess of the dwelling unit density and/or building footprint, of the altered or demolished building or structure for a period of five years from the unlawful alteration or demolition. A person or entity may be relieved of the penalties provided in this section if, as to an unlawful alteration, the person or entity restores the original distinguishing qualities and character of the building or structure destroyed or altered. Such restoration must be undertaken pursuant to a valid building permit issued after a recommendation by the historic resources commission, and a finding by the city council that the proposed work will effect adequate restoration and can be done with a substantial degree of success. 
F.  Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies in subsections B through E of this section are not mutually exclusive. 
(Ord. 662, § 2, 2009)  
Chapter 17.46 - APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
17.46.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all zoning appeals, except where other specific appeal procedures are prescribed by this title, in which case such prescribed procedures shall be followed. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.46.020 - Right to appeal. 
Decisions of the planning director or planning commission may be appealed by an applicant or any aggrieved person, including the planning commission and the city council, and individual members thereof. An appeal shall be filed in the form of a letter setting forth the reasons for the appeal. An appeal shall be accompanied by any fees required as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. Appeal fees shall not be required for appeals initiated by the planning commission or the city council. When an appeal has been filed, the planning director will prepare a report on the matter and schedule the appeal for consideration by the appropriate body within forty-five days of receipt of the appeal. The hearing body may affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, decision or determination which is the subject of the appeal, based upon findings of fact regarding the particular case. Such findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the appeal, and verify the compliance or noncompliance of the subject of the appeal with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 524 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.46.030 - Appeals of planning director actions. 
Determinations on the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this title which are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff, and any decision of the planning director to approve or deny an application may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning director shall provide the planning commission and city council with notification of its actions. Appeals shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission within fourteen days after the decision of the planning director. The appeal will be decided by the planning commission following a public hearing conducted in accordance with Section 17.42.030 (Public hearing and notice). 
(Ord. 524 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.46.040 - Appeals of planning commission actions. 
Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by filing a letter of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the action of the planning commission. The planning director shall provide the city council with notification of the planning commission actions. Appeals will be decided by the city council following a public hearing conducted in accordance with Section 17.42.030 (Public hearing and notice). 
(Ord. 524 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1993: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.48 - AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - General procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any amendment to this title shall be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are amended or adopted. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.020 - Special procedure—When required. 
Any amendment of this title which changes any property from one zone to another or imposes any regulation upon property not theretofore imposed, or removes or modifies any such regulation, shall be adopted as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.030 - Initiation of amendments. 
Amendments to this title may be initiated by an application of the owner of affected property; or by his agent, or upon its own initiative either the city council or the planning commission may by motion initiate proceedings for such amendment. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.040 - Application by property owner. 
Application for an amendment to change district boundaries may be made by the owner of record of property for which a change is sought, or by his agent when authorized in writing by the owner, or by a purchaser or lessee of said property when acting pursuant to a written contract with the owner. Application shall be made to the planning commission on a form prescribed by the commission and shall contain (a) a description and map showing the boundaries of existing and requested districts, and identifying the property for which a change of district is requested; (b) a written statement setting forth the reasons for the application and all facts relied upon by the applicant in support thereof; and (c) such additional information as the planning director may deem pertinent to the application. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.050 - Public hearing by planning commission. 
Upon receipt of an application for a change in district boundaries pursuant to Section 17.48.040, or upon the initiation of an amendment to this title upon motion of the city council or the planning commission, the planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the amendment to be considered, shall be given in the manner specified in Section 17.48.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.060 - Notice of public hearing. 
The planning commission shall give notice of hearing on a proposed amendment of the kind described in Section 17.48.020 in the following manner: 
A.  Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication once in a local newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. 
B.  Additionally, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of hearing to each owner of record of real property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the proposed boundary change. If the proposed amendment was initiated by a person other than the owner of the subject property; said notice shall also be mailed to the owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  In the event that the number of owners to whom notice would be sent pursuant to subsection B of this section is greater than one thousand, the planning commission may, as an alternative, give such notice at least ten days prior to the date of hearing by placing an insert with any generalizing mailing sent by the city to property owners in the area affected by the proposed amendment, such as billings for city services. Compliance with the procedures set forth in this section constitutes a good-faith effort to provide notice, and the failure of any owner to receive notice shall not prevent the city from proceeding with the hearing or from taking any action, nor shall the failure to receive notice affect the validity of any action so taken. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.070 - Contents of notice of public hearing. 
The notice of public hearing given pursuant to Section 17.48.060 shall contain the following: 
A.  In the case of a proposed amendment changing district boundaries, the street address of the affected property, if known, or the location of the property if the street address is not known, and the existing and proposed districts applicable to the property; 
B.  The time, place and purpose of the hearing; 
C.  A brief description, the content of which shall be in the sole discretion of the city, of the change in district boundaries or in zoning regulations proposed; 
D.  Reference to the application or motion on file for particulars; 
E.  A statement that any interested person may appear and be heard. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.080 - Action by planning commission. 
After the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the city council. The recommendation shall include: 
A.  The reasons for the recommendation; 
B.  The relationship of the proposed amendment to the general plan and to applicable specific plans; 
C.  The findings and determinations of the commission with respect to the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.090 - Denial by planning commission. 
Planning commission denial of any proposed amendment shall terminate the proceedings in the matter; except, that in the case of an amendment initiated by the city council, the commission shall forward its recommendation to the council as provided in Section 17.48.080. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.100 - Public hearing by city council. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission concerning the proposed amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of public hearing by the planning commission, as specified in Sections 17.48.060 and 17.48.070. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.110 - Action by city council. 
After consideration of the recommendation of the planning commission and the completion of the public hearing, the council may approve, modify or disapprove the proposed amendment; provided, that any modification of the proposed amendment by the city council not previously considered by the planning commission during its public hearing on the matter shall first be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, but the planning commission is not required to hold a public hearing on the modification. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.120 - Prezoning. 
The determination of district classifications and district boundaries appropriate for property located outside the city, but potentially subject to annexation, may be made in the same manner as prescribed in this chapter for any property within the city; provided, that any ordinance duly passed by the city council establishing such district classifications and district boundaries shall become effective only upon the effective date of annexation of such property to the city. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.130 - Resubmittal of application. 
When an application for a change of district boundaries has been submitted by a property owner and subsequently has been denied, no new application by a property owner for the same; or substantially the same, change shall be filed or considered within one year of the date of closing of the hearing on the application before the planning commission. This provision does not prevent the initiation of proceedings by either the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.48.140 - Notification of county assessor. 
Within thirty days after the final adoption of an ordinance changing the zoning of any property from one district to another, the city council shall notify the county assessor or such action. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
Chapter 17.49 - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
17.49.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the general welfare and beauty of the city of Soledad through the acquisition and installation of public art works. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Art," "art work" or "public art" means an original creation of art which is freestanding or free hanging in that it is not a part of a building or other structure, nor an architectural element on or in which the work of art is placed, installed or affixed. Art includes, but is not limited to, sculptures, monuments, wall hangings, tapestries, photographs, etchings, engravings and paintings. Art shall not include decorative, ornamental or functional elements designed by the architect or other design consultant retained for the design and construction of the subject building or art objects that are mass produced with a standard design such as fountains and statuary objects. 
"Art in public places committee" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 17.49.080. 
"Commercial building" means any building or structure, all or part of which, contain commercial use. 
"Construction cost" means the total value of all construction on a commercial or industrial structure. 
"Industrial building" means any building or structure, all or part of which, contain industrial use. 
"Maintenance" means preservation of the art work in good condition to the satisfaction of the city, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or alteration, and securing and maintaining insurance coverage. 
"Mural" means a graphic illustration or presentation other than a sign of any type, that is painted or otherwise applied to an inside or outside wall, facade, or surface of a building or structure. 
"Public place" means any area on public or private property which is open to the general public and is easily accessible and clearly visible to the general public. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.030 - Public art or in lieu payment required. 
Any person constructing a commercial or industrial building within the city shall provide art in a public place or make an in lieu payment as provided in this section. 
A.  The project applicant shall acquire and install an art work in a public place on or in the vicinity of the project site as approved by the city council pursuant to this chapter. The art work shall have a value that equals or exceeds one percent of the total construction cost. 
B.  In lieu of acquiring and installing an art work in a public place, project applicants may contribute funds to the "art in public places fund" established pursuant to Section 17.49.130. The in lieu payment shall be equal to one percent of the construction cost of the commercial or industrial building and shall be paid by the project applicant at the time of issuance of a building permit. Project applicants shall indicate on their building permit application that they wish to make an in lieu payment. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.040 - Projects subject to art in public places requirement. 
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the following: 
A.  All new commercial and industrial building over fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area; 
B.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of existing commercial and industrial buildings, interior or exterior, where the building permit value exceeds one hundred thousand dollars in changes to the building, excluding landscaping and "acts of God." 
C.  All public facilities over fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area constructed by the city or the redevelopmentagency, except those listed in Section 17.49.050. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.050 - Projects not subject to art in public places requirement. 
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of existing commercial and industrial use property which constitutes less than one hundred thousand dollars of building permit value; 
B.  Residential subdivision and development; 
C.  Low-income housing construction, remodel, repair or reconstruction projects; 
D.  Construction, remodel, repair or reconstruction of structures to be constructed and occupied by a nonprofit, social service agency or institution; 
E.  Underground public works projects; 
F.  Street or sidewalk repairs; 
G.  Tree planting. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.060 - Application. 
A.  An art in public places application shall be made on a form provided by the city no later than application for permits. 
B.  The following information and documents must be submitted with all applications: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the applicant shall provide his or her legal name, any aliases, and current driver's license, 
b.  A partnership, the applicant shall provide the complete name of the partnership, the legal names of all the general partners, and any aliases, 
c.  A corporation, the applicant shall provide the complete name of the corporation, the legal names and any aliases, and capacity of all officers; 
2.  The name of the business; 
3.  The name of the prospective on-site manager or foreman; 
4.  The type of proposed property use whether commercial or industrial; 
5.  Square footage of the proposed development project; 
6.  The location of the property; 
7.  Option selection: 
a.  Acquire and install an art work in a public place pursuant to subsection A of Section 17.49.030, or 
b.  In lieu payment pursuant to subsection B of Section 17.49.030; 
8.  A site plan showing the location of the art work, complete with a detailed drawing showing size, scale, colors and description of materials to be used; 
9.  The applicant shall date and sign the application under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.070 - Application process. 
The requirements and procedures for processing an art in public places application shall be as follows: 
A.  The project applicant shall submit to the building division a completed application, designating which option is being utilized (in lieu or installation of art). In cases where an in lieu payment has been selected, payment of the fee will complete the application process; 
B.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application deposit fee, the city shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date; 
C.  An application submitted pursuant to this section will not be accepted unless the application fee is submitted with the respective application; 
D.  In those cases under Section 17.49.030(A) not later than thirty days after the city has received the application, the city shall determine in writing whether the application is complete and shall immediately transmit the determination to the applicant; 
E.  In the event the determination is made that the application is not complete, then the written determination shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they may be made complete; 
F.  If the written determination is not made within thirty days after receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this chapter; 
G.  Within thirty days after the application has been deemed complete, the staff liaison shall forward a copy of the application to the art in public places committee for its review and comment; 
H.  Within thirty days after receiving the comment from the development review committee, the staff liaison shall forward a copy of the application and a staff recommendation to the city of Soledad city council for its review and consideration; 
I.  The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application with or without prejudice based upon the guidelines set forth in Section 17.49.170 within thirty days of its initial review of the application. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.080 - Art in public places committee. 
The art in public places committee shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor with the consensus of the city council. The membership should, to the greatest extent possible, consist of persons with knowledge, education, training or experience in the visual arts. The art in public places committee members shall serve for a term of two years and shall serve without compensation. 
The art in public places committee will have the authority and duty to recommend public art works for placement in public and private development projects throughout the city. The committee shall also advise the city council on the use of the public art fund and other matters regarding implementation of the art in public places program pursuant to the adopted guidelines. 
The committee shall review art plans for art work to be located within a public place as directed by the city council. In making this determination, the committee shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  Whether the art work is appropriate as public art and is compatible in scale, material form and content with the surroundings within which it is to be located; 
B.  The inherent quality of the work of art; 
C.  Consideration of the structural and surface soundness of the art work and its prominence in terms of relative proof against age, theft, vandalism, weathering or excessive maintenance or repair costs; 
D.  Whether reasonable diversity in the type of art work in public places is being attained in terms of style, scale, media and materials represented; 
E.  Recommending themes for artwork e.g., in industrial area, "steel theme"; 
F.  Recommending to the city council purchase or commission of artwork/murals. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.090 - Performance security. 
A.  If the applicant has elected to acquire and install public art, then the applicant shall deposit with the city cash, a letter of credit, or other satisfactory security in an amount equal to the value of the art required by Section 17.49.030(A) within thirty days after the final decision of the city council. 
B.  If the public art required by this chapter is not installed within the time period set by the city council, then the applicant shall forfeit the security posted with the city and the city shall be permitted to use the security to purchase and install alternate public art within the city. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.100 - Guidelines for art works. 
Guidelines for the approval and maintenance of art in public places shall include, but are not limited to, the following criteria: 
A.  The art works shall be clearly visible and easily accessible to the public; 
B.  The application shall include a site plan showing the location of the art work, complete with landscaping, lighting and other accessories to complement and protect the art work; 
C.  The composition of the art work shall be of permanent type materials in order to be durable against vandalism, theft and weather, and in order to require a low level of maintenance; 
D.  The art work shall be related in terms of scale, material, form and content to immediate and adjacent buildings and landscaping so that it complements the site and surrounding environment; 
E.  The art work shall be designed and constructed by persons experienced in the production of such art work and recognized by critics and by his or her peers as one who produces works of art; and 
F.  The art work shall be a permanent, fixed asset to the property. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.110 - Denial of application. 
A denial of an application shall be based upon the applicant's failure to comply with the guidelines set forth in Section 17.49.100. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.120 - Certificate of occupancy. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for buildings subject to this chapter unless and until the applicant has complied with Section 17.49.030(A) or (B). In the event the project applicant has elected to make an in lieu payment to the art in public places fund, the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such payment has been paid in full to the city. In the event of remodeling or repairs that meet the chapter requirements, a final inspection shall not be scheduled or performed until all requirements of the chapter are met. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.130 - Art in public places fund. 
A.  Any payments collected in accordance with the in lieu payment provision of this chapter shall be deposited in a separate interest bearing account denominated as the "art in public places funds." 
B.  The city manager or his or her designee shall establish accounting records sufficient to identify and control the art in public places fund. 
C.  The art in public places fund shall be used to provide sites for, and works of art in, public places in order to further the intent of this chapter. 
D.  The art in public places fund shall be used to maintain and insure art works installed pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  The development review committee shall make recommendations to the city council concerning the use of the art in public places fund to purchase or commission art works. 
F.  The decision to use the art in public places fund to purchase or commission art work shall be based on the guidelines set forth in Section 17.49.100. 
G.  All decisions regarding the use of the art in public places fund shall be made by the city council. 
H.  Administration of the art in public places fund shall comply with the provisions of Government Code Section 66000 et seq. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.140 - Ownership, maintenance and insurance. 
A.  The holder of the certificate of occupancy of the structure for which the public art requirement was imposed is the owner of the art, and is responsible for its maintenance and for providing insurance coverage in the amount of the purchase price to insure the art against any loss or damage, including vandalism. This provision does not apply when the in lieu option is selected. 
B.  Any art purchased by the city from the art in public places fund shall be the property of the city and shall be maintained and insured by the city. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.150 - Removal or alteration of public art. 
Public art installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the city council. If such public art is knowingly removed or altered without prior approval from the city council, the property owner shall contribute funds equal to the project's original public art requirement to the city's art in public places fund. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.160 - Public nuisance. 
Failure to comply with Sections 17.49.030 and 17.49.140(A) of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.50 of this code. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
17.49.170 - Infraction violation. 
A violation of Sections 17.49.030, 17.49.090(A) and 17.49.150 of this chapter by any person responsible for committing such violation shall constitute an infraction violation and the violator shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.50 of this code, including, but not limited to, the imposition of any and all criminal penalties set forth therein. 
(Ord. 641 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 17.50 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Enforcement. 
The planning director and all department officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall do so in conformity with the provisions of this title, and any such permit, certificate, license or other entitlement issued in conflict with this title, intentionally or otherwise, is null and void. It shall be the duty of the planning director and the building official to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure, and to the use of any land, building or premises. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.50.020 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and any use of land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to this title is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney, upon the written request of the planning director or upon direction from the city council, is authorized and directed to commence legal action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986)  
17.50.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provisions of this title, is guilty of an infraction. The fine for the first conviction shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars. The fine for a second conviction of the same municipal code section within one year shall be a minimum of two hundred dollars. For each additional conviction of the same municipal code section within one year, the minimum fine shall be three hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 467 § 1, 1988: Ord. 445 § 2 (Exbt. A) (part), 1986) 
