SCOTTS VALLEY - MUNICIPAL CODE 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Scotts Valley, California 
Codified 1978 
Revised and Republished 1998 by 
Matthew Bender & Co., Inc. 
701 East Water Street 
Charlottesville, VA 22902 
866-501-5155 
Currently Supplemented by 
Municipal Code Corporation 
  
PREFACE 
The Scotts Valley Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1978, has been kept current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Gary V. Giannini, City Attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, located in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by a prior code cross-reference table, which sets out the location of individual sections of the prior code, and an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification. 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
Supplementation of this Code is provided by Municipal Code Corporation, P.O. Box 2235, Tallahassee, FL, 32316. Contact us at 800-262-2633 or info@municode.com. 
I. HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. The numbering system is the backbone of a code of ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section . Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1991).) This note will be updated by Municipal Code Corporation as each section is amended, with the most recent amendment added to the beginning. The notation "(part)" is used when the code section contains only part of the ordinance (or section of the ordinance) specified; this indicates that there are other areas of the code affected by the same ordinance (or section of the ordinance). If the code section was derived from an earlier codification, the last entry in the note indicates the old or "prior code" section number. 
Statutory References. The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated by Municipal Code Corporation. 
Cross-Reference Table. When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." This table will be updated as prior code sections are renumbered or repealed. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed by Municipal Code Corporation. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." When an ordinance is repealed, the disposition will be changed by Book Publishing Company to "(Repealed by Ord.…)" with the appropriate ordinance number. Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled), "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Index. If you're not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
  ;hg;See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Insertion Guide. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. 
Page Numbers. When originally published, this Code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact our Customer Service Department at 1-800-262-2633 (info@municode.com) or write to us at the following address: 
Municipal Code Corporation, P.O. Box 2235, Tallahassee, FL 32316. 
II. PROCEDURE FOR DRAFTING ORDINANCES 
This code has been codified using a logical, expandable numbering system to allow for additions, repeals or amendments. When drafting ordinances, it is important to designate, within the ordinance, what specific portions of the code are affected. The ordinance(s) underlying the section being changed can be determined from the ordinance history note in parentheses at the end of each section. 
Effect of Title. 
The title of an ordinance and any introductory language appearing before the ordaining clause has no legal effect. The title may state that the ordinance repeals (or amends or adds) certain provisions, but in order for these changes to be effective, the intended repeal, amendment or addition must be set out following the ordaining clause. 
Procedure When Amending Existing Code Material. 
Amend the code section specifically. The underlying ordinance section may also be included. 
Examples:  § 3.04.020 of the _______ Municipal Code is amended to read as follows: 
§ 3 of Ord. 319 and § 3.04.020 of the _______ Municipal Code are amended to read as follows: 
If only a portion of a section is being amended, designate the specific portion: 
Example: § 3.04.050(A)(2) of the _______ Municipal Code is amended to read as follows: 
Procedure When Repealing Existing Code Material. 
When repealing material, designate the specific portion of the code to be repealed. Include the underlying ordinance section if you wish; however, we consider both code section and underlying ordinance to be repealed whether you mention the underlying ordinance or not. 
Examples:  § 3.04.020 of the _______ Municipal Code is repealed. 
§ 3 of Ord. 319 and § 3.04.020 of the _______ Municipal Code are repealed. 
Subsection B of § 3.04.030 of the _______ Municipal Code is repealed. 
Procedure When Adding New Material to Code. 
When new provisions are to be added to the code, you should determine where the material would best fit within the subject matter of the existing section, chapter or title. If there is no existing section, chapter or title, you should assign a new section, chapter or title number. Our expandable decimal numbering system is designed to allow for the incorporation of new material without disturbing the numbering system of existing material. 
The following language is sufficient to locate new material in the code: 
Subsection D is added to § 5.10.040 or the _______ Municipal Code, to read as follows: 
§ 5.10.033 is added to the _______ Municipal Code, to read as follows: 
Chapter 12.07 is added to the _______ Municipal Code, to read as follows: 
If you have any questions as to the proper placement of a new provision, please contact us. 
One copy of all ordinances passed should be forwarded to Municipal Code Corporation, P.O. Box 2235, Tallahassee, FL 32316 or via e-mail to ords@municode.com. 
Our editorial staff is always willing to provide assistance should there be any difficulty is amending the code. Please call our Customer Services Department at 1-800-262-2633.  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the Scotts Valley Municipal Code as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. (Ord. 89 § 1, 1980)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the Scotts Valley Municipal Code, and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Scotts Valley Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, and addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 89 § 2, 1980)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of administrative ordinances of the city of Scotts Valley, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 89 § 3, 1980)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 74, and Zoning Ordinance No. 16.40. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 74, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: 
Ordinances 2.05, 4.3, 10-T-11, 15.3, 15.4, 62.1, 64.2, 71.2, 75, 76, 77, 77.1, 78, 79.2, 79.3, 79.4, 79.5, 80, 80.1, 81, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 16.14.1, 16.14.2, 16.14.3, 16.15.1, 16.18.1, 16.41, 16.42, 16.43, 16.44, 16.44.1, 16.45, 16.48, 16.49, 16.50, 16.51, 16.52, 16.52.1 and 16.53. (Ord. 89 § 4, 1980)  
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Scotts Valley Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Scotts Valley, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 89 § 5, 1980)  
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter, and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 89 § 6, 1980)  
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 89 § 7, 1980)  
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 89 § 8, 1980)  
1.01.090 - Effective date. 
This code shall become effective on the date this ordinance adopting this code as the Scotts Valley Municipal Code shall become effective. (Ord. 89 § 9, 1980)  
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 89 § 10, 1980)  
Chapter 1.04 - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Scotts Valley, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined, and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. 
A.  "City" and "town" each mean the city of Scotts Valley or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Scotts Valley, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions. 
B.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Scotts Valley. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen holding office. 
C.  "County" means the county of Santa Cruz. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Scotts Valley, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the state of California. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeo-graphed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Scotts Valley unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.080 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 74 § 1 (part), 1978)  
Chapter 1.05 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
1.05.010 - Statutory Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to and in conformity with Sections 905, 930.2, 935 and 29700 et. seq. of the California Government Code. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.020 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to allow the city to make a timely investigation of the facts on which a claim is based so as to have an opportunity to settle just claims before suit is brought to defend itself against unjust claims, and promptly correct any conditions or practices which gave rise to claims. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.030 - Scope. 
All claims against the city for money or damages which are excepted by section 905 of the Government Code from the claims procedure provided by Part 3 of Division 3.6, Title 1 of the Government Code and which are not expressly governed by any other statute or regulation shall be governed by this Chapter. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.040 - Requirements to bring suit. 
No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city on a cause of action for which this chapter requires a claim to be presented until a written claim therefor has been filed in conformity with this chapter. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a suit. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.050 - Time limitation. 
The claim for any cause of action specified in Section 1.05.030 shall be presented in the manner provided in Section 1.07.070 of this chapter as applicable and shall be presented and processed as provided by Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code insofar as said provisions are not in conflict with this chapter. A claim relating to a cause of action for death or for injury to a person or to personal property or growing crops shall be presented not later than six months after accrual of the cause of action. A claim relating to any other cause of action shall be presented not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action. Each claim shall be verified by the person who claims to be entitled to be paid the money or damages or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.070 - Claim form. 
Claims under this chapter shall be filed as specified in this section: 
A.  Any claim for salaries and wages of city officers and employees shall be presented to the director of finance in the number and on the forms prescribed by the director of finance. The claim shall be certified by the head of the department or office in which the officer or employee is employed. 
B.  Any claim for mileage, travel and other expenses of city employees shall be presented to the director of finance on forms prescribed by the director of finance. The claim shall be signed by the claimant and certified by the head of the department or office whose appropriations are charged with the expenditure. 
C.  Any claim for transportation of city officers or employees or other authorized persons, payable to public carriers, shall be presented to the director of finance on forms prescribed by the director of finance. The claims shall be certified by the officer whose appropriations are charged with the expenditure. 
D.  Any claim for principal or interest shall be based solely upon presentation of the matured bond, interest coupon, or other evidences of indebtedness. 
E.  Any claim by the state or a department or agency of or by another public entity relating to a cause of action for death or for injury to person or to personal property shall be presented to the city clerk . Any other claim by the state or a department or agency thereof or by another public entity shall be presented to the director of finance on forms prescribed by the director of finance and such claim shall be certified by the officer directing the expenditure, where appropriate. 
F.  Any claim for money or damages for loss or damage to personal property entrusted to the care and custody of a city officer or employee as a result of such claimant's confinement in any city facility and for which existing public liability and property damage insurance policies of the city do not otherwise cover, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
G.  Any claim for money or benefits under the Workers' Compensation Law (Division 4 of the Labor Code and Title 8 of the California Administrative Code) shall be presented to the city manager on forms prescribed by the division of industrial accidents or by the city manager. 
H.  Wherever in this section certification of a claim is required to be made by the head of a department or office, it shall be deemed to include certification by his designated subordinate; wherever in this section certification is required on a claim, the claimant shall present the claim to the designated officer for certification before presentation to the director of finance or city manager but if, within ten days after presentation to such officer, the officer has failed or refused to certify the claim, the claimant may present the uncertified claim to the director of finance or city manager including thereon an appropriate notation showing presentation to the designated officer and his failure or refusal to certify. 
I.  As an alternative procedure to that specified in this section for the filing of any of the foregoing claims, any claimant of a claim under this chapter may file such claim with the city clerk on the form provided by the director of finance or city manager but need not obtain certification of the claim prior to such filing. 
J.  Whenever as prescribed in subsection A of this section certification of a claim is required to be made by the head of the department or office for salaries and wages of city officers and employees and a state of extreme emergency, state of disaster, or state of local disaster exists, including and emergency resulting from a labor controversy, during the period of such state of extreme emergency, state of disaster, or state of local disaster, including an emergency resulting from labor controversy, it will be presumed, in absence of receipt by the director of finance of information to the contrary, that no change in the payroll status of the city officers and employees in the department or office has occurred and that work by the officers and employees has been performed during normal working hours. In such event, salaries and wages of such city officers and employees may be paid without a certification of a claim from the head of the department or office as otherwise provided. Any amounts paid in excess of salaries and wages due and owing to such city officers and employees by reason of this provision shall be recovered by the city from such city officers and employees in the same manner as other overpayments for salaries and wages are recovered. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.080 - Director of finance duties. 
The director of finance shall audit and allow or reject claims presented to the director of finance under subsections A through J of Section 1.05.070 in lieu of and with the same effect as allowance or rejection by the city council. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.090 - Time for action by city officers and claimant. 
The director of finance, city manager, or city council shall act upon any claim filed pursuant to this chapter within the time prescribed by Section 912.4 of the Government Code and in the manner prescribed by Section 912.6 of that code for action by a board, and the failure or refusal of the director of finance, city manager, or city council to act on a claim shall be the effect stipulated in said Section 912.4. Any action brought by the claimant in the cause of action set forth in any claim filed pursuant to this chapter shall be brought within the time specified in Section 945.6 of the Government Code. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.110 - Reexamination of rejected claims. 
The director of finance, city manager, or city council may, in their discretion, within the time prescribed by section 945.6 of the Government Code for commencing an action on the claim, reexamine a previously rejected claim within their jurisdiction in order to consider settlement of the claim in accordance with section 913.2 of the Government Code. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.110 - Contract claims. 
In accordance with the authorization granted by Section 930.2 of the Government Code, the following procedure may be made applicable to the presentation and processing of claims arising out of or relating to contracts and agreements to which the city is a party. 
A.  Time Limitation. A claim under this chapter based upon the accrual of a cause of action arising from a purchase order or other agreement of the city shall be presented in the manner provided in subsections B and C of this section not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action. For the purpose of computing the time limit prescribed by this section the date of accrual of a cause of action which is the subject matter of a claim is the date upon which the cause of action accrued within the meaning of the applicable statute of limitations, as defined by Section 901 of the Government Code. 
B.  Claim Form—Purchase Order Forms. The presentation of claims for materials or services furnished in compliance with purchase orders issued by the city shall be as follows: 
1.  The claimant shall file one copy of his invoice with the director of finance, One Civic Center Drive, Scotts Valley, California 95066. 
2.  The invoice shall show the following: 
a.  The date service was rendered or materials furnished; 
b.  The purchase order reference under which the materials or services were furnished; 
c.  The claimant's name and post office address to which the remittance is to be mailed; 
d.  A detail of the items invoiced, the unit price, sales tax where applicable, and the total amount claimed. 
3.  The director of finance shall, prior to payment of the invoice, secure the certification of the ordering department of receipt of goods in compliance with the purchase order. 
C.  Claim Form—Agreements Other Than Purchase Orders. If the claim is based upon an agreement other than a purchase order, the claim shall be completed by the claimant by filling in all applicable blanks and shall be presented by the claimant to the director of finance or to the officer or agent to whom the city council has given responsibility for administrative supervision of the contract performance in triplicate, on forms furnished or approved by the director of finance. A claim may be filed by mail but will not be deemed filed unless and until its actual receipt by the director of finance or other authorized officer or agent. The director of finance shall secure certification of performance by the administering officer or agent prior to the payment of the claim. 
D.  Action on Contract Claims. If the claim is based upon a purchase order or if the claim is based upon a contract other than a purchase order, it shall be acted upon by the city council with recommendation by the city manager within the time prescribed by Section 912.4 and in the manner prescribed by Section 912.6 of the Government Code for action by the board of a local public entity. Any action brought by the claimant on the cause of action set forth in the claim shall be brought within the time specified in Section 945.6 of the Government Code. Sections 911.4 to 912.2 of the Government Code shall apply to all claims under this section. 
E.  Action on Certain Car Rental Agreement Claims. Notwithstanding subsections B, C and D of this section, claims for damages to rental cars under contracts or agreements with the city where collision damage waivers are declined shall be administered by the city manager, subject to the same settlement authority authorized for settlement of tort liability claims under Section 1.05.130. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.120 - Action on liability claims. 
A.  All tort liability claims required to be presented to the city under the provisions of the California Government Claims Act (Government Code Section 810, et. seq.) or this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk. 
B.  The city manager or his/her designee of the city is authorized to allow, compromise or settle any tort liability claim or other claim for damages or any legal action for damages that is filed against the city, its officers or employees; provided: 
1.  The amount to be paid pursuant to such allowance, compromise or settlement, does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars and the allowance, compromise or settlement is approved by the city attorney. If the amount to be paid exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars, the allowance, compromise or settlement must be approved by the city council; and 
2.  The claim or action is not subject to the terms of an insurance policy wherein the insurer is granted the authority to allow, deny, compromise or settle claims or actions within the scope of such policy. 
C.  In all claims or actions that are allowed, compromised or settled, the director of finance will be responsible upon written order of the city attorney, and in accordance with the terms of such allowance, compromise or settlement, to cause the necessary warrant to be issued upon the treasury of the city in any amount for which such tort liability claim or action has been allowed, compromised or settled pursuant to this section. (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.05.130 - Action on worker's compensation claims. 
A.  All city employees making a claim for workers' compensation benefits under the provisions of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code shall file such claims with the city manager, or the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board pursuant to Division 4, Chapter 3 of the Labor Code and Title 8, Administrative Code, Section 10400. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to allow, compromise or settle any workers' compensation claim or case that is filed against the city; provided: 
1.  The amount to be paid pursuant to such allowance, compromise or settlement does not exceed ten thousand dollars; 
2.  The claim or action is for benefits as defined under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the state; 
3.  The claim or action is not subject to the terms of an insurance policy wherein the insurer is granted the authority to allow, deny, compromise or settle claims or actions within the scope of such policy; and 
4.  Any such compromise or settlement is approved by the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board (WCAB). 
C.  In all workers' compensation claims or actions that are allowed, compromised or settled, the city's workers' compensation claims administrator shall, upon order from the risk manager, cause the necessary check to be issued from the city's workers' compensation trust account in an amount for which any workers' compensation claim or action has been allowed, compromised or settled and approved by the Workers' Compensation Appeals Board (WCAB). (Ord. 172 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 1.10 - SPECIFIC INFRACTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.10.010 - Specific infractions. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of the following chapters of this code shall be deemed to be guilty of an infraction: Chapters 5.20, 6.12, 6.16 (except for Section 6.16.130 which shall be treated as a misdemeanor), 10.04 and 10.12. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)  
Chapter 1.12 - ARREST PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Notice to appear upon arrest. 
If any person is arrested for a violation of any provision of any ordinance of the city, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as prescribed by the Penal Code of the state of California, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least five days after such arrest. (Ord. 13 § 1.1, 1966)  
1.12.020 - Release from custody upon promise to appear. 
The arresting officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release must give his written promise to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by said officer. The arresting officer shall then release the person arrested from custody. The arresting officer shall as soon as practicable file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. (Ord. 13 § 1.2, 1966)  
1.12.030 - Warrant for arrest—Provision for issuance. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and does not post bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution, a warrant for his arrest within the time and in the manner as provided in the Penal Code of the state, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date on which he promised to appear, then the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within the time and in the manner provided in the Penal Code of the state. (Ord. 13.1 § 1, 1978: Ord. 13 § 1.3, 1966)  
1.12.040 - Wilful violation of promise to appear is misdemeanor. 
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate his written promise to appear in court. Any person who wilfully violates his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, and upon conviction of the offense of wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, in the county jail, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 13 § 1.4, 1966)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Office of the city manager created. 
The office of the city manager of the city of Scotts Valley is hereby created and established pursuant to subdivision (a) of Government Code Section 34851 of the state of California. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and his selection shall be made wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualification. Subject to Section 2.04.240 hereof, he shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. All references to city administrator in all city ordinances or resolutions shall hereafter be deemed to mean city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 2, 1990)  
2.04.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment but, within one hundred eighty days thereafter, the city manager must become a resident of the city, unless the city council approves his residence outside the city. (Ord. 5.8 § 3, 1990)  
2.04.030 - Council member eligibility. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 5.8 § 4, 1990)  
2.04.040 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 5.8 § 5, 1990)  
2.04.050 - Acting city manager. 
The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by a letter filed with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence. In the event the city manager's absence (or disability) extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two- month period, appoint an acting city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 6, 1990)  
2.04.060 - Compensation. 
A.  The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council from time to time determines, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against funds of the city as the city council designates. 
B.  In addition, the city manager shall be paid for or reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his official duties, including those incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when an itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to and approved by the city council. (Ord. 5.8 § 7, 1990)  
2.04.070 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. (Ord. 5.8 § 8, 1990)  
2.04.071 - Authorization to city manager to execute certain agreements and grant documents without prior council approval. 
The city manager is authorized to execute the following agreements and grant documents: 
A.  Any grant application and/or other related grant documents which must be executed on behalf of the city as part of the grant application and acceptance process. 
B.  Recreation services agreements used by the recreation department for purposes of hiring independent contractors who conduct special recreation programs for the city. 
C.  Reimbursement agreements with newly hired police employees with respect to the provision of services to the police department for a specified number of years of employment or, in the alternative, providing for a repayment schedule to the city on an amortized basis for expenses incurred by the city as costs of training. (Ord. 171 § 1, 2001)  
2.04.080 - Law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. (Ord. 5.8 § 9, 1990)  
2.04.090 - Authority over employees. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall have the authority to control, order and give direction to all department heads and to all subordinate employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. The city manager shall periodically evaluate all department heads and employees under his direct supervision. (Ord. 5.8 § 10, 1990)  
2.04.100 - Power of appointment and removal. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall, appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city (including, without limitation, the city clerk and city treasurer, but specifically excluding the city attorney), subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and/or regulations. Provided, that notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of any memorandum of understanding currently in effect pertaining to the appointment, removal, promotion and/or demotion of any officer and/or employee therein referenced, the provisions of said memorandum of understanding shall prevail until expiration or sooner termination of the present term thereof, all in accordance with the provisions of said memorandum of understanding. (Ord. 5.8 § 11, 1990)  
2.04.110 - Administrative reorganization of officers. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. (Ord. 5.8 § 12, 1990)  
2.04.120 - Ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary. (Ord. 5.8 § 13, 1990)  
2.04.130 - Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or city council as a whole. (Ord. 5.8 § 14, 1990)  
2.04.140 - Financial reports. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. (Ord. 5.8 § 15, 1990)  
2.04.150 - Budget. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for approval. (Ord. 5.8 § 16, 1990)  
2.04.160 - Purchasing agent. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 17, 1990)  
2.04.170 - Investigations and complaints. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government, and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city. (Ord. 5.8 § 18, 1990)  
2.04.180 - Public buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. (Ord. 5.8 § 19, 1990)  
2.04.190 - Hours of employment. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire work time to the duties of his office and in furthering the interests of the city. (Ord. 5.8 § 20, 1990)  
2.04.200 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 5.8 § 21, 1990)  
2.04.210 - Internal relations with council. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 22, 1990)  
2.04.220 - Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Ord. 5.8 § 23, 1990)  
2.04.230 - Attendance at commission meetings. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, parks and recreation commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. (Ord. 5.8 § 24, 1990)  
2.04.240 - Removal from office. 
The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the council convened in a regular council meeting. (Ord. 5.8 § 25, 1990)  
2.04.250 - Limitation on removal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.04.240, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of said ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of Section 2.04.240 shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 5.8 § 26, 1990)  
2.04.260 - Severance pay. 
Severance pay shall be provided in the employment agreement with the city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 27, 1990)  
2.04.270 - Employment agreement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any employment agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5.8 § 28, 1990)  
2.04.280 - Office of city clerk created. 
The office of city clerk is hereby established. The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 29, 1990)  
2.04.290 - Duties and authority of office. 
The city clerk shall perform such duties and exercise such authority as may be established for the office under and pursuant to applicable laws of the state of California and appropriate city ordinances presently in effect and which may hereafter be adopted or amended by the city from time to time. The city clerk shall also perform such duties as may be assigned by the city manager. (Ord. 5.8 § 30, 1990)  
2.04.300 - Qualification and compensation of office. 
The qualifications and compensation of the office shall be as established by applicable city ordinances or resolutions currently in effect and as may be adopted or amended from time to time hereafter. (Ord. 5.8 § 31, 1990)  
Chapter 2.08 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
 
2.08.010 - Established. 
There is hereby established the office of director of finance of the city. (Ord. 44 § 1, 1970)  
2.08.020 - Powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Countersign all city warrants; 
B.  Certify or approve payrolls or attendance records of all officers and employees of the city not otherwise approved by the department heads; 
C.  Coordinate and/or prepare financial reports and treasurer's reports and submit them to the city clerk for submission to the council; 
D.  Coordinate and prepare and keep all financial records of the city; 
E.  All those powers and duties set forth in Chapter 4, Title 4, Division 3, Part 2 of the Government Code and any other applicable laws of the state; 
F.  Perform such other functions as may from time to time be delegated by the city clerk or the council. (Ord. 44 § 2, 1970)  
Chapter 2.12 - HEALTH OFFICER 
 
2.12.010 - Authorized to make arrest. 
The health officer of the city and his designated subordinates, pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code Section 836.5 of the state, may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation of any ordinance, statute or law, the enforcement of which is under the administration of the health officer. Upon making such an arrest, the health officer, or his delegated subordinate, shall release the person arrested pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.6 of the state, the provisions of which are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter. (Ord. 70 § 1, 1976)  
Chapter 2.14 - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
 
2.14.010 - Created. 
There is created within the city the position of code enforcement officer. The city administrator shall designate and appoint an appropriate employee of the city as the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 135 § 1, 1988)  
2.14.020 - Powers and duties. 
The code enforcement officer is authorized, and it shall be his duty, to enforce the provisions of all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city. For purposes of this section, the code enforcement officer is authorized to arrest persons for violations of the provisions of any such ordinances or resolutions, to the extent permissible by law, all pursuant to, in accordance with, and subject to the applicable provisions of the California Penal Code including, without limitation, the provisions of Sections 19(d) and 836.5, as well as the applicable provisions of any other state law, all as the same may presently exist or hereafter be amended from time to time. (Ord. 135 § 2, 1988)  
2.14.030 - Enforcement authority not restricted. 
The provisions of Sections 2.14.010 and 2.14.020 of this chapter, shall not in anywise be construed as affecting, limiting or restricting the authority of any other duly authorized employee or officer, including, without limitation, any peace officer of the city to enforce the provisions of any ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations of the city or to effect or cause the arrest of persons for violations thereof. (Ord. 135 § 3, 1988)  
2.14.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply except to the extent of conflict with or preemption by the provisions of any applicable state law that may presently exist or hereinafter be enacted, in which event the latter shall control. (Ord. 135 § 4, 1988)  
Chapter 2.16 - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.16.010 - Created. 
There is hereby created a city planning commission which shall consist of five members. Each member shall be appointed by the council of the city. 
(Ord. 30.6 § 1 (part), 1977: Ord. 30.5 § 2, 1976)  
2.16.020 - Members. 
A.  Planning commission members shall be appointed as provided in Section 2.21.010 of this title and shall serve in office until their successors are appointed by the council. 
B.  The term of office for each planning commissioner shall commence on the date of appointment by the city council. Each member of the planning commission shall serve at the pleasure of the council and any member of the planning commission may be removed therefrom by the city council. All members of the planning commission shall be subject to the limitations set out in Section 2.21.030 B of this title. 
(Ord. 141.2 § 1, 1995: Ord. 141.1 § 1, 1991: Ord. 30.6 § 1 (part), 1977: Ord. 30.5 § 3, 1976)  
2.16.030 - Dismissal of member. 
Any member of the city planning commission who misses two consecutive planning commission meetings without prior approval of the secretary or chairman of the planning commission may be removed by council as a member of said planning commission, and if so removed, a successor shall be appointed in accord with this chapter. 
(Ord. 30.5 § 4, 1976)  
2.16.040 - Salary. 
Each member of the planning commission of the city shall receive a salary of one hundred and fifty dollars per month. 
(Ord. 30.10 § 1, 1999: Ord. 30.8 § 1, 1988)  
2.16.050 - Planning commission to perform design review duties. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the term "design review board" is used in this code, it shall refer to the city planning commission. 
(Ord. 30.9 § 1, 1996)  
2.16.060 - Bylaws. 
The planning commission shall adopt, and from time to time may amend, proposed bylaws for the conduct of its business and the holding of regular and special meetings. The bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall not become effective unless and until they are first approved by resolution of the city council. The bylaws, or any amendment approved by the council, shall become the official bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 141.3, § 2, 7-18-2012)  
Chapter 2.18 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.18.010 - Findings. 
It is hereby found, determined and declared pursuant to Section 33101 of the Health and Safety Code of the state that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said Code to function in the city, and said agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law of the State of California (Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq.). 
(Ord. 88 § 1, 1980)  
2.18.020 - City council to act as agency. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code, the city council hereby declares itself to be said agency, and all the functions, rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in said agency shall be vested in the city council. 
(Ord. 88 § 2, 1980)  
2.18.030 - Executive director. 
The city council hereby appoints the city administrator to serve as executive director of the redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. 88 § 3, 1980)  
Chapter 2.19 - ARTS COMMISSION 
 
2.19.010 - Purpose. 
The Scotts Valley arts commission is established to advise the city council on matters concerning the arts, including literature, music and other cultural activities or arts-related matters as may be directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 170 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.19.020 - Members. 
The commission shall be comprised of five members to be appointed by the city council as provided in Section 2.21.010 of this title. All members of the commission shall be residents in the Scotts Valley planning area and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and any member may be removed by the city council at their sole discretion at any time. 
The chairman and vice-chairman of the commission shall be appointed annually by the commission from amongst its voting members. The appointments shall be made as soon as practical, following the first Tuesday of November of each year. 
(Ord. 170 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.19.030 - Duties. 
The commission shall perform the following specific duties: 
A.  Advise the city council and/or city manager regarding the arts, including literature, music and other cultural activities, including development and design of facilities related to the arts. 
B.  Formulate and recommend to the city council and the city manager programs, activities and events as it pertains to the arts, including literature, music, and other cultural activities for the inhabitants of the city of Scotts Valley which will contribute to the utilization and enjoyment of their leisure time and which will promote the public appreciation, education, and development of cultural activities in the community. 
C.  Advise the city council in regard to the allocation of public funds and fund raising as it pertains to the arts, including literature, music and other cultural activities. 
D.  Establish liaison with other commissions, local schools, county cultural commission, and civic organizations in order to foster public interest in the arts. 
E.  Advise the city council concerning the creation, interpretation and implementation of new and established policies and practices of the city as they relate to the objectives of the arts commission. 
F.  Perform such other functions and duties as may be directed by the city council or prescribed or authorized by any ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 170 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.19.040 - Bylaws. 
The commission shall adopt, and from time to time may amend, proposed bylaws for the conduct of its business and the holding of regular and special meetings. The bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall not become effective unless and until they are first approved by resolution of the city council. The bylaws, or any amendment approved by the council, shall become the official bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. 170 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 2.20 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION* 
 
2.20.010 - Purpose. 
The Scotts Valley parks and recreation commission is established for the purpose of advising the city council on matters concerning city parks, open space, recreation, arts, cultural activities and/or other park and recreation services, or such other duties as may be directed from time to time, by the city council. 
(Ord. 68.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.20.020 - Members. 
A.  The parks and recreation commission shall be comprised of five members to be appointed by the city council as provided in Section 2.21.010 of this title. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and any member may be removed by the city council at any time. 
B.  In addition, the president of the board of trustees of the Scotts Valley Union School District may appoint one member of said board of trustees as an ex officio nonvoting member of the commission. 
C.  All members of the parks and recreation commission shall be subject to the limitations set out in Section 2.21.030 A of this title. 
D.  A chairman and vice-chairman shall be appointed annually by the commission from among its members entitled to vote. 
(Ord. 141.2 § 2, 1995: Ord. 141.1 § 2, 1991: Ord. 68.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.20.030 - Duties. 
The commission shall perform the following specific duties: 
A.  Advise the city council regarding policies for the acquisition, development, maintenance, and improvement of park facilities and make recommendations as appropriate. 
B.  Formulate and recommend to the city council, fee schedules, policies, rules and regulations for parksites and other recreation facilities. 
C.  Formulate and recommend to the city council a recreation and park program for the inhabitants of the city which emphasizes general educational and recreational objectives for children and adults of the city; promotes and stimulates public interest in parks and recreation programs; and which encourages to the fullest extent possible, the cooperation of the local school authorities and other public and/or private agencies or interests. 
D.  Advise the city council regarding the acceptance or rejection of offers of donations of money, personal and/or real property to the city for recreational, park purposes and use and make recommendations where appropriate. 
E.  Advise the city council regarding the recreation division and parks division budgets and make recommendations as appropriate. 
F.  Perform other duties relating to recreation and park matters as may be dictated from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 68.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.20.040 - Bylaws. 
The commission shall adopt, and from time to time may amend, proposed bylaws for the con- duct of its business and the holding of regular and special meetings. The bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall not become effective unless and until they are first approved by resolution of the city council. The bylaws, or any amendments approved by the council, shall become the official bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. 68.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.20.050 - Salary. 
Each member of the parks and recreation commission of the city shall receive a salary of seventy-five dollars per regular or special meeting attended. 
(Ord. 68.3 § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 141.3, § 3, 7-18-2012)  
Chapter 2.21 - COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BOARDS 
 
2.21.010 - Appointments to commissions, committees and boards. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere set forth in this code, all appointments to commissions, committees and boards, including the planning commission and the parks and recreation commission, shall be made by the city council; provided, however, that each council-member shall be entitled to have one person on each commission, committee or board (heretofore or hereafter established by the city council) whom that councilmember has nominated for appointment. No person nominated for appointment by any councilmember shall become a member of any commission, committee or board unless and until said person's nomination is confirmed by the city council. New nominations and appointments shall occur forty-five days after the election or reelection of each councilmember. All members appointed to any commission, committee or board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from said commission, committee or board by the city council. 
(Ord. 141.1 § 3, 1991: Ord. 141 § 3 (part), 1990)  
2.21.020 - Time of meetings. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere set forth in this code, no meeting of any commission, committee or board shall terminate later than eleven p.m.; provided, however, that any such meeting may be extended beyond eleven p.m. by a four-fifths vote of all of its members or a unanimous vote of the members present if less than all members are present. This section shall not apply to any commission, committee or board that is not a permanent, on-going regular committee or board. It specifically shall not apply to temporary or ad hoc commissions, committees or boards or committees composed solely of two councilmembers. 
(Ord. 141 § 3 (part), 1990; Ord. No. 141.3, § 4, 7-18-2012)  
2.21.030 - Residency requirements. 
A.  Except as expressly stated below, no person may be appointed to any commission, committee or board of the city unless that person resides within the adopted planning area of the city. If, after being appointed, a member of a commission, committee or board moves outside the adopted planning area of the city, that person's seat shall automatically be deemed vacant. 
B.  No person may be appointed to the planning commission of the city unless that person resides within the city limits. If, after being appointed, a member of the planning commission moves outside the city limits, that person's seat shall automatically be deemed vacant. 
C.  Except as provided below, no person may be appointed to, nor maintain membership on, the design review board of the city unless that person resides within the city limits. 
1.  If any person already serving on the board moves out of the city, but into the city's planning area, that person may continue to serve so long as he or she remains in the planning area; and 
2.  Council may appoint individuals residing in the city's planning area if the individual is professionally employed in a field closely related to design review activities. 
(Ord. 141.2 § 3, 1995)  
Chapter 2.23 - ELECTION OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS 
 
2.23.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are: 
A.  To provide that all members of the city council shall be elected in accordance with the principles of the United States and California Constitutions; 
B.  To provide that any appointment of a person to fill a vacancy on the city council will be temporary and operate only until the next election; 
C.  To provide that an open election to fill such vacancy and replace any such temporary appointment to the city council will be held as quickly as possible and in accordance with California Government Code Section 36512.2; 
D.  To provide that the selection of temporary city council appointees shall take place in open public meetings. 
(Ord. 112 § 2 (part), 1984)  
2.23.020 - Findings. 
A.  At the time of circulation of this petition, only two of the five-member city council were elected by a vote of the people. 
B.  The majority of the city council is appointed and not elected. 
C.  The California Government Code provides that a city has the authority to fill every council vacancy by an election. 
D.  Section 36512.2 of the Government Code provides that a city has the authority to limit the term of office of a temporary appointee to the city council and the authority to call for an election to fill such council vacancy. 
E.  The city council knew of these laws and authorities at the time of each appointment to the city council and refused to exercise them. 
F.  Further, by the time they approved the third, majority, appointee, the council had four separate opportunities to enact these laws and authorities and four times refused to exercise them. 
G.  These actions created a nonrepresentative and nonelected majority on the city council. 
H.  This lack of elected representation on the city council is contrary to the intent of the United States and California Constitutions and deprives the citizens of the city of democratic rights guaranteed to them by those Constitutions. 
(Ord. 112 § 2 (part), 1984)  
2.23.030 - Procedure for filling city council vacancies. 
A.  The city council shall immediately call an election to fill the remaining term of any city council vacancy. 
B.  The city council may fill such vacancy with a temporary appointment only until the date of an election called to fill that vacancy. 
C.  Elections called to fill council vacancies shall be held on the date of the next regularly scheduled election not less than ninety days from the call of the election, unless such an election date falls more than two hundred seventy days from the call of the special election, in which case the special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than ninety days from the call of the special election. 
D.  Within ninety days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall adopt ordinances to establish an open public interview and selection process for temporary council appointees. 
E.  If the city council elects to make a temporary appointment to fill a council vacancy, the following procedure shall apply: 
1.  The city shall advertise all council vacancies as established by law. 
2.  The temporary appointment shall be made within thirty days of the commencement of the vacancy. 
3.  All applicants for such temporary appointments shall be interviewed during a regularly scheduled open public council meeting. Selection of the temporary appointee shall occur during the same regularly scheduled open public council. 
(Ord. 112 § 2 (part), 1984)  
2.23.040 - Severability. 
If a portion of this chapter is hereafter determined to be invalid, all remaining portions of this ordinance codified in this chapter shall remain in full force and effect, and, to this extent, the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. 112 § 2 (part), 1984)  
2.23.050 - Date of assuming office. 
Candidates for city council elected at any council election shall assume office and be seated at the next regular council meeting following certification of election results. 
(Ord. 114 § 1, 1984)  
Chapter 2.24 - COUNCIL MEETINGS AND SALARY 
 
2.24.010 - Meeting time and place. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each month unless such date be on a holiday, in which event the city council, at its preceding meeting, shall adjourn to a day set certain. Unless otherwise specifically noticed, the time of commencement of regular meetings shall be at six p.m. Regular meetings of the city council shall end not later than eleven p.m.; provided, that any such meeting may be extended beyond eleven p.m. upon a four-fifths vote of all members of the city council or a unanimous vote of the members present if less than all members are present. Unless otherwise specifically noticed, regular meetings shall be held in the City Council Chambers located at City Hall, One Civic Center Drive, Scotts Valley, California. 
(Ord. 141 § 1, 1990: Ord. 2.8 § 1, 1988: Ord. 127 § 1, 1985; Ord. 2.07 § 1, 1983: Ord. 2.05 § 1, 1980: Ord. 2.04 § 1, 1978: Ord. 2.3 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2.02 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2.01 § 2, 1967)  
2.24.020 - Salary. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516 of the California Government Code (as the same may now exist or hereafter be amended), each member of the city council shall receive the maximum monthly salary of four hundred eighty-eight dollars and sixty-seven cents. The city shall also provide medical and health insurance coverage, and pay the cost thereof, for each council member and his or her dependents to the same extent, the same is now or hereafter provided and paid for by the city department heads. 
(Ord. 73.2 § 1, 2001: Ord. 73.1 § 1, 1991: Ord. 73 § 1, 1977)  
Chapter 2.28 - COUNCIL PROCEDURES 
 
2.28.010 - Council name and applicability. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "council procedure ordinance" of the city. It shall apply to all regular and special meetings of the council of the city, and in addition, Sections 2.28.240 through 2.28.280 shall apply to all meetings of and public hearings before the Scotts Valley Planning Commission. Reference to "presiding officer", "council", "councilmen" and "city clerk" in Sections 2.28.240 through 2.28.270 shall respectively mean, chairman, planning commission, commissioner and secretary of the planning commission when applied to planning commission meetings. 
(Ord. 12 § 1.1, 1966)  
2.28.020 - Meeting defined. 
The term "meeting" means the gathering together of a majority of the members of the council or planning commission, each member within normal hearing distance of the other, at the time and place established by ordinance or resolution for regular meetings, or at such other time and place as authorized by law for special meetings, for the purpose of acting in their official capacity as the legislative body of the city in the case of the council, and in their official capacity as the planning commission in the case of the planning commission. Unless otherwise authorized by law to be held in private, all such meetings shall be open to the public. 
No other gathering of the persons who constitute the city council or planning commission, or any portion thereof, shall be considered a meeting. Any action or decision required by law to be taken or made at a meeting shall be invalid and of no force and effect if the same is not taken or made at a meeting as herein defined. 
The foregoing shall not prevent less than a quorum, otherwise gathered at the time and place and for the purpose of conducting a meeting, from adjourning from time to time in accord with law until a quorum is present. 
If at any time the legislature of the state or the final decision of an appellate court of said state should define a meeting of a city council or a city planning commission other than as above set forth, such legislative or final judicial definition shall thereafter supersede the definition hereinabove set forth. 
(Ord. 12 § 1.2, 1966)  
2.28.030 - Actions not to be invalidated. 
Failure to observe the rules hereinafter set forth shall not invalidate any action taken which is otherwise lawful, and defective only for failure to follow the procedure outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 12 § 1.3, 1966)  
2.28.040 - Agenda. 
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, or other matters to be submitted to the council at their regular meeting shall be delivered to the city clerk not later than 5:00 on the preceding Thursday. The city clerk shall prepare an agenda of all such matters according to the order of business and shall furnish each member of the council, the city administrator, the city attorney and each department head with a copy of the same prior to the council meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no matter not included on the agenda may be presented to the council without first obtaining the unanimous consent of all councilmen present at the meeting. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.1, 1966)  
2.28.050 - Order of business. 
The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order, unless otherwise changed by order of the city council: 
Call to Order (6:00 p.m.) 
Pledge of Allegiance 
Roll Call 
Committee Reports 
City Manager Report 
Public Comment Time 
Additions/Deletions to Consent Agenda 
Additions/Deletions to Regular Agenda 
Consent Agenda 
Regular Agenda 
Public Hearings (6:30 p.m.) 
Regular Agenda (resumed, if necessary) 
Future Agenda Items 
Closed Session (if necessary) 
Adjournment 
The above order of business may be changed from time to time by the council. In addition, the regular order of business may, for any particular meeting, be suspended for any purpose by the presiding officer with consent of a majority of the council members present. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.2, 1966; Ord. 12.3 § 1, 1978; Ord. 2.9 § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 12.7, § 1, 11-6-2013)  
2.28.060 - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those physically present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.3, 1966)  
2.28.070 - Quorum. 
A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. The presence or absence of a quorum shall be determined by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.4, 1966)  
2.28.080 - Reading of minutes. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of the council meeting is requested in open meeting by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. Notwithstanding the above, reading of the minutes may always be waived by a duly carried motion to waive the reading thereof. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.5, 1966; Ord. No. 12.6, § 1, 1-20-2010)  
2.28.090 - Voting. 
A vote by roll call shall not be required unless a council member specifically requests a roll call after a motion is made and before the presiding officer calls for the vote. Unless a member of the council audibly states he is not voting, his silence shall be, and shall be recorded as, an affirmative vote. 
(Ord. 12 § 2.6, 1966)  
2.28.100 - Mayor as presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore. He shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order. In the absence of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon, a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the temporary presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the particular business immediately before the council at that time. Wherever in this ordinance the term mayor is used, it shall apply equally to the presiding officer as defined in this section. 
(Ord. 12 § 3.1, 1966; Ord. 12.2 § 1, 1968)  
2.28.110 - Powers and duties of presiding officer. 
The presiding officer shall have a vote, but no veto power, and may move, second and debate from the chair. He shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. He shall state, or call upon the clerk to state, every question before the council on all subjects. He shall decide all questions of order, subject however to an appeal to the council or any councilman, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He shall have and exercise such other powers and duties as are contained elsewhere in this ordinance, and as are authorized by law. 
(Ord. 12 § 3.2, 1966)  
2.28.120 - Additional powers. 
The presiding officer shall have power and authority in his discretion and without a vote of the council, to: 
A.  Refer any matter, whether or not on the agenda, to a committee for study and report. Such power may not be exercised while a motion is on the floor covering such matter, until the motion is disposed of. Once a matter has been referred to committee and a report rendered thereon, it may not thereafter be referred to committee a second time under this power but only by council action; 
B.  Set time limits on council discussion on any matter; 
C.  Set time limits on any communications from members of the public to the council; 
D.  Declare the opening and closing of public hearings; 
E.  Rule any motion on a subject not on the agenda as being out of order, in which case the motion shall thereafter be void and the clerk shall set the subject matter thereof down on the agenda of the next regular or special council meeting; 
F.  Table any motion on any matter until the next regular or special council meeting, whenever the city attorney advises that there is a serious question as to the validity or constitutionality of the particular proposed course of action which is the subject matter of said motion; 
G.  Require any witness testifying to facts at any public hearing to be sworn before proceeding further with any such testimony. 
(Ord. 12 § 3.3, 1966)  
2.28.130 - Preparation of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall be prepared by or under the direction of the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor or city administrator, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(Ord. 12 § 4.1, 1966)  
2.28.140 - Prior review by administrative staff. 
Before presentation to the council, all ordinances, written resolutions and contract documents shall have been approved as to form by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(Ord. 12 § 4.2, 1966)  
2.28.150 - Introduction for passage or approval. 
A.  Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor, city administrator or city attorney may present the same and any councilman may assume the sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution or matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. 
B.  Any ordinance may be introduced by the reading of the title only. All ordinances shall be read in full at least once prior to final passage and adoption, unless the reading thereof is dispensed with by the unanimous vote of the council present at a regular meeting. Notwithstanding the above, all emergency ordinances shall be read in full prior to passage and adoption. 
C.  Resolutions may be presented in written or oral form. Where written, the resolution need only be read by title and number prior to action thereon, and only the motion adopting it need appear in the minutes. Where oral, the same shall be stated in full by the moving party, and if adopted, shall either: 
1.  Be transcribed in full in the minutes; or 
2.  Thereafter be reduced to written form separate from the minutes, executed by the presiding officer and attested by the city clerk. 
The presiding officer shall direct which final form a verbally presented resolution shall take. 
D.  The presiding officer shall call all motions to a vote except those which have not been seconded. 
E.  All motions for enactment of any ordinance, resolution or other council action which do not receive the required vote for passage shall nevertheless be entered in the minutes. 
(Ord. 12 § 4.3, 1966; Ord. 12.1 § 1, 1968)  
2.28.160 - Presiding officer may debate. 
The mayor or such other member of the council as may be acting as presiding officer may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members. He shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilman by reason of his being mayor or acting as presiding officer. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.1, 1966)  
2.28.170 - Getting the floor. 
Every council member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.2, 1966)  
2.28.180 - Interruptions. 
A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.3, 1966)  
2.28.190 - Privilege of closing debate. 
The councilman moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution, or council action, shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.4, 1966)  
2.28.200 - Motion to reconsider. 
A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, and may be made at any time and shall have precedence over all other motions and shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.5, 1966)  
2.28.210 - Remarks of councilmen—Synopsis of debate. 
A councilman may request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. 
If the council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. The clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the council. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.6, 1966)  
2.28.220 - Rules of order. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings of the council shall be governed under "Roberts' Rules of Order" on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law. 
(Ord. 12 § 5.7, 1966)  
2.28.230 - Failure to observe rules of order on debate. 
No action of the council shall be invalidated nor the legality thereof affected by the failure or omission to observe or follow the within rules of debate or "Roberts' Rules of Order". 
(Ord. 12 § 5.8, 1966)  
2.28.240 - Addressing the council. 
General. Any person desiring to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do; provided, however, that under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any qualified and interested person shall have the right to address the council upon obtaining recognition by the presiding officer: 
A.  Written communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council by written communication. If copies of said communications are furnished to each councilman present, such written communications need not be read aloud at the meeting unless so ordered by a majority vote of the council. 
B.  Oral communications. Taxpayers or residents of the city or their authorized legal representative may address the council by oral communications on any matter concerning the city's business, or any matter over which the council has control; provided, however, that preference shall be given to those persons who may have notified the city clerk in advance of their desire to speak. 
C.  Public hearings. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the council by reading a protest, petition, or communication relating to matters the subject of public hearing under this category, and the order of presentation and the time thereof shall be under the direction and control of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 12 § 6.1, 1966)  
2.28.250 - Manner of addressing council. 
Each person addressing the council shall stand and give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and shall speak into the microphone provided at all times that the electronic public address system is in operation. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than the council and person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No person shall address or question a council member, the city attorney, the director of public works, the city administrator or other official at the council table without the prior consent of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 12 § 6.2, 1966)  
2.28.260 - Particular rules. 
A.  Written communications on a particular matter for council discussion shall be read by the council at the time of such discussion rather than under the agenda item of "written communications". 
B.  Written communications from the administrative staff shall not be read aloud unless requested by the writer or any councilman. 
C.  Anonymous communications shall not be read. 
D.  The presiding officer shall not permit any communication, written or oral, to be made or read where it does not bear directly on an agenda item then under discussion. 
E.  After a motion is made by a councilman, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the council to do so. 
(Ord. 12 § 6.3, 1966)  
2.28.270 - Public hearings—General rules. 
The following general rules shall be applicable to all public hearings by the council (except hearings on appeal which are not de novo hearings), and to all public hearings by the Scotts Valley Planning Commission until such time as separate rules are adopted by ordinance for planning commission public hearings: 
A.  No written communication received by the council or planning commission after the close of a public hearing shall be read or considered in determining the issue in question; unless prior to the close of such hearing, the presiding officer has specifically directed that such written communication be received. 
B.  Referral to committee for report. 
1.  Subject to the limitations hereafter set forth, the presiding officer may, and on hearings de novo on appeal to the council on zoning variances, adjustments and use permits the presiding officer shall, prior to close of the hearing, refer the matter to a committee for report and recommendation. The hearing shall be continued to such date as the report is ordered filed, and at that future time the continued hearing shall be restricted solely to the point raised in the committee report, and thereafter shall be closed. 
2.  No matter the subject of a public hearing shall be referred to committee nor a report therefrom considered by the council or planning commission after a public hearing is closed, unless the same is reopened on rendition of the report for the limited purpose, however, of discussing the report. 
3.  Any matter referred to committee for report may be acted on without such report if the same is not rendered at the time required. 
C.  Whenever in the approval of a tentative subdivision map or building site, the granting of a zoning variance or adjustment, or of a use or architectural and site control permit, conditions are imposed or to be imposed, a reasonable opportunity shall be provided the applicant to discuss such proposed conditions and the effect thereof prior to the imposition of the same. 
"Reasonable opportunity" for the purposes of this section shall mean as follows: 
1.  Where the matter is referred to committee prior to action thereon, the committee shall discuss any proposed conditions with a representative of applicant prior to rendition of the report. A copy of such report shall be filed with the city clerk, or secretary of the planning commission at least three days prior to the date of the continued hearing; or 
2.  Where the public hearing is closed and action taken directly thereon by the council or planning commission without committee report, after a motion to approve with conditions and before a second to said motion, a single representative of applicant may address the council and briefly discuss the proposed conditions; or 
3.  Such other reasonable method in lieu thereof as may be ordered by the presiding officer. 
D.  In all other respects the rules for addressing the council shall be applicable to public hearings. 
(Ord. 12 § 7.1, 1966)  
2.28.275 - Public hearings—Commencement time. 
A.  All public hearings before the city council shall commence at 6:30 p.m. on the meeting date in question or as soon thereafter as the course of business permits, regardless of position on the agenda. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A. of this section, the presiding officer with the consent of the majority of the councilmembers present may designate an earlier or later time for commencement of a particular public hearing to be held at any succeeding meeting of the council. All public hearings shall be duly noticed as required by law. 
(Ord. 12.4 §§ 1, 2, 1990; Ord. No. 12.5, § 1, 4-16-2008)  
2.28.280 - Hearings on appeal from planning commission. 
Hearings de novo on appeal shall be conducted in the same manner as required for the original hearing before the planning commission. On other than de novo hearings, no member of the public may address the council save for one speaker for the appellant and one for the respondent, with a limitation of fifteen minutes per side in total. These limitations may be modified, changed or suspended by resolution of the council at any time. 
(Ord. 12 § 7.2, 1966)  
2.28.290 - Decorum and enforcement. 
While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt proceedings or the pace of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Ord. 12 § 8.1, 1966)  
2.28.300 - By other persons. 
Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the council, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. 12 § 8.2, 1966)  
2.28.310 - Council contempt. 
While the council is in session, any person who acts in a disorderly, contemptuous or insolent manner towards the council or any council member thereof, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council or any council member thereof, which conduct tends to interrupt the due course of the meeting; or any member of the public in attendance who fails, on demand of the presiding officer, to comply with any rule set forth in Sections 2.28.240 through 2.28.280 of this chapter, or any order of the presiding officer made in accord with the authority of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 12 § 8.3, 1966)  
2.28.320 - Enforcement of decorum. 
The chief of police of the city and his deputies, or such one of them as shall be present, shall be sergeant at arms of the council meeting. He, or they, shall carry out all orders of the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meetings. Upon instructions from the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the order or the decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of this ordinance, the complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 12.2 § 2, 1966)  
2.28.330 - Adjournment. 
Any meeting may either be terminated, or continued to another time, place and/or date by adjournment, regardless of whether or not all matters on the agenda, or under discussion have been covered, acted on or concluded. Notwithstanding the above, no meeting shall be terminated before closing all public hearings noticed for that meeting, without first continuing said public hearings to another time, place and date. Subject to the above, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. Where a meeting is continued to a future date, if either the time or place, or both of them, is not stated in the order of adjournment, it shall be deemed to be at the hour and place specified for regular meetings of the council. 
(Ord. 12 § 9.1, 1966)  
Chapter 2.32 - BONDS FOR CITY CLERK AND TREASURER 
 
2.32.010 - Designated. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36518 of the state, the bond of the city clerk is hereby fixed at five thousand dollars corporate surety, and the bond of the city treasurer is hereby fixed at five thousand dollars corporate surety. Each bond shall be approved by the council. (Ord. 3 § 1, 1966)  
2.32.020 - Blanket bond coverage. 
The mayor, the mayor pro tempore, the deputies of the city clerk and city treasurer, and all other department heads and their deputies, exclusive of the city clerk and the city treasurer, shall be covered by a blanket primary commercial fidelity bond in the sum of eighty thousand dollars. (Ord. 3 § 1, 1966)  
Chapter 2.36 - TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 
 
2.36.010 - Desire for aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 25 § 1, 1966)  
2.36.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of said Chapter 1, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 25 § 2, 1966)  
Chapter 2.40 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.40.010 - Holding time—Disposition. 
All unclaimed property shall be held by the police department of the city for at least four months, except for unclaimed bicycles, which shall be held for at least three months. Should any of such property remain unclaimed by the true owner for such period, it shall thereafter be transferred to the city purchasing and stores agency for sale to the public at public auction; provided, however, that the city purchasing and stores agency may determine that any such property transferred to it for sale is needed for public use and if such determination is made, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. The provisions of this section and chapter are specifically made subject to the provisions of Section 2080.3 of the Civil Code of the state, as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time. (Ord. 126 § 1(A), 1985; Ord. 48.1 § 2, 1976)  
2.40.020 - Purchasing and stores agency designated. 
The city administrator of the city or his designated representative, is designated as the city's purchasing and stores agency, pursuant to Civil Code Section 2080.4 and other applicable laws. (Ord. 126 § 1(B), 1985; Ord. 48.1 § 3, 1976)  
2.40.030 - Regulations by state code. 
All property which is subject to the Penal Code of the state and regulated thereby shall be handled in accordance with such provisions, notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 48.1 § 4, 1976)  
Chapter 2.44 - PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
2.44.010 - Contract with city. 
A contract between the council of the city and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized. A copy of the contract is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 62 § 1, 1975)  
2.44.020 - Mayor authorized. 
The mayor of the council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute the contract for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord. 62 § 2, 1975)  
Chapter 2.48 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTERS 
 
2.48.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of a disaster and to provide for the coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such civil defense and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 31 § 1, 1969)  
2.48.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Civil Defense. As used in this chapter, the term "civil defense" means preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy. 
B.  Disaster. As used in this chapter, the term "disaster" means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity. (Ord. 31 § 2, 1969)  
2.48.030 - Council membership. 
The Scotts Valley civil defense and disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of civil defense and disaster, who shall be vice-chairman; 
C.  The deputy director appointed by the director of civil defense with the advice of the council who, under the supervision of the director, shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the civil defense and disaster program of this city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director; 
D.  Such assistant directors and chiefs of civil defense and disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official group or organization civil defense and disaster responsibility as may be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 31 § 3, 1969)  
2.48.040 - Council. 
It shall be the duty of the Scotts Valley civil defense and disaster council, and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the council, civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The civil defense and disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 31 § 4, 1969)  
2.48.050 - Director of civil defense and disaster—Powers and duties. 
There is created the office of director of civil defense and disaster. Such officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
The director is empowered to: 
A.  Request the council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster or an emergency and the termination thereof if the council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the council at the earliest practicable time; 
B.  Request the governor to proclaim a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster; 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
D.  Direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.  Represent the civil defense and disaster organization of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster. (Ord. 31 § 5, 1969)  
2.48.060 - Powers of director. 
In the event of the proclamation of a disaster or emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency by the governor or the director of the California Disaster Office, the director is hereby empowered to: 
A.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council. 
B.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
C.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency by the governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and disaster service volunteers; 
D.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
E.  Execute all of his ordinary powers as required by his official position within the city, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the constitution and general laws. (Ord. 31 § 6, 1969)  
2.48.070 - Civil defense and disaster organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of subsection C of Section 2.48.060 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense and disaster organization of the city. (Ord. 31 § 7, 1969)  
2.48.080 - Divisions, services and staff of the organization. 
The functions and duties of the civil defense and disaster organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution. The council shall, concurrently with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, adopt a resolution setting forth the form of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of functions, duties and powers, and the designation of officers and employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the civil defense and disaster agencies of the federal government and the state of California. (Ord. 31 § 8, 1977)  
2.48.090 - Punishment of violations. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during a disaster to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense and disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  To wear, carry or display without authority any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the state. (Ord. 31 § 9, 1977)  
Chapter 2.52 - USE OF CRIMINAL HISTORY INFORMATION 
 
2.52.010 - Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for employment by the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the appointing authority shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The classification, including its sensitivity, to which the person is applying or being certified and whether the classification is unrelated to the conviction; 
2.  The nature and seriousness of the offense; 
3.  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
4.  The length of time elapsed since the conviction; 
5.  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
6.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; 
7.  Contributing social or environmental conditions. 
B.  The appointing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application for employment. 
C.  An applicant who is disqualified for employment under this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of notice of disqualification. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety days after it is filed. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a peace officer position shall be disqualified, without right of appeal, from employment if the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling employment duties set forth in this section: City administrator, city clerk, chief of police, and city attorney. (Ord. 82 § 1, 1979)  
2.52.020 - Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or misdemeanor shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for the following city licenses or permits: 
1.  Business licenses and entertainment permits. 
B.  The city licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the city licensing authority shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The type of business license or permit for which the person is applying; 
2.  The nature and seriousness of the offense; 
3.  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
4.  The length of time elapsed since the conviction; 
5.  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
6.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; 
7.  Contributing social or environmental conditions. 
C.  The city licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
D.  An applicant who is disqualified for a city business license or permit under this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety days after it is filed. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling licensing duties set forth in this section: city administrator, city clerk, chief of police, and city attorney. (Ord. 82 § 2, 1979)  
2.52.030 - Copy of regulations to Department of Justice. 
The city clerk shall forward a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the Department of Justice Criminal Records Security Unit. (Ord. 82 § 4, 1979)  
Chapter 2.56 - ELECTIONS 
 
2.56.010 - Holding of general municipal elections. 
All general municipal elections in the city shall hereafter be held on the same day as the statewide general election, on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. (Gov. Code § 36503.5) (Ord. 105.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.56.020 - County approval. 
Following its adoption by the city council, this chapter shall become operative upon its approval by the Santa Cruz County board of supervisors as provided in Government Code Section 36503.5. (Ord. 105.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
2.56.030 - City clerk requirements. 
The city clerk shall perform the requirements of Government Code Section 36503.5(e). (Ord. 105.2 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 2.60 - SCOTTS VALLEY CAMPAIGN REFORM ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. 150.2, § 1, adopted May 5, 2010, amended ch. 2.60 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 2.60, §§ 2.60.010—2.60.080, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 150, § 1 (part), adopted 1992; Ord. 150.1, § 1, adopted May 5, 2004. 
 
2.60.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Scotts Valley Campaign Reform Act. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.020 - Purpose. 
A.  Large sums of money are often expended to finance election campaigns. Inherent in the high cost of elections is the problem of excessive or improper influence, real or perceived, exercised by campaign contributors over elected officials, and over the electoral process itself. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter, to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amount that individual persons may contribute to political campaigns in city elections. 
B.  This chapter is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act of 1974 and as subsequently amended; and in the event of a conflict between the Act and this article, that Act shall prevail. This chapter is enacted pursuant to article XI, section 17 of the Constitution of the State of California, and section 10102 of the California Elections Code. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.030 - Interpretation of this Act. 
The definitions set forth in Government Code Sections 82000 et seq. shall govern the interpretation of this Act. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.040 - Limitations on contributions. 
A.  No individual or non-individual, including a firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert shall contribute to any candidate for the office of city council member or the controlled committee of such a candidate and no such candidate or the candidate's controlled committee shall accept from any individual or non-individual, including a firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert a contribution or contributions totaling more than one hundred dollars for each election in which the candidate is on the ballot or is a write-in candidate. 
B.  No candidate for the office of city council member or the controlled committee of such a candidate shall accept any contribution from a non-individual, including a firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. 
C.  A contribution shall not be considered to be received if it is neither negotiated, deposited, and/or utilized by the candidate or the candidate's controlled committee. In addition, it must be returned to the donor within fourteen days of receipt. (Failure to return the contribution within fourteen days shall be deemed to be acceptance.) 
D.  A candidate for the office of city council member shall have no more than one campaign committee and one checking account out of which all expenditures shall be made. This subsection shall not prohibit the establishment of savings accounts, but no qualified campaign expenditures shall be made out of these accounts. 
E.  No person who contracts with the jurisdiction, for the rendition of personal services, for the furnishing of any material, supplies or equipment to the city or for selling any land or building to the city, whenever the value of such transaction exceeds five thousand dollars shall make any contribution to an elected city council member of the city, candidate for the office of city council member, or committee controlled by such official or candidate at any time between the commencement of negotiations and either the completion of the performance under or the termination of negotiations for, such contract, whichever occurs later. 
F.  The local filing officer shall monitor the contributions and expenditures described herein, and shall charge the candidate a fee, in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, for the cost of processing the statements. 
G.  A candidate for the office of city councilmember shall have no more than one campaign committee and one checking account out of which all expenditures shall be made. This section shall not prohibit the establishment of savings accounts, but no qualified campaign expenditures shall be made out of these accounts. 
H.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit loans from a candidate to his/her own campaign in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.050 - Duties of local filing officer. 
A.  The city clerk shall act as the local filing officer. 
B.  The local filing officer shall prescribe the necessary forms for filing the appropriate statements. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.060 - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Act is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who causes any other person to violate any provision of this Act, or who aids and abets any other person in the violation of any provision of this Act, shall be liable under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
2.60.070 - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of this state or jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 510.2, § 1, 5-5-2010)  
Chapter 2.64 - PROHIBITION OF GIFTS 
 
2.64.010 - Gifts prohibited. 
A.  No officer or designated employee of the city, the redevelopment agency or the public financing authority shall accept any gift, directly or indirectly, from any person who is subject to the decision-making or recommending authority of such officer or employee, except as specifically provided in this section. 
B.  "Person subject to the decision-making or recommending authority" means any individual, firm or entity whose interest or whose employer's or client's interest: 
1.  Has been materially affected by the work of such officer or employee within one year prior to the time the gift is given; or 
2.  In the near future could reasonably be foreseen to be materially affected by the work of such officer or employee. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.64.020 - Gift defined. 
"Gift" means a voluntary transfer of any thing, service, payment or value to the extent that legal consideration of equal or greater value is not received. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the term "gift" includes: 
1.  Any rebate or discount in the price of anything of value unless the rebate or discount is made in the regular course of business to members of the public without regard to official status, or unless the rebate or discount is made available to all officers and employees of the city, the redevelopment agency and the public finance authority on an equal basis; 
2.  An officer's or employee's community property interest, if any, in a gift received by that individual's spouse; and 
3.  The provision of travel, including transportation, accommodations and food, except as expressly permitted pursuant to Section 2.64.030. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the term "gift" does not include: 
1.  Campaign contributions which otherwise comply with the California Political Reform Act (Gov. Code, § 81000 et seq.) which are required to be reported under Chapter 4 of that Act as amended; and 
2.  Any devise or inheritance. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.64.030 - Gifts not prohibited. 
This chapter does not prohibit those gifts which strictly fall within the exceptions enumerated herein: 
A.  Gifts Less Than Fifty Dollars. Gifts which have a value of no more than fifty dollars, as long as the total value of all such gifts received from any one donor does not exceed fifty dollars in any calendar year; 
B.  Informational Material. Informational material such as books, reports, pamphlets, calendars, or periodicals or reimbursement for any such expenses including the provision of educational trips including transportation, accommodations and food; 
C.  Hospitality. Gifts of hospitality involving food, beverages or lodging provided to any officer or designated employee by an individual in such individual's primary residence; 
D.  Reciprocal Gifts. Gifts exchanged between any officer or designated employee and an individual other than a local governmental lobbyist on holidays, birthdays, or similar occasions. This exception shall not apply to the extent that the gift received by the officer or designated employee exceeds in value gifts that he or she has given to the donor; 
E.  Meals and Beverages. Meals and beverages provided to an officer or employee in a business or a social setting; 
F.  Honoraria and Awards. Honorarium and awards. As used in this chapter, "honorarium" means a payment or gift for speaking at an event, participating in a panel or seminar, or engaging in any similar activity; 
G.  Panels and Seminars. Free admission, food, beverages, and similar nominal benefits provided to an officer or employee at an event at which the officer or employee speaks, participates in a panel or seminar or performs a similar service, and reimbursement or advance for actual travel or for necessary accommodations provided directly in connection with such event; 
H.  Admission Given by Sponsor of an Event. Admission to ceremonial, political, civic, cultural or community functions provided by a sponsor of the event; 
I.  Employment Interview. Transportation, accommodations, food and directly related expenses, advanced or reimbursed in connection with an employment interview; 
J.  Authorized Travel. Transportation, accommodations, food and directly related expenses for any officer or designated employee which has been authorized by a majority of the council or agency board or which is pursuant to a written city or agency policy for intrastate or interstate travel regardless of the source of payment; 
K.  City or Agency Business. Transportation provided to an officer or designated employee by a contractor or other person doing business with the city or redevelopment agency, provided that such transportation is related to city or agency business which is within the scope of employment or the duties of such officer or designated employee. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to limit the council's or agency board's discretion to approve travel under subsection J above; 
L.  Flowers. Flowers, candy, plants or balloons which are given on ceremonial occasions, to express condolences or congratulations, or to commemorate special occasions; and 
M.  Prizes. A prize awarded on the basis of chance. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.64.040 - Acceptance of gifts. 
A gift shall be deemed to have been accepted except where: 
A.  It is not used, and, within thirty days after receipt, is returned to the donor or delivered to a charitable organization without being claimed as a charitable contribution for tax purposes; 
B.  It is treated as and remains the property of the city or agency; and 
C.  It is received by an officer or designated employee in his or her official capacity or as a representative of the city or agency, is reported to the city council or agency board, and the council or board approves the retention. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.64.050 - Reporting of gifts received by spouse and children. 
A.  At the time of filing the annual disclosure statement required by the Political Reform Act or any applicable conflict-of-interest code, each city and redevelopment agency officer and designated employee shall file a family gift report on a form to be provided by the city clerk. 
B.  The officer or designated employee shall indicate on such report any gifts known to have been accepted during the relevant reporting period by such officer's, designated employee's or employee's spouse or any dependent child where such gifts would have been prohibited to the officer or designated employee. The value of any such gift and the donor must be disclosed. If the officer or designated employee has no knowledge of any such gift having been received, the report shall so state. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.64.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  Other Enforcement Sections Inapplicable. Enforcement of this chapter shall not be governed by Section 1.08.010 of this code, unless such violation constitutes a separate violation of another section or provision of this code or of another applicable provision of law. 
B.  Civil Penalties. 
1.  Any violation of this chapter by an officer or employee of the city or redevelopment agency may be deemed a failure to perform the duties under, or to observe the rules and regulations of the department, office, board or commission of such officer or employee within the meaning of the civil service ordinances and other rules and regulations of the city or agency. 
2.  Additionally, this chapter may be enforced in a civil action brought against any officer or employee who has violated any provision hereof by the city attorney or by an individual appointed by the city attorney to bring such action in the public interest. The damages in such civil action shall be five thousand dollars or the value of any gift given or services rendered or received in violation of this chapter, whichever is greater. Any such damages recovered in said civil action shall be paid into the city's general fund. 
3.  Any person other than a defendant in a criminal action, who claims that a payment or something of value received is not a gift by reason of consideration given, has the burden of proving that the consideration given is of equal or greater value than that received. (Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1992).  
Chapter 2.68 - RESOURCE MANAGEMENT POLICY 
 
2.68.010 - Statement of policy. 
The city declares its scarce resources to be significant to the well-being of the city and valuable to manage wisely. To fulfill this aim, the council adopts this policy to assure all actions taken by the council will be made with a full and complete understanding of the consequences a decision will have on the city's scarce resources. (Ord. 155 § 1, 1992)  
2.68.020 - Preparation of resource inventory— Annual review by council. 
The planning director shall prepare an inventory of valuable environmental resources upon which the city relies, and the council shall review the availability of these resources at least once every year. The planning director shall update this inventory as appropriate. (Ord. 155 § 2, 1992)  
2.68.030 - Council review. 
Following the presentation of the report prepared by the community development director as provided in this section, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the availability of resources within the city. These resources which are reviewed shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Infrastructure: 
1.  Traffic carrying capacity for roads and intersections within the city, 
2.  Average daily trips or roads within the city, 
3.  Capacity of the city's wastewater treatment plant, and 
4.  Capacity of the city's recycled water facility; 
B.  Economy: 
1.  Number of businesses and employees within the city, 
2.  Number of businesses and employees with a city business license, 
3.  Tax revenues for the fiscal year, and 
4.  Vacant land inventory by type of use within the city; 
C.  Housing: 
1.  Market rate housing type and sales price for the year, 
2.  Rental housing type and rental rate for the year, 
3.  Affordable housing type and sales price for the year, 
4.  Affordable rental housing type and rental rate for the year, and 
5.  Compare jobs to housing balance; 
D.  Community: 
1.  Number of city schools (public and private), school capacity, enrollment figures and average class sizes, 
2.  Number and type of existing public and private parks and recreation facilities within the city, and 
3.  Number of sites with historic or cultural value within the city; 
E.  Natural Environment: 
1.  Water supply and demand capacity in each water purveyors district supplying water within the city, and 
2.  Air quality within the city. (Ord. 155.3 § 1, 1999: Ord. 155.2 § 1, 1996: Ord. 155.1 § 1, 1995: Ord. 155 § 3, 1992)  
2.68.040 - Community development director report. 
A.  The community development director shall prepare a written report which shall be made available to the council and the public at the first regular council meeting in March. The report shall be prepared with the input from all agencies serving the city, as well as other city departments. The report shall include an analysis of city resources formatted in the following fashion: 
1.  Present availability of each resource; 
2.  Projected demand for the coming year, for five years and for ten years into the future; and 
3.  Recommended limitations, restrictions or allocations, if any, upon the use or reuse of each resource for purposes of short-term and long-term planning for the growth of the city in an orderly, efficient and environmentally sound use of resources. 
B.  The report shall contain information outlined in a "method of reporting" which shall be adopted by the council by resolution. (Ord. 155.2 § 2, 1996: Ord. 155.1 § 2, 1995: Ord. 155 § 4, 1992)  
2.68.050 - Evaluation of report—Criteria for resource consumption. 
Following review of the planning director's report and any oral or written testimony provided at the public hearing, the council shall evaluate the information and determine which resource supply, if any, is or soon will be, threatened by over-consumption or use. To effectively manage the available resources, the council may establish criteria for consumption of the resources. Based on the council's criteria, and upon the council's sole discretion, certain threatened resources may be preserved by methods such as allocation of land use permits, limitations in growth, or other land use planning tools which will prevent premature, unnecessary or unsustainable over-consumption of resources within the city. (Ord. 155 § 5, 1992)  
Chapter 2.70 - PURCHASING 
 
2.70.010 - Establish purchasing procedure and centralized purchasing office. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of services, materials, supplies and/or equipment for the city at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, and to clearly define authority for the purchasing function to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing procedure is adopted and a centralized purchasing office under the direction of a purchasing officer is established. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.020 - Purchasing officer. 
The purchasing officer shall be the city manager, or his/her designated representative. The duties of purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing officer shall have authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for services, materials, supplies and/or equipment required by any city department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing office and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of services, materials, supplies and/or equipment; 
C.  Procure for the city the needed quality in services, materials, supplies and/or equipment at the least expense; 
D.  Discourage uniform or collusive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
E.  Prepare and recommend rules governing the purchase of services, materials, supplies and/or equipment for the city; 
F.  Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules; 
G.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
H.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other purchasing rules and regulations; 
I.  Supervise the inspection of all services, materials, supplies and/or equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications; 
J.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies, materials and/or equipment between city departments as needed and the sale or trade of all supplies, materials and/or equipment which cannot be used by any city department or which have become unsuitable for city use; and 
K.  Maintain a bidders' list, vendors catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing office. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Emergency" means any natural disaster, work stoppage or other action or activity that impairs public health, safety or both. 
"Local vendor" means any wholesaler, distributor, dealer, merchant or seller of goods and/or services with their primary place of business located within the city limits of Scotts Valley. 
"Materials, supplies and/or equipment" means all materials, supplies and/or equipment of whatever kind purchased by the city except materials, supplies and/or equipment for public works projects and governed by law related to bidding for public works projects. 
"Professional services" means the services of attorneys; physicians; architects; engineers; consultants; auditors; specialized printers; other individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized, technical skill and/or expertise not adaptable to competitive bidding; individuals contracting for special activities or negotiating for the acquisition of land; individuals contracting to provide services related to insurance bonds or any other services of a similar nature engaged for a particular project or series of projects; or other governmental agencies. 
"Services" means all types of service except services provided by persons performing professional services. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.040 - Exceptions from centralized purchasing. 
The purchasing officer may authorize any city department to purchase or contract for specified services, materials, supplies and/or equipment independently of the purchasing officer, provided that such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter. Such authorization by the purchasing officer may be either in writing or verbally, except that any authorization in excess of the informal purchase limits shall be in writing. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.050 - Estimates of requirements. 
All city departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements for services, materials, supplies and/or equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer shall prescribe. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.060 - Open market procedure. 
Any single purchase of contractual services, materials, supplies and/or equipment of an estimated value of less than five thousand dollars, may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market, subject only to such limitations as are set forth by the city council. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.070 - Requisitions. 
City departments requiring services, materials, supplies and/or equipment shall submit requests to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms provided by the purchasing office. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.080 - Informal bidding procedures. 
Any single purchase of services, materials, supplies and/or equipment of an estimated value of five thousand dollars to fifty thousand dollars may be made by the purchasing officer by observing the following procedures: 
A.  Inviting Informal Bids. The purchasing officer may solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the Scotts Valley city hall or by any other means deemed reasonably effective. 
B.  Written Informal Bids. The purchasing officer may accept sealed, written informal bids or oral bids as deemed appropriate. 
C.  Minimum Number of Bids. Purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three informal bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder except as provided in Section 2.70.150, Local vendor preference. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.090 - Formal bidding procedures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for services, supplies, materials and/or equipment of an estimated value in excess of fifty thousand dollars shall be formally bid as provided hereinafter. 
A.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date set for opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a trade paper, magazine or a newspaper of general circulation. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
B.  Sealed Bids. Bids shall be submitted in sealed envelopes on or before the hour set by the city to receive the bids. 
C.  Bidders' Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidders' security may be required as set forth in public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of their bid security. The successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of the contract has been mailed first class, postage prepaid by the city. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder. 
D.  Bid Opening Procedure. The sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. 
E.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, for any reason whatsoever, the city council may reject all bids presented, readvertise for bids, or waive the bidding procedure if deemed necessary by a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
F.  Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
G.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit for delay to readvertise for bids, the city council may accept the bid it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders. 
H.  Emergency Procedures. In the event of an emergency as defined in Section 2.70.030, the purchasing office may purchase services, supplies, materials and/or equipment in the open market without complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.110 - Bidding for public works projects. 
By council resolution Nos. 1137 and 1137.1, the city council elected to be subject to the uniform construction accounting procedures set forth in Article 2 (commencing with Section 22010) of the California Public Contract Code (the "Act"). Public projects of the public works department, as defined in the Act (Section 22002), or as those sections may be amended from time to time by the state legislature, shall be advertised, bid and awarded in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 22030) of the Act. To the extent Sections 2.70.111 through 2.70.114 are inconsistent with the Act, the provisions of the Act shall prevail. (Ord. 157.1 § 1, 1996: Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.111 - Same—Informal bid procedures. 
Public projects, as defined in the Act, of less than seventy-five thousand dollars may be let as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Act. (Ord. 157.1 § 2 (part), 1996)  
2.70.112 - Same—Contractors list. 
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Act and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (the "Commission"). (Ord. 157.1 § 2 (part), 1996)  
2.70.113 - Same—Notice inviting informal bids. 
When a public project is to be performed that is subject to Section 2.70.111, a notice inviting informal bids will be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 2.70.112. Additional contractors or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids; provided however: 
A.  If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission; and 
B.  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to that contractor or contractors. (Ord. 157.1 § 2 (part), 1996).  
2.70.114 - Same—Award of informal bid contracts. 
The city council will award informal contracts under Section 2.70.111 or designate a specific city officer to make the award on a project by project basis. (Ord. 157.1 § 2 (part), 1996)  
2.70.120 - Available funds. 
Except in the event of an emergency as outlined in Section 2.70.090 H of this chapter, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for services, materials, supplies and/or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.130 - Surplus or unused supplies, materials and equipment. 
All city departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such manner as he/she may prescribe, reports showing all supplies, materials and/or equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or no longer usable by the city. The purchasing officer shall have authority to sell, exchange or trade supplies, materials and/or equipment which no longer can be used by any city department or which are unsuitable for city use, or trade the same for new supplies, materials and/or equipment. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.140 - Recycled materials and supplies. 
Whenever available at a reasonably comparable price, quality and fitness for intended use, the purchasing officer shall purchase recycled materials and supplies. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.70.150 - Local vendor preference. 
The purchasing officer shall establish and maintain procedures which provide for award of contracts for services, materials, supplies and/or equipment to local vendors in the city so long as their bid is no greater than one percent over the otherwise lowest bid. (Ord. 157 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION TO COUNTY 
 
3.04.010 - Transference of duties. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the state (Government Code Sections 51500-51520), the council transfers the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector to the assessor and tax collector of Santa Cruz County, the county in which the city is situate. 
(Ord. 22 § 1, 1968)  
3.04.020 - Compensation to county. 
The city shall pay to the county of Santa Cruz such compensation as may be fixed by agreement between the board of supervisors of Santa Cruz County and the council, and the negotiation of such an agreement is hereby authorized. 
(Ord. 22 § 2, 1968)  
3.04.030 - Transfer of assessor duties to city clerk. 
All duties provided by law to be performed by the city assessor, other than the assessing of property, shall be transferred to, and be performed by the city clerk or such other officer as the council may hereafter determine by resolution. All duties provided by law to be performed by the city tax collector, other than the collection of taxes, shall be transferred to and be performed by the city clerk or such other officer as the city may hereafter determine by resolution.  
Chapter 3.08 - FUND DEPOSITORY AND SALARY AND WAGE FUND 
 
3.08.010 - Institutions designated as depositories. 
Any state or national bank or state or federal savings and loan associations located in the state are designated as repositories for all of, or part of, the funds of the city. 
(Ord. 4.3 § 2, 1979)  
3.08.020 - Salary and wage fund. 
There is created a special revolving fund under the supervision of the director of finance or city treasurer, to be known as the salary and wage fund. Payment of salaries and wages to city officers and employees shall be made by check drawn or transfer made by the city treasurer or finance director against this fund as set forth in Section 3.08.030. 
(Ord. 4.3 § 3, 1979)  
3.08.030 - Authorization to issue payroll checks. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 37206, and other applicable laws, the city treasurer or director of finance is authorized to prepare a biweekly payroll and issue checks against the salary and wage fund for the payment of all salaries and wages to the officers and employees of the city, as such salaries and wages are authorized by a duly approved city budget, or otherwise by resolution or order of the city council. 
(Ord. 4.3 § 4, 1979; Ord. 4.4 § 1, 1991)  
3.08.050 - Ratification of payroll. 
Each payroll of city officers and employees shall be presented to the city council for ratification and approval at the first meeting held after the delivery of payroll checks. Upon such ratification and approval, a warrant or transfer of funds in the amount of such paid and approved payroll shall be ordered drawn on the general fund to reimburse the salary and wage fund. 
(Ord. 4.3 § 6, 1979)  
3.08.060 - City attorney retainer. 
The monthly retainer for the city attorney shall not be paid pursuant to the foregoing but shall be paid out of the general fund once a month at the first meeting of each month. 
(Ord. 4.3 § 7, 1979)  
Chapter 3.12 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.12.010 - Title and purpose. 
This chapter shall be known as the "real property transfer tax" of the city, and is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 20 § 1, 1967)  
3.12.020 - Imposition of tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any line or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 20 § 2, 1967)  
3.12.030 - Persons on whom tax imposed. 
The tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 20 § 3, 1967)  
3.12.040 - Security for debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 20 § 4, 1967)  
3.12.050 - Exemptions. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the city is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this part when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
Any tax imposed hereunder shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as the result of or in lieu of foreclosure, except as specifically provided in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926. 
(Ord. 20 § 5, 1967; Ord. 20.1 § 1, 1978)  
3.12.060 - Conveyances not subject to tax—Plans of reorganization or adjustment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; or 
B.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected. 
Subdivisions A to D inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 20 § 6, 1967)  
3.12.070 - Conveyances not subject to tax—Securities and Exchange Commission orders. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, and 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed, and 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 20 § 7, 1967)  
3.12.080 - Conveyances not subject to tax—Transfer or termination of partnership. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of termination. 
(Ord. 20 § 8, 1967)  
3.12.090 - Conveyance not subject to tax—County exemptions. 
In addition to the foregoing, there is automatically exempted from the tax imposed by this chapter, such conveyances as may in the future be exempted from such tax by the county of Santa Cruz under its ordinance adopted pursuant to Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, without subsequent or further amendment of this chapter, to include such exemptions. 
(Ord. 20 § 9, 1967)  
3.12.100 - County recorder to administer. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 20 § 10, 1967)  
3.12.110 - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 20 § 11, 1967)  
Chapter 3.16 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 1, 1973)  
3.16.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 2, 1973)  
3.16.030 - Purpose. 
The council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve among others, the following purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 4, 1973)  
3.16.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that, if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 5, 1973)  
3.16.050 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 6, 1973)  
3.16.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 7, 1973)  
3.16.070 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 8, 1973)  
3.16.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 9, 1973)  
3.16.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 10, 1973)  
3.16.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 11, 1973)  
3.16.110 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 13, 1973; Ord. 11.6 § 1, 1983)  
3.16.114 - Alternative exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 11.6 § 2, 1983)  
3.16.116 - Operability. 
A.  Section 3.16.110 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
B.  Section 3.16.114 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 11.6 §§ 3, 4, 1983)  
3.16.120 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 15, 1973)  
3.16.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 11-3 § 16, 1973)  
Chapter 3.17 - TEMPORARY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Editorial Note: Ord. No. 186, § 1, adopted August 21, 2013, amended Ch. 3.17 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.17, §§ 3.17.1—3.17.13, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 178, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2005. Ord. No. 186, § 6, states: Termination Date. The tax levied by this ordinance shall continue at the rate of 0.50% from April 1, 2014 until March 31, 2022. The authority to levy the tax imposed by this ordinance shall expire eight (8) years from the operative date of this ordinance. 
 
3.17.01 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Temporary Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Scotts Valley hereinafter shall be called "city." This ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.02 - Operative date. 
"Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this ordinance, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.03 - Purpose. 
This ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.04 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.05 - Transactions rate tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated and unincorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory for eight years from the operative date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.06 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, all retail sales are consumed at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.07 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer for eight years after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.08 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.09 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this ordinance. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.10 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.11 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax in the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purpose of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied. 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) if the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract of lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchase is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.12 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not consistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this ordinance, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
3.17.13 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 8-21-2013)  
Chapter 3.20 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
3.20.010 - Fund created. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, of Division 1, of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. 6 § 1, 1966)  
3.20.020 - Which moneys paid into fund. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets and highways other than state highways, shall be paid into said fund. 
(Ord. 6 § 2, 1966)  
3.20.030 - Expended for authorized purposes. 
All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 6 § 3, 1966)  
Chapter 3.24 - UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Citation. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 76 § 1, 1978)  
3.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
A.  "City" means the City of Scotts Valley. 
B.  "Finance director" means the director of finance as defined in Chapter 2.08 of the city's Municipal Code. 
C.  "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure in the city, including but not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, guesthouse, bed and breakfast inn, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. The term "hotel" shall also include any space in a mobile home park, travel trailer park or similar facility which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients who occupy the space with a mobile home, travel trailer, camper or similar vehicle or portion thereof for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes 
D.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. The term "occupancy" shall also include the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any space or portion thereof in a mobile home park, travel trailer park or similar facility by a person who occupies or has the right to occupy the space with a mobile home, travel trailer, camper or similar vehicle designed for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
E.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs its functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as its principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
F.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
G.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and service of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
H.  "Transient" means: 
1.  Any person, other than an individual, who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, for any period of time; or 
2.  Any individual who personally exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. 
(Ord. 76 § 2, 1978; Ord. 76.1 §§ 1 and 2, 1984; Ord. No. 76.2, § 1, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eleven percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city finance director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city finance director. 
(Ord. 76 § 3, 1978; Ord. No. 76.3, § 1, 12-19-2018)  
3.24.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
2.  Any federal or state officers or employees when on official business; 
3.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected, and under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the finance director. 
(Ord. 76 § 4, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 2, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.050 - Operator duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in Section 3.24.160. 
(Ord. 76 § 5, 1978)  
3.24.060 - Registration. 
Not later than thirty days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the city finance director and obtain a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Scotts Valley by registering with the city finance director for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the city finance director. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Ord. 76 § 6, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
A.  Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each calendar month, prepare a tax return to the city finance director, on forms provided by the city, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies for the preceding calendar month. At the time the tax return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted in a form of payment acceptable to the city. 
B.  All tax returns shall be completed on forms provided by the finance director. 
(Ord. 76 § 7, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 4, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.080 - Penalty—Original delinquency. 
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. 76 § 8(a), 1978)  
3.24.090 - Penalty—Continued delinquency. 
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(Ord. 76 § 8(b), 1978)  
3.24.100 - Penalty—Intentional misrepresentation/fraud. 
If the city finance director determines that the failure to remit any tax on or before the due date set forth in this chapter is because of an intentional, material misrepresentation or omission, or fraud by the operator, the finance director shall impose an additional penalty in the amount of twenty-five percent of the delinquent tax. 
(Ord. 76 § 8(c), 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 5, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.110 - Penalty—Interest. 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. 76 § 8(d), 1978)  
3.24.120 - Penalty—Merged with tax. 
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of Sections 3.24.080 through 3.24.110 and this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. 
(Ord. 76 § 8(e), 1978)  
3.24.130 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by city finance director. 
A.  If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city finance director shall proceed in such manner deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of the tax due. 
B.  As soon as the city finance director procures such facts and information as the director is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the director shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the city finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at the operator's last known place of address. 
C.  Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the city finance director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city finance director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
D.  If such application is made, the city finance director shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
E.  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the city finance director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is made as provided in Section 3.24.140. 
(Ord. 76 § 9, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 6, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.140 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city finance director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at its last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Ord. 76 § 10, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 7, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.150 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city finance director shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. Such records shall be maintained at the operator's premises or shall be available for delivery to the city finance director within one week after request. The records shall include at least the following: 
A.  Daily summary of room occupancies, rents charged, and tax imposed and collected; 
B.  A record of each occupancy charge for which an exemption is claimed, including the name of the individual occupying the room, dates of occupancy, and reasons for exemption. 
C.  List of bad debts claimed for exemption, including names and addresses of debtor and amount of room rent unpaid. 
(Ord. 76 § 11, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 8, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.160 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a written claim for refund, stating under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city finance director within two years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city finance director. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the city finance director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city finance director, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the city finance director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes its right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 76 § 12, 1978; Ord. No. 76.2, § 8, 8-1-2018)  
3.24.170 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator, which has not been paid to the city, shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 76 § 13, 1978)  
3.24.180 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. No. 76.2, § 9, adopted August 1, 2018, repealed § 3.24.180, which pertained to violation—Penalty and derived from Ord. 76 § 14, 1978.  
Chapter 3.28 - PARK, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE LAND AND FACILITIES TAX 
 
3.28.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council that there be an excise tax imposed on the privilege of constructing bedrooms within residential dwelling units and mobile homes in the city of for the purpose of raising revenue. The tax shall be called the parks, recreation and open space, land and facilities tax. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.01, 1978)  
3.28.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Bedroom" means an enclosed division of a dwelling unit or mobile home containing at least ninety square feet of floor area and commonly used, for, or with reasonable potential for sleeping purposes, but not including halls, closets, living rooms, kitchens and utility rooms. 
An enclosed division is an area bounded along more than seventy-five percent of its perimeter by vertical walls or partitions which serve to define the boundaries of division. 
B.  "Dwelling unit" means a structure of permanent character, place in a permanent location, which is planned, designed or used for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings, apartment houses and complexes, but not including hotels, motels, and boardinghouses for transient guests. 
C.  "Mobile home" means any portable structure or vehicle, designed or used for residential purposes so as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
D.  "Mobile home lot" means any area or portion of mobile home park designated, designed or used for the occupancy of one mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis. 
E.  "Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership or any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individual. 
(Ord. 77 §§ 1.01—1.06, 1978)  
3.28.030 - Tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the privilege of constructing in the city any mobile home lot or residential dwelling unit, and every person to whom a permit to construct any residential dwelling unit in the city is issued, and every person to whom a permit to construct and install electrical and plumbing equipment to service a mobile home lot in a mobile home park in the city is issued, shall pay the city such tax. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.07, 1978)  
3.28.040 - Time of payment. 
A.  The parks and recreation facilities tax herein required to be paid shall be due and payable upon issuance by the city of a building permit for the construction of any residential dwelling unit, or prior to connection to the city sewer to service a mobilehome lot in a mobilehome park. If the building code expires, within the meaning of Section 302 (d) of the Uniform Building Code, 1970 Edition, Volume 1, within thirty days after the date of such expiration, upon written application for such refund by the person who paid such tax setting forth in full the facts showing that such permit has expired. 
B.  Fees which are being collected with a building permit may be postponed and paid at any time prior to a lathe and/or wallboard inspection if approved by either the city administrator or the city council. Postponement shall be by written request of the applicant. In the event there is no lathe and/or wallboard inspection, fee shall be paid at the time of frame inspection. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.08, 1978; Ord. 77.1 § 1, 1980)  
3.28.050 - Place of payment. 
The parks and recreation facilities tax shall be paid to the city building official or his authorized agent at the office of the city building department. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.09, 1978)  
3.28.060 - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to following: 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state. 
B.  Reconstruction of a building which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or other cause over which the owner had no control (provided that compliance with any building code or other ordinance requirement of the city or of any other applicable law shall not be deemed a cause over which the owner has no control), but only if the number of bedrooms in the building is not increased. If the number of bedrooms is increased then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms. 
C.  Enlargement, remodeling or alteration of a building but only if the number of bedrooms in the building is not increased. If the number of bedrooms is increased, then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms. 
D.  The construction of a dwelling unit or a mobile home lot for which and only to the extent that the dedication of land or payment of a fee, or a combination thereof, has been required and paid pursuant to Title 16 of this Code (as adopted or as thereafter amended). 
(Ord. 77 § 1.10, 1978)  
3.28.070 - Fund created. 
A.  All of the parks, recreation, open space land and facilities taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into a special fund which is created and established for such purpose and which shall be known as the park, recreation and open space land and facilities tax fund. 
B.  The fund shall be composed of a separate revenue and expense account for the city as designated in Section 3.28.080. Taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund, and shall be used and expended solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of public park, playground and recreational and open space land and facilities of the city located within the city from which they were collected and for the administration and maintenance of said park, playground, and recreational programs and projects. It shall be the policy of the city to expend such taxes within the city from which they were collected as close to the residential dwelling units or mobilehome lots for which they were collected as is reasonably practicable and feasible. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.11, 1978; Ord. 77.1 § 2, 1980)  
3.28.080 - Use of revenue. 
The expenditure of revenues from this fund shall be for projects consistent with city's open space, recreation and conservation element of the general plan as the same presently exists or may hereafter, from time to time, be amended or revised. 
(Ord. 77 § 1.12, 1978; Ord. 77.2 § 1, 1988)  
Chapter 3.32 - SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATION AND FEES 
 
3.32.010 - Citation. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "school facilities dedication and fee ordinance." 
(Ord. 81 § 1, 1979)  
3.32.020 - Adoption. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 81 § 2, 1979)  
3.32.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for financing interim school facilities necessitated by new residents and developments causing conditions of overcrowding. 
(Ord. 81 § 3, 1979)  
3.32.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of an attendance area's school or schools, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school or schools within the attendance area, as determined by the governing body of the school district. 
B.  "Decision-making body" means the city council or its designees. 
C.  "Dwelling unit" means a building or a portion thereof, or a mobile home, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or more persons living together as a domestic unit. 
D.  "Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" includes, but is not limited to, concepts such as: 
1.  Any agreements entered into by the affected school district which would alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development; 
2.  The use of relocatable structures, student transportation, and school boundary realignments; 
3.  The use of available bond or state loan revenues to the extent authorized by law; 
4.  The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from other appropriate sources, as determined by the governing body of affected school districts; 
5.  Agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential development in a school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used. 
E.  "Residential development" means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobile homes, of one or more units, or a division of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential units. Residential development includes, but is not limited to, a planned unit development use permit, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, a building permit, or any other discretionary permit for new residential use. 
(Ord. 81 § 7, 1979)  
3.32.050 - Regulations. 
The city council may from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 4, 1979)  
3.32.060 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Adequate school facilities should be available for children residing in new residential developments; 
B.  Public and private residential developments may require the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new school facilities; 
C.  In many areas of the city, the funds for the construction of new classroom facilities are not available when new development occurs, resulting in the overcrowding of existing schools; 
D.  New housing developments frequently cause conditions of overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated under existing law within a reasonable period of time; 
E.  That, for these reasons, new and improved methods of financing for interim school facilities necessitated by new development are needed in Scotts Valley. 
(Ord. 81 § 5, 1979)  
3.32.070 - General plan. 
The city general plan provides for the location of public schools. Where facilities are to be constructed from fees or land required to be dedicated hereunder, or both, they shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 81 § 6, 1979)  
3.32.080 - School district finding of overcrowded attendance area. 
The governing body of a school district, pursuant to Government Code Section 65970 et seq., may make a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that: 
A.  Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs, including the reason for such conditions existing; 
B.  All reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated; 
C.  No feasible method for reducing such conditions exist. Upon making these findings, the school district must provide the city with written notice of its findings as provided in Section 3.32.090. 
(Ord. 81 § 8, 1979)  
3.32.090 - Notice of findings requirements. 
Any notice of findings sent by a school district to the city shall specify: 
A.  The findings listed in Section 3.32.080; 
B.  The mitigation measures and methods, including those listed in subsection D of Section 3.32.040 considered by the school district in any determination made concerning them by the district; 
C.  The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; 
D.  Such other information as may be required by council regulation. 
(Ord. 81 § 9, 1979)  
3.32.100 - Concurrence by city. 
After receipt of any notice of findings complying with the requirements of Section 3.32.080, the council, if it concurs with such school district findings, shall do so by resolution. 
(Ord. 81 § 10, 1979)  
3.32.110 - Restriction on approval of residential development—City council findings. 
Within an attendance area, where the council has concurred in a school district's notice of finding that conditions of overcrowding exist, no decision-making body shall approve an application for a residential development within such area unless such decision-making body makes one of the following findings: 
A.  That, pursuant to this chapter, provision has been made for payment of fees, dedication of land, or both, or some other provision has been agreed upon by the applicant for a residential development in the school district to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area; or 
B.  That there are specific, overriding, fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which, in the judgment of the decision-making body, would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land or other alternate provisions required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 11, 1979)  
3.32.120 - Requirement of fees and/or dedications. 
In an attendance area where the council has concurred that overcrowding exists, the applicant of a proposed residential development, as a condition of approval, or the obtaining of a building permit, shall pay fees, make an equivalent arrangement in lieu thereof, dedicate land, or do a combination thereof unless excepted as provided in subsection B of Section 3.32.110, as determined by the decision-making body during the hearings and other proceedings on specific residential development applications falling within its jurisdiction. Prior to the imposition of the fees, or the dedication of land, or both, it shall be necessary for the decision-making body acting on the application to make the following determination: That the facilities to be constructed, purchased, leased or rented from such fees or the land to be dedicated or both, are consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 81 § 12, 1979)  
3.32.130 - Standards for land and fees. 
A.  General Standard. Any requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim, elementary, or high school facilities, and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for the schools caused by the development. 
B.  Amount of Fee. When fees are required by this chapter to be paid in lieu of land dedication or as a combination, or both, such fees shall be payable at the times and in the amount fixed by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The total land area required by this chapter to be dedicated shall be at least equal in monetary value to the fees which would be otherwise required by this section. The planning director shall determine and establish the monetary value of land area for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 13, 1979)  
3.32.140 - Payment of fees in smaller subdivisions. 
Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels, or less, or other developments containing fifty units, or less. 
(Ord. 81 § 14, 1979)  
3.32.150 - Land dedication. 
When land is to be dedicated, it shall be offered for dedication in substantially the same manner as prescribed in the city subdivision ordinance. Land shall be deeded directly to the school district or districts under procedures adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 81 § 15, 1979)  
3.32.160 - Refunds. 
If a residential development approval is vacated or voided, and if the city still retains the fees collected therefor, and if the applicant so requests, the council shall order fees returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 81 § 16, 1979)  
3.32.170 - School district schedule. 
Following concurrence by the council pursuant to Section 3.32.100, the clerk of the city shall notify each school district affected thereby. The governing body of the school district shall then submit a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the council and the reasons for the modifications. 
(Ord. 81 § 17, 1979)  
3.32.180 - Use of land and fees. 
All land or fees, or both, collected pursuant to this chapter and received by a school district shall be used only for the purpose of providing portable interim elementary or high school classrooms and related bathroom facilities. All such portable classroom and bathroom facilities shall be fully accessible to and usable by the physically handicapped. Such land or fees shall not be used in any attendance area of a district, any part of which is within the county or city, until and unless the county or city has adopted an ordinance requiring the dedication of land or collection of fees pursuant to Chapter 955, Statutes of 1978 and such requirements are substantially similar to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 18, 1979)  
3.32.190 - Agreement for fee distribution. 
If two separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the distribution of revenues from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 19, 1979)  
3.32.200 - Records and reports. 
Any school district receiving funds or lands pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and disposition of land received, and shall file a report with the council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year, and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the council. 
(Ord. 81 § 20, 1979)  
3.32.210 - Termination of dedication or fee requirements. 
When it is determined by the council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an attendance area, decision-making bodies shall cease imposition of any requirement under this chapter. 
(Ord. 81 § 21, 1979)  
Chapter 3.35 - UTILITY USERS' TAX 
 
3.35.010 - Purpose. 
The taxes imposed and levied by the provisions of this chapter are solely for the purpose of providing revenue for the usual current expenses of the city. The provisions of this chapter are not enacted for regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.015 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "City" means the city of Scotts Valley, California, including all of the territory and jurisdiction thereof as presently constituted, and any and all of the same which shall later come into existence by any manner or means whatsoever. 
B.  "Director" means the director of finance or his/her designee of the city. 
C.  "Electrical corporation" and "gas corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 216, 218 and 222 respectively of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California as those sections may be amended from time to time. 
D.  "Master meter user" means any person who receives gas, electric or water service from a service supplier through a master meter and who distributes that service to customers or tenants through a submeter which measures the customers' or tenants' individual use. 
E.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
F.  "Person" means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndications, joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals. 
G.  "Service supplier" means a person who does any of the following: 
1.  Sells electrical energy to a source user in the city; 
2.  Sells gas which is delivered through mains or pipes to a service user in the city; 
3.  Transports and delivers electrical energy or delivers gas through mains or pipes to a service user in the city and who charges the service user for such transportation and delivery. 
H.  "Service user" means a person who does any of the following: 
1.  Uses electrical energy in the city; 
2.  Uses gas in the city which is delivered through mains or pipes. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.020 - Exemptions. 
A.  Exempted Users. This chapter shall not apply where the director determines that a service user is one of the following: 
1.  The city; 
2.  Any person when imposition of a tax imposed by this chapter upon that person would be in violation of the constitution of the United States or state of California; 
3.  The state, any county, municipal corporation, city and county, district or any political subdivision of the state; 
4.  Service users qualified for and participating in the local electrical and gas corporation "Low Income Rate Assistance" program (LIRA); 
5.  The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof; or 
6.  Any person otherwise exempted by this chapter from payment of a tax imposed by this chapter. 
B.  Filing Application. Except those persons determined to be exempt pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the director, no exemption shall be granted by the director unless an application in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds for the exemption, is filed with the director. The application shall be submitted on forms furnished by the director. 
C.  Proof Required. No exemption shall be granted by the director unless the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the director, a right thereto by written records demonstrating entitlement. 
D.  Determination By Director. Within a reasonable time following receipt of a properly completed application, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of the director's determination on exemption. In the event of approval, the director shall also give written notice to the applicants service supplier. The director shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
E.  Action by Service Supplier(s). If the director grants an exemption to a service user, the service supplier(s) shall discontinue collecting taxes imposed by this chapter from the service user within sixty days of receipt of the director's written notice. 
F.  Refund. In the event a service user who has paid the tax is granted an exemption, that service user may apply for a refund of the tax paid under Section 3.35.170. 
G.  Finality. Any decision of the director made under this section shall be final. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.030 - California Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to conflict with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any conflict, the provision of said rules, regulations and tariffs shall control. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.040 - Electricity users' tax. 
A.  Imposition of Tax. Every person using electrical energy in the city, other than an electrical or gas corporation, shall pay a tax at the rate of four percent of the charges billed for such energy, including charges for service, transportation and delivery. The service user shall pay the tax to the service supplier or master meter user at the same time as and along with payment of the charges billed for the energy. 
B.  Duty of Seller. If the person selling electrical energy, also transports and delivers such energy to the service user, then that person shall collect from the service user four percent of the charges billed for the energy and shall remit the tax to the director. 
C.  Duty of Deliverer. The person transporting and delivering the electrical energy, if different from the person selling such energy, shall collect from the service user four percent of the charges billed for such transportation and delivery and shall remit the tax to the director. 
D.  Procedure. The procedure for collection and remittance of the tax is set forth in Section 3.35.070. Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.050 - Gas users' tax. 
A.  Imposition of Tax. Every person in the city using gas which is delivered through mains or pipes, other than an electrical corporation or gas corporation, shall pay a tax at the rate of four percent of the charges billed for such gas, including charges for service, transportation and delivery. The service user shall pay the tax to the service supplier or master meter user at the same time as and along with payment of the charges billed for the gas. 
B.  Duty of Seller. If the person selling gas also transports and delivers such gas to the service user, that person shall collect from the service user four percent of the charges for the gas by that service supplier and shall remit the tax to the director. 
C.  Duty of Deliverer. The person transporting and delivering the gas, if different from the person selling such gas, shall collect from the service user four percent of the charges billed for transportation and delivery and shall remit the tax to the director. 
D.  Procedure. The procedure for collection and remittance of the tax is set forth in Section 3.35.070. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.060 - Submetered electrical or gas energy. 
Whenever a master meter service user submeters electrical or gas energy to residents or tenants of an apartment house, mobilehome park or other residential multifamily accommodation, or to nonresidential premises, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  The master meter user shall collect the tax from the submetered tenants or customers at the same time and along with the same charges imposed in accordance with the regular billing practice of the master meter user. 
B.  The master meter user shall pay to the service supplier four percent of the charges billed by the service supplier to the master meter user. 
C.  The master meter user shall remit to the director the full amount of taxes collected from submetered tenants or customers in excess of the amount of taxes paid to the service supplier. Such remittance shall be made semi-annually for each six months in which there was an excess. Such remittance shall be made on January 31st of each calendar year for any and all excess in the period July 1st through December 31st, and on July 31st for any and all excess in the period January 1st through June 30th. Concurrently with each remittance of taxes, the master meter user shall file a report with the director on a form furnished by the director. The report shall include such information required by the director. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.070 - Collection and remittance. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  Collection by Service Supplier. Except as provided in Section 3.35.070(E), the service supplier shall collect the tax from the service user at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. In the event the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of the charges and the taxes which have accrued for any billing period, a proportionate share of both the charges and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid unless: 
1.  The amount paid is equal to the full amount of the charges due; or 
2.  The service user has notified the service supplier of the service user's refusal to pay all or any portion of the tax due. 
B.  First Regular Billing Period. Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this section, the duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the regular billing period applicable to that service user on or before July 1, 1992. 
C.  Annexations. Whenever the city annexes property, it shall provide notice to service suppliers of the addresses of service users within the boundaries of the newly annexed area. The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user within the newly annexed area shall commence no later than the third regular billing period applicable to that service user after the service supplier receives the notice provided for in this subsection. However, the time to commence collection may be extended by the director, for good cause, upon a prior written request. 
D.  Remittance by Service Supplier. The service supplier shall remit to the director either the amount of taxes collected or the amount of taxes billed each month, including delinquent taxes collected or billed at the same time as and along with collection of the delinquent service charges, on or before the twenty-fifth day of the following month. Concurrently with each remittance of taxes, the service supplier shall file a return with the director on forms furnished by the director. The information to be provided with the return shall include such information as the director may reasonably require in rules and regulations adopted by the director to ensure proper administration of this chapter. 
E.  Timely Remittance. If remittance by service supplier is made by personal delivery, then remittance is timely if delivered on or before the due date provided in this section. Whenever remittance is by mail or other delivery service, the director shall consider the remittance as timely if: 
1.  The envelope containing the remittance bears a postmark or receipt showing that the remittance was mailed or sent on or before the due dates provided in this section or if the due date occurs on a weekend or legal holiday, the remittance was postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday; or 
2.  Proof satisfactory to the director is furnished that the remittance was, in fact, sent or deposited in the mail on or before the due date. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.080 - Authority of director. 
The director is authorized to establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter concerning payment, collection, and remittance of the taxes imposed herein. Such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the office of the director. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.090 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
A.  Every service supplier required to collect and remit to the director any tax imposed by this chapter and every master meter user required under Section 3.35.060 to remit taxes collected from service users in excess of those taxes paid to service providers, shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years from the date of remittance, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any tax such service supplier, service user or master meter user may have collected or been required to remit. 
B.  All such records shall be made available for inspection, audit or copying by the city's authorized representative at any time during regular business hours upon written request by the city. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.100 - Delinquent remittance. 
A.  Delinquent Remittance. Taxes billed or required to be collected from a service user by a service supplier or excess taxes collected by a master meter user which are not remitted to the director on or before due dates provided in Sections 3.35.060 and 3.35.070 are delinquent. 
B.  Penalties and Interest. Penalties and interest for delinquent remittance of any tax shall be assessed as follows: 
1.  Any service supplier or master meter user who fails to remit any tax imposed by or required to be collected pursuant to this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of delinquent remittance. 
2.  If the director determines that nonpayment of any remittance is due to intentional misrepresentation or intentional material omission by the service supplier or master meter user, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the delinquent remittance shall be added in addition to the penalty imposed by Section 3.35.100 (B)(1). 
3.  In addition to the penalties imposed by Subsection (B)(1) and (2) of this section, any service supplier or master meter user who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter on or before the due dates shall pay interest at an annual rate established by the city to be one percent per month on the unpaid balance. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.110 - Delinquent tax—Service user. 
A.  Delinquent Tax. Any tax imposed on a service user by this chapter which is not paid to a service supplier, master meter user or the director on or before the due dates provided in this chapter is delinquent. 
B.  Delinquent Service Charges. Whenever a service user has not timely paid the service charges and the tax billed by the service supplier or master meter user, the service supplier or master meter user shall pursue collection of the delinquent tax in the same manner as and along with the pursuit of the delinquent service charges. The service supplier or master meter user shall impose, and the service user shall pay, interest on such tax at the same rate of interest as charged by the service supplier or master meter user on the delinquent service charges. The interest imposed on the tax shall become a part of the tax to be paid by the service user and remitted to the director by the service supplier or master meter user. When collected, the service supplier or master meter user shall remit the delinquent tax and all accrued interest thereon to the director in the same manner as provided in Sections 3.35.060, 3.35.070(C) and (D). 
C.  Refusal to Pay Tax. Whenever the director determines that a service user has paid for the service but has not paid or refuses to pay to a service supplier or master meter user any tax imposed by this chapter, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Collection by Director. The director shall relieve the service supplier or master meter user of the duty to collect the delinquent tax from such service user for those billing periods for which the tax was not paid. 
2.  Demand for Payment. The director shall notify the service user in writing that the director has assumed responsibility to collect the delinquent tax for the stated periods and shall demand payment of such tax from the service user. 
3.  Penalties and Interest. If the service user fails to remit the delinquent tax to the director within fifteen days from the date of mailing of such notice, the service user shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax set forth in the notice or ten dollars, whichever is the greater amount. In addition to the penalty imposed by this subsection, any service user who fails to remit the delinquent tax and penalty to the director within the time specified shall pay interest on the amount of tax and penalty at an annual rate established by the city to be one percent per month on the unpaid balance. All penalties and interest imposed upon a service user under this subsection shall become a part of the tax required to be paid and remitted. 
D.  Failure to Pay Tax to Director. Penalties and interest for the delinquent remittance of any tax required to be paid to the director shall be assessed as follows: 
1.  Any service user who fails to remit a tax imposed by Sections 3.35.040 or 3.35.050 within the time required in Section 3.35.070 shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax or ten dollars whichever amount is greater. 
2.  If the director determines that nonpayment of any tax is due to either intentional misrepresentation or intentional material omission, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalty imposed in Section 3.35.110(D)(1). 
3.  In addition to the penalties imposed in this section, the service user shall pay interest as established by the city in Section 3.35.110(C)(3) on the amount of the tax and penalties beginning from the date on which the tax first became delinquent and shall remain until the full amount owing is paid. 
4.  All penalties and interest imposed upon a service user under this subsection shall become a part of the tax required to be paid and remitted. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.120 - Assessment of delinquent taxes by director. 
A.  Assessment. If any service supplier, master meter user or service user required pursuant this chapter to pay a tax to the director, fails to timely remit any tax imposed by this chapter, the director shall obtain the necessary facts and information on which to base a reasonable estimate of the tax due. The director shall establish the assessment amount due from the service supplier, master meter user or service user for the tax and the interest and penalties due on the delinquent tax. 
B.  Notice of Assessment. The director shall give written notice to the service supplier, master meter user or service user of the amount assessed as delinquent taxes including penalties and interest. The service supplier, master meter user or service user may, within fifteen days from the date of mailing such assessment notice, make application, in writing, to the director for a hearing on the amount of the assessment. 
C.  Hearing. 
1.  Application. If an application for hearing is received by the director within the prescribed time, the director shall give not less than five days' written notice to the service supplier, master meter user or service user of the time and place in which to appear and show cause as to why the assessed amount should not be fixed. If an application for hearing has not been received by the director within the time specified in Section 3.35.120(B), the tax, interest and penalties assessed by the director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
2.  Notice of Determination. After the hearing, the director shall notify service supplier, master meter user or service user of the amount determined to be due and payable. The amount shall be deemed due and payable fifteen days after the mailing of the notice of determination stating the amount assessed and payable. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.130 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director pursuant to Sections 3.35.100, 3.35.110 or 3.35.120 may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk and the director. The notice shall be received by the city clerk within fifteen days of the mailing of the notice of determination set forth in Section 3.35.120. The council shall fix a time and place for the hearing of the appeal and the city clerk shall give written notice to the applicant. 
B.  The city council shall hear and determine all questions raised on the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the director. The decision of the council shall be final and any amount found to be owing by the council shall be immediately due and payable. The city clerk shall mail a written notice of the council's decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.140 - Recovery of debt owed city. 
A.  Debt Owed by Service User. Any debt resulting from the tax, penalty and interest, required to be paid by a service user under this chapter shall be deemed a debt owned by the service user to the city. 
B.  Debt Owed by Service Supplier or Master Meter User. 
1.  Any tax required to be collected under this chapter by a service supplier which is not billed to the service user shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the service supplier. 
2.  Any tax collected from a service user by a service supplier which has not been remitted to the director shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the service supplier. 
3.  Any excess tax collected by a master meter user and not remitted to the director when due and payable shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the master meter user. 
C.  Action. Any person owing money to the city under this chapter shall be liable to the city for the recovery of the amount, together with all costs and attorneys' fees for any action brought by the city to recover the tax, penalty, interest and other fees due the city. 
D.  Nonexclusive Remedy. The remedy provided in this section is not exclusive but is in addition to all other legal remedies available to the city, whether civil or criminal to recover the nonpayment of taxes and recovery of debt owed to city. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.150 - Bankruptcies and refusals. 
A.  Service suppliers or master meter users who seek to collect charges from parties in bankruptcy proceedings shall also include in any such claim the amount of taxes due city for those services, unless the director determines that such duty is in conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation, or that such action would be administratively impractical. 
B.  All service suppliers and master meter users not required to collect taxes in connection with pursuit of claims for service charges in bankruptcy proceedings pursuant to Section 3.35.150(A), shall notify the director in writing within forty-five days after receipt of notice that a service user has initiated bankruptcy proceedings. 
C.  All service suppliers or master meter users who do not seek to collect charges for service in bankruptcy proceedings shall notify the director in writing within forty-five days after receipt of notice that a service user has initiated bankruptcy proceedings. 
D.  All service suppliers and master meter users who receive notice of a service user's refusal to pay shall notify the director in writing within forty-five days after receipt of such notice. 
E.  All persons who have notified the director of a refusal or bankruptcy proceeding to Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section shall be relieved of the duty to collect and remit any tax owed by the service user. 
F.  All remittances of taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be remitted on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month following collection. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.160 - Payment of delinquent taxes. 
Payment of delinquent taxes by service suppliers, master meter users and service users shall be applied by the director to the oldest outstanding obligation of the service supplier or service user. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.170 - Refunds. 
A.  Filing Claim. 
1.  Any tax imposed by this chapter, including any interest or penalty added thereto, may be refunded by the director as provided in Sections 3.35.170(B) and 3.35.170(C) whenever such tax has been: 
a.  Overpaid; 
b.  Paid more than once; or 
c.  Erroneously collected or received by the city, including any instance where a service supplier, pursuant to an order by the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction refunds to its service users taxes paid on refunded charges. 
2.  No refund shall be paid by the director unless a written claim stating, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon which the refund is sought and is filed with the director within three years of the date of payment of such tax. The claim shall be submitted on forms furnished by the director. The director may require such additional information or documentation to support a claim for refund or credit as set forth in the rules and regulations adopted by the director. 
B.  Refund or Credit to Service Supplier. A service supplier may obtain a refund or take credit against taxes to be remitted for any amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously collected or received by the city. Neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the tax has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier. 
C.  Refund to Service User. A service user may obtain a refund of any tax, interest or penalty when: 
1.  The service user was required to remit to the director a tax imposed by Sections 3.35.040 and 3.35.050 and the service user establishes to the satisfaction of the director that the amount was overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously collected; or 
2.  The service user establishes that the amount was overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously collected and has paid the tax to the service supplier but is unable to obtain a refund or credit from the service supplier who collected the tax. 
D.  Finality. Any decision of the director made under this section shall be final. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.35.180 - Annual review—Sunset clause. 
The city council shall review the continued implementation of this tax on an annual basis at the same time as the city council reviews its annual budget. The collection of the tax shall be renewed each year on or before the first day of the city's fiscal year by a majority vote of the council. Should the council fail to garner a majority vote, collection shall be suspended until renewed by a majority vote of council. 
(Ord. 109.3 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 3.36 - MUNICIPAL SOLAR UTILITY PROGRAM 
 
3.36.010 - Created. 
A municipal solar utility is created for purposes of satisfying requirements contained in Section 17052.5 or Section 23601 of the California Revenue Tax Code. 
(Ord. 106 § 1, 1982)  
3.36.020 - Direction and control. 
The municipal solar utility shall be under the direction and control of the city administrator. 
(Ord. 106 § 2, 1982)  
3.36.030 - Rules and regulation. 
The city administrator shall present for council approval rules and regulations governing the activities of the municipal solar utility including a program whose primary activity will be issuing permits to qualified solar leasing businesses, and establishing permittee and/or consumer protection criteria. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by council resolution. 
(Ord. 106 § 3, 1982).  
Chapter 3.40 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
 
3.40.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. 
B.  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
C.  The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 2100 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operation expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080 (b) (8) (1). 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.020 - Delegation of authority and direction to city administrator. 
A.  The city administrator is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the city council to implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service enumerated in this chapter based on the schedule of rate review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter. 
B.  The city administrator is delegated authority to issue executive orders, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, defining terms, setting out administrative, fee collection, and financial procedures, and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the city council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the finance director certifying that the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with, and shall be signed by the city administrator connoting the effective date of the executive order and new or revised rate structure, procedure or definition. 
C.  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3.40.030. In performing the tasks referenced in subsection B, above, the city administrator shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.030 - Costs reasonably borne defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred; 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system; 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset; 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city attorney, city administration, city clerk, city treasurer, finance department, personnel office, city promotion activities, and economic development activities, and all other staff and support services provided by the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of the taxes, fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs; 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B, C, and F of this section; 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
A.  The city council shall by resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter and section, establish the rates of fees and charges to be charged and collected in order to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing the product, service or regulation, which rates shall be appropriate to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne for the various products, services, and regulations, all as established and set forth herein below. The city administrator, finance director and each city department head, under the direction of the city administrator, shall review annually the fees and service charges set in accordance with the following list, and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the city council for its consideration and adoption by resolution so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne that are necessary to provide the listed regulation, product or service. 
B.  Not less than a minimum fee of ten dollars shall be charged in all instances. 
C.  The hereinabove services as listed in this section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System for the City of Scotts Valley" dated January, 1990, as produced by Management Services Institute, Incorporated, of Anaheim, California, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Scotts Valley. 
D.  All fees and charges set by resolution of the city council adopted pursuant to this chapter and section shall take effect ten days after the date of adoption of said resolution, provided that the city administrator signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed. All fees and charges established by resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter and section shall be due and paid at the time of and concurrent with the filing of the subject application or prior to provision of the subject service if no application is involved, unless a different time is determined by the city administrator pursuant to executive order issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.40.020. 
E.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city administrator to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
F.  The city administrator may vary the review schedule listed in this section if, in the judgment of the city administrator and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate review which deviates from the review schedule as set herein shall be reported to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.050 - Statutory public meeting. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 54992, 54994.1 and 54994.2 the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as therein set forth including, without limitation, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and to be published in accordance with Section 6062a of the Government Code, and the city council periodically, at least annually, shall conduct a public hearing during a regularly scheduled meeting at which it shall receive oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public hearing shall be provided and conducted prior to the city council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the city annual budget process and hearing. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.060 - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to the aforesaid sections of the California Government Code, at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the city administrator shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost, required to provide the service, product or regulation for which the fee or service charge is levied and the revenue sources anticipated to provide the service, including general fund revenues. The city administrator also shall provide a listing or summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
3.40.070 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined or set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter (and as it may be amended from time to time hereafter), or that such percentage of costs as set out in this chapter (and as it may be amended from time to time hereafter), is excessive, arbitrary or unreasonable, or that such fee or charge has not been reviewed within the review schedules set out herein (subject to any exceptions herein provided), may appeal in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk, specifying the ground(s) of appeal, within ten days of the date the subject action was taken, or, in the case of a failure to annually review fees or charges as herein required, within ten days of the last date by which the action should have been taken. 
B.  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting after receipt of such appeal, and heard at such council meeting subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Sections 54950 et seq. of the Government Code), as the same presently exist or may be amended from time to time hereafter. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by the city council. 
(Ord. 138 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Title 4 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT  
Chapter 4.01 - DEFINITIONS 
 
4.01.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(A)  "Abatement" means any action the City may take on public or private property and any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a nuisance, including but not limited to demolition, removal, repair, boarding and securing or replacement of property. 
(B)  "Administrative Enforcement Order" means an order issued by an Enforcement Hearing Board after a hearing requiring a Responsible Person to correct violations, abate a public nuisance, pay civil penalties and administrative costs or take any other action as authorized or required by this Code and applicable state codes. The Enforcement Order may also include an order authorizing the City to abate a public nuisance or assess a Nuisance Abatement Lien. 
(C)  "Abatement Notice" means a notice issued by an enforcement official, which requires a Responsible Person to abate a public nuisance. 
(D)  "Code Enforcement Performance Bond" means a bond posted by a Responsible Person to ensure compliance with the Municipal Code, applicable state codes, a judicial decree or Administrative Enforcement Order. 
(E)  "Courtesy Notice" means a letter sent to a property owner or Responsible Person informing them of violations of the Municipal Code on their property and should include possible remedies, the required administrative process to be followed, a compliance date, and information regarding the possibility of fees, fines, and the issuance of criminal or civil citations for failure to comply. 
(F)  "Enforcement Hearing Board" is a three person board appointed by the City Council to preside over administrative enforcement hearings. 
(G)  "Enforcement Official" means any person authorized to enforce regulations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes as designated in section 4.02.021[B] of this chapter. 
(H)  "Financial Institution" means any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of trust on a property. 
(I)  "Imminent Life Safety Hazard" means any condition, which creates a present and immediate danger to life, property, health or public safety. 
(J)  "Legal Interest" means any interest that is represented by a document such as a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic's lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the County Recorder. 
(K)  "Municipal Code" means the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
(L)  "Notice and Order" means a document used in abatement and civil penalty actions, which provides notice of Municipal Code or applicable state code violations and orders a Responsible Person to take certain steps to correct the violations. 
(M)  "Notice of Compliance" means a document sent by an Enforcement Official representing that a property complies with the requirements listed in a Notice of Violation and that the Responsible Person or property owner has paid all fines, penalties and administrative costs of enforcement. 
(N)  "Notice of Violation" means a written notice prepared by an Enforcement Official which informs a Responsible Person of code violations, requires compliance and contains specific information as required by the Municipal Code. 
(O)  "Nuisance Abatement Lien" means a lien recorded to collect outstanding civil penalties and administrative costs imposed as part of a cost recovery, administrative or judicial code enforcement action. 
(P)  "Person" means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, limited liability company, business trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
(Q)  "Property Owner" means the record owner of real property based on the County Assessor's records. 
(R)  "Public Nuisance" means the maintenance or use of property in the City in a manner that jeopardizes or endangers the health, safety or welfare of persons on the premises or in the surrounding area; or real property that has been the situs for nuisance activity including, but not limited to: disturbing the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking alcoholic beverages in public, harassment of passers by, illegal gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, acts of violence, public urination or defecation, acts of vandalism, acts of lewd conduct, unreasonable loud noise, loitering or excessive littering; or the maintenance or use of property in the City in a manner that violates, or real property that has been the situs of a violation of, any provision of this Municipal Code or any other City, state or federal law or regulation. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit in any manner the provisions found in chapter 8.04 of this Municipal Code. 
(S)  "Responsible Person" means a person who an Enforcement Official determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. The term "Responsible Person" includes but is not limited to a property owner, tenant, and person with a Legal Interest in real property or person in possession of real property. 
(T)  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multi-graphed, photocopied, facsimile and any other item of writing as listed in California Evidence Code Section 250. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.02 - CODE ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND POWERS 
 
4.02.010 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that the enforcement of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes throughout the City is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The Council recognizes that enforcement depends upon clear and precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The Council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain code compliance. Administrative remedies are designed to provide fair and efficient methods of enforcing the provisions of the Municipal Code without the required expense and consumption of time that judicial actions may require. Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action may require the City Attorney to file a judicial action to compel compliance. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.02.020 - General Enforcement Authority. 
All city Enforcement Officials designated in Municipal Code Section shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes for which they are responsible. These powers include the power to issue Notices of Violation and field citations, inspect public and private property with a search warrant or with the permission of the owner/occupant and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.02.021 - Authority to Issue Notice to Appear and Release Citations. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California, certain officers and employees of the City of Scotts Valley are authorized to issue written notice to appear and release citations for misdemeanors or infraction violations of city ordinances or this Municipal Code, which such officers or employees have the duty to enforce. 
B.  The following officers and employees of the City of Scotts Valley are hereby designated and authorized to issue said citations: 
Community Development Director and his or her designated subordinates. 
Building Official and his or her designated subordinates. 
Finance Director and his or her designated subordinates. 
Public Works Director and his or her designated subordinates. 
Poundmaster and his/her designated subordinates for purposes of enforcing Title 6 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04; Ord. No. 7.7, § 1, 4-3-2013)  
4.02.030 - Notice of Violation. 
Chapter 4.10 provides the procedure for issuance and recordation of Notices of Violation where other sections of this Municipal Code or applicable state codes do not provide an alternative procedure. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.02.040 - Authority to Inspect. 
City Enforcement Officials are authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations, inspections and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter or inspect, the Enforcement Official may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the applicable procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.02.050 - Power to Arrest. 
City Enforcement Officials are authorized to arrest without a warrant any person whenever the Enforcement Official has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes in his or her presence. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 the Enforcement Official can only arrest a person by issuing a misdemeanor field citation or by affecting a citizen's arrest with the assistance of a peace officer. Custodial arrests may only be effected by sworn peace officers. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.03 - NOTICES 
 
4.03.010 - Service of Notices. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under the Municipal Code for enforcement purposes, the notice shall be served by any of the following methods unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply: 
Personal service. 
Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by first class mail postage prepaid. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, provided the notice sent by first class mail is not returned. 
Posting written notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the Community Development Director. 
First Class mail, postage prepaid. 
Service by certified or first class mail postage prepaid in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Municipal Code. The notice requirements in this section do not apply to initial Notices of Violation, which may be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid. Service of a Notice of Violation by first class mail is effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.03.020 - Proof of Service of Notices. 
Proof of service of notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this City or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years. The proof of service shall show that service was done in conformity with this Municipal Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.03.030 - Constructive Notice of Recorded Documents. 
Whenever a document is recorded with the County Recorder as authorized or required by the Municipal Code or applicable state codes, recordation shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.04 - JUDICIAL REMEDIES 
 
4.04.010 - Criminal Violations—Misdemeanors and Infractions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Municipal Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with the requirements of the Municipal Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the violation is otherwise made an infraction by other provisions of this Municipal Code. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code, any violation of this Municipal Code, which constitutes an infraction under this Municipal Code, may, in the discretion of the City Attorney, be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Municipal Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1000) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Municipal Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by fine only as follows: (i) upon a first conviction, by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100); (ii) for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200); (iii) for each additional violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500). Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person convicted of a violation of a city building and/or safety code section which is an infraction shall be punishable by fine only as follows: (i) upon a first conviction, by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100); (ii) for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500); (iii) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000). Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Municipal Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.04.020 - Civil Violations—Injunctions and Civil Penalties. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this Municipal Code, any provision of this Municipal Code may be enforced by injunction issued by the Superior Court upon a suit brought in the name of the City of Scotts Valley. All remedies prescribed by this chapter are cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purposes of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
B.  As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this Municipal Code, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per violation of the Municipal Code for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this Municipal Code. 
C.  In addition to the penalties provided above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of any ordinance of the City or provision of this Municipal Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as provided herein or in other chapters of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.04.030 - Code Enforcement Performance Bond. 
As part of any enforcement action taken by the City, the City has the authority to require a Responsible Person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with the Municipal Code, applicable state codes or any judicial action. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.04.040 - Judicial Abatement. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 372, and California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 the City has the authority to judicially abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil nuisance actions. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.04.050 - Treble Damages for Subsequent Abatement Judgments. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include costs incurred abating conditions pursuant to Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.06 - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
 
4.06.010 - Administrative Remedies. 
Chapters 4.06 through 4.26 establish optional administrative enforcement remedies available to the City for violations of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes. The general remedies include issuance and recordation of Notices of Violation, Administrative Civil Penalties, Administrative Citations, Summary Abatement, and Administrative Abatement. Chapters 4.20 and 4.22 govern the procedures for appeals and hearings relating to these administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.06.020 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that there is a need for a variety of administrative remedies that do not require the City to file court actions to initiate enforcement of violations of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes. The procedures established by these administrative remedies are in addition to any other legal remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address Municipal Code and applicable state code violations. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.06.030 - Authority. 
Whenever the City, through one of its Department Heads or Enforcement Officials, determines that a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state code exists, the City may pursue any of the administrative remedies outlined in Chapters 4.06 through 4.26 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.10 - ISSUANCE AND RECORDATION OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION 
 
4.10.010 - Issuance and Recordation of Notices of Violation. 
This Chapter shall govern the procedures relating to the issuance and recordation of administrative Notices of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.020 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcement for violations of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes, which are found to exist on real property. The Council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance and recordation of Notices of Violation. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.030 - Procedures for Issuance of a Notice of Violation. 
Whenever an Enforcement Official determines that a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state code pertaining to real property exists, the Enforcement Official may issue a Notice of Violation to a Responsible Person. A Notice of Violation shall include sufficient information to provide reasonable notice of activities or conditions constituting violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state code, and actions necessary to correct the violations. The Notice of Violation shall include the following information: 
1.  The name of the property's record owner; 
2.  Street address; 
3.  The Municipal Code sections in violation; 
4.  A description of the property's condition, which violates the applicable codes; 
5.  A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance; 
6.  A deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed in the Notice of Violation; 
7.  Reference to the potential consequences should the property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline including, but not limited to: criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the Notice of Violation and withholding of future municipal permits; 
8.  A brief description of the procedure to appeal the Notice of Violation including time limitations. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.040 - Procedures for Recordation. 
A.  Once an Enforcement Official has issued a Notice of Violation to a Responsible Person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the Notice of Violation, the Enforcement Official may record a Notice of Violation with the Recorder's Office of Santa Cruz County. 
B.  Before recordation, the Enforcement Official shall provide to the Responsible Person a letter of intent to record a Notice of Violation unless a written appeal is filed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this Chapter. The letter shall be served pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. The Enforcement Official may also send a courtesy copy of the letter to any financial institution with a legal interest in the real property. 
C.  If a written appeal is not filed pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Chapter, the Enforcement Official may record the Notice of Violation if the violation has not been corrected. 
D.  The recorded Notice of Violation shall include the name of the property owner, the property's assessor's parcel number, the parcel's legal description, and a copy of the Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.050 - Service of Notice of Violation. 
A copy of the recorded Notice of Violation shall be served on the Responsible Person and Property Owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.060 - Procedures to Appeal Recordation. 
A.  An appeal of a departmental letter of intent to record the Notice of Violation shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.20 of this Municipal Code. 
B.  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Enforcement Official shall schedule a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.22 of this Municipal Code. The purpose of the hearing is for the Responsible Person or Property Owner to show cause why a Notice of Violation should not be recorded. 
C.  The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative appeal hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.070 - Appeal Hearing. 
A.  The appeal shall follow the hearing procedures as set forth in Chapter 4.22 of this Municipal Code. 
B.  At the appeal hearing, the Hearing Board shall only consider evidence that is consistent with the applicable rules and procedures for administrative enforcement hearings and that is relevant to the following issues: 
1.  Whether the conditions listed in the Notice of Violation violate the Municipal Code or applicable state codes; and 
2.  Whether the Enforcement Official afforded the Responsible Person with due process by adhering to the notification procedures specified in this Municipal Code. 
C.  If the Hearing Board affirms the Enforcement Official's decision, the Enforcement Official may proceed to record the Notice of Violation. 
D.  If the Hearing Board determines that recordation is improper, the Hearing Board shall reverse the Enforcement Official's decision to record the Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.080 - Notice of Compliance—Procedures. 
A.  After a Notice of Violation has been recorded, and after the violations listed on the Notice of Violation have been corrected, the Responsible Person or Property Owner may file with the Enforcement Official a written request for a reinspection of the property to determine compliance with the Municipal Code and applicable state codes listed in the recorded Notice of Violation, and for the issuance of a Notice of Compliance on a form provided by the City. 
B.  Once the Enforcement Official receives this request, the Enforcement Official shall reinspect the property to determine whether the violations listed in the Notice of Violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed. 
C.  The Enforcement Official shall serve a Notice of Compliance to the Responsible Person or Property Owner in the manner provided in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code if the Enforcement Official determines that: 
All violations listed in the recorded Notice of Violation have been corrected; and 
All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; and 
All penalties assessed against the property or Responsible Person have been paid; and 
The party requesting the Notice of Compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the City for all administrative costs. Administrative fees may include costs incurred in the investigation, inspection, reinspection, title search, reasonable attorney fees, appeal hearing and any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the Notice of Violation. 
If the Enforcement Official denies a request to issue a Notice of Compliance, the Enforcement Official shall serve the Responsible Person or Property Owner with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. 
The Enforcement Official's decision denying a request to issue a Notice of Compliance shall be final and non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.090 - Prohibition Against Issuance of Municipal Permits. 
Subject to the exception set forth herein, the City of Scotts Valley shall withhold permits for any alteration, repair or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure: (i) if a request to appeal the recordation of a Notice of Violation has not been timely filed; or (ii) after a Hearing Board on appeal affirms the Enforcement Official's decision to record a Notice of Violation. The City may thereafter withhold permits until a Notice of Compliance has been issued by the Enforcement Official. The City may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a Notice of Compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.10.100 - Cancellation of Recorded Notice of Violation. 
The Enforcement Official, Property Owner or Responsible Person shall record the Notice of Compliance with the County Recorder's Office. The recordation of the Notice of Compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.14 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
4.14.010 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes. The City Council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by California Government Code section 53069.4. The procedures established in this Chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.020 - Authority. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of the Municipal Code or applicable state code may be issued an administrative citation by an Enforcement Official as provided in this Chapter. 
B.  Each and every day a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense for which an administrative citation may be issued. 
C.  A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Enforcement Official and shall be payable directly to the City Finance Department. 
D.  Civil penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this Chapter. 
E.  The administrative citation process set forth in this chapter does not apply to continuing violations of this Municipal Code that pertain to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, unless a reasonable opportunity to correct or otherwise remedy the violation is first given to the violator. Ten (10) days shall be deemed to be a reasonable period in the case of most such continuing violations; however, a longer period, in no case to exceed thirty (30) days, shall be allowed at the discretion of the Enforcement Official. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from utilizing the administrative citation process for building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning violations, which are transient and non-continuing in nature, or create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.030 - Procedures. 
A.  Upon discovering any violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes, an Enforcement Official may issue an administrative citation to a Responsible Person in the manner prescribed in this Chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by the City Manager. 
B.  In the case of a business, the Enforcement Official shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue the business owner an administrative citation. If the Enforcement Official can only locate the manager of the business or the person in apparent charge of the business, the administrative citation may be issued to such person, who may sign or receive the administrative citation as agent for the Responsible Person or owner of the business. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed to the business owner or Responsible Person in the manner prescribed by Chapter 4.03. 
C.  Once the Responsible Person is located, the Enforcement Official shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. If the Responsible Person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings. 
D.  If the Enforcement Official is unable to locate the Responsible Person for the violation, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the Responsible Person in the manner prescribed in Chapter 4.03. 
E.  If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the Responsible Person in the manner prescribed by Chapter 4.03. 
F.  The administrative citation shall also contain the signature of the Enforcement Official. 
G.  The administrative citation shall be mailed to the Responsible Person in the manner prescribed by Chapter 4.03. Provided that an administrative citation is properly issued to a Responsible Person, the failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.040 - Contents of Notice of Administrative Citation. 
A.  The administrative citation shall refer to the date and location of the violations and the approximate time the violations were observed. 
B.  The administrative citation shall refer to the Municipal Code sections violated and describe how the sections are violated. 
C.  The administrative citation shall describe the action required to correct the violations. 
D.  The administrative citation shall require the Responsible Person to immediately correct the violations and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct the violations. 
E.  The administrative citation shall state the amount of penalty imposed for the violations. 
F.  The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty. 
G.  The administrative citation shall provide notice of the right to appeal. 
H.  The citation shall contain the signature of the Enforcement Official and the signature of the Responsible Person if that person can be located, as outlined in subsection 4.14.030(3). 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.050 - Appeal of Administrative Citation. 
An appeal of an administrative citation shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.20. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.060 - Administrative Enforcement Order. 
The appeal hearing shall follow the enforcement hearing procedures set forth in Chapter 4.22. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.070 - Penalties Assessed. 
A.  The penalties assessed for each administrative citation issued for the same violation, which is not a violation of building or safety provision of this Municipal Code, shall not exceed the following amounts: 
1.  First violation, One Hundred Dollars ($100); 
2.  Second violation within a one year period, Two Hundred Dollars ($200); 
3.  Third or Subsequent violation within a one year period, Five Hundred Dollars ($500). 
B.  The penalties assessed for each administrative citation issued for the same violation, which is a violation of building or safety provision of this Municipal Code, shall not exceed the following amounts: 
1.  First violation, One Hundred Dollars ($100); 
2.  Second violation within a one year period, Five Hundred Dollars ($500); 
3.  Third or Subsequent violation within a one year period, One Thousand Dollars ($1000). 
C.  If the Responsible Person fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation. The amount of the penalty shall increase at a rate specified in this Chapter. 
D.  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. 
E.  All penalties assessed shall be payable to the City Finance Department. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.080 - Failure to Pay Penalties. 
The failure of any person to pay the civil penalties assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the Enforcement Official referring the matter to the City Finance Director to file a claim with the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the Enforcement Official may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the administrative fines. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.14.090 - Allocation of Administrative Civil Penalties. 
Administrative civil penalties collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited in the City general fund. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.16 - SUMMARY ABATEMENT 
 
4.16.010 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that its purpose in adopting this Chapter and Chapter 4.18 is to establish a procedure for the summary abatement of public nuisances and Municipal Code violations. The procedures established herein are in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law, which may be pursued to address Municipal Code or applicable state code violations. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.16.020 - Summary Abatement. 
This Chapter governs the procedures relating to summary abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.16.030 - Authority. 
Whenever an Enforcement Official determines that an imminent life safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the Enforcement Official may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the Responsible Person: 
A.  Order the immediate vacation of any tenants and prohibit occupancy until all repairs are completed; or 
B.  Post the premises as unsafe, substandard or dangerous; or 
C.  Board, fence or secure the building or site; or 
D.  Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent further collapse and remove any hazard to the general public; or 
E.  Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent life safety hazard; or 
F.  Take any other action as appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.16.040 - Procedures. 
An Enforcement Official shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred by the City during the summary abatement process shall be assessed and recovered against the Responsible Person or property owner through the procedures outlined in Chapter 4.18. The Enforcement Official may also pursue any administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.18 - ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT 
 
4.18.010 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that its purpose in adopting this Chapter and Chapter 4.16 is to establish a procedure for the abatement of public nuisances and Municipal Code violations. The procedures established in these sections are in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law, which may be pursued to address Municipal Code or applicable state code violations. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.18.020 - Authority. 
Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes, which constitutes a public nuisance but which does not constitute an imminent life safety hazard may be abated by the City pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.18.030 - General Procedures and Appeals. 
A.  Abatement Notice. 
1.  Whenever an Enforcement Official determines that public or private property or any portion of public or private property is a public nuisance as generally defined in Chapter 4.01 or as declared in a specific section of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes, an Abatement Notice may be issued to the Responsible Person or property owner to abate the public nuisance. 
2.  The Abatement Notice shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property. It shall refer to the Municipal Code or applicable state code violations, which render the property a public nuisance. 
3.  The Abatement Notice shall describe the action required to abate the public nuisance which may include corrections, repairs, demolition, removal, obtaining the necessary permits, vacation of tenants or other appropriate action and shall establish deadlines by which each action must occur. 
4.  The Abatement Notice shall explain the consequences should the Responsible Person fail to comply with the terms of the notice. 
5.  The Abatement Notice shall identify all applicable hearing and appeal rights. 
B.  Service of Abatement Notice. The Abatement Notice shall be served by any one of the methods of service listed in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. 
C.  Time Frame for Compliance. The Enforcement Official shall establish a reasonable time frame for compliance based on the nature and severity of the nuisance. The time frame shall normally be ten (10) working days for a nuisance that does not involve an imminent threat to public health and safety. 
D.  Right to Appeal. The Responsible Person may appeal the Abatement Notice within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the abatement Notice by filing a written request to appeal to an Enforcement Official. 
Upon receiving a written request to appeal an Abatement Notice, an Enforcement Official shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.20 and request the Enforcement Hearing Board to schedule a hearing to hear any objections why abatement should not be ordered and effected. 
Abatement shall not proceed until the Enforcement Hearing Board issues an order after an appeal by the Responsible Person or an appeal has not been timely filed, unless the Enforcement Hearing Board concludes that an imminent threat to the public's health and safety exists. 
If the Enforcement Hearing Board issues an order confirming the existence of a public nuisance, the City may immediately abate the public nuisance pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 4.18.040 of this Chapter. The Hearing Board's decision is the final administrative decision and shall become effective upon the date of issuance by the Enforcement Hearing Board. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.18.040 - Abatement of a Public Nuisance by the City. 
A.  Once an Enforcement Official follows the procedures set forth in Section 4.18.030 of this Chapter and obtains authorization to abate a public nuisance, the public nuisance may be abated by City personnel or by a private contractor. 
B.  City personnel or a private contractor can enter upon private property in a reasonable manner to abate the public nuisance as specified in the Abatement Notice or Abatement Order. Interference with the City's abatement of the public nuisance by a Property Owner or Responsible Person shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
C.  When abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed and the Enforcement Official shall prepare an itemized account of the total abatement costs. The report shall contain the names and addresses of the Responsible Persons or Property Owners of each parcel, the tax assessor's parcel number and a legal description of the property. 
D.  The Enforcement Official shall request the Hearing Board to schedule a confirmation of costs hearing pursuant to Chapter 4.24, unless waived in writing by all Responsible Persons. 
E.  All administrative and actual costs incurred by the City in abating the public nuisance may be assessed and recovered against the Responsible Person pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 4.24. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.20 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS 
 
4.20.010 - Appeal Procedures. 
A.  A person served with one of the following documents, orders or notices may file an appeal within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service: 
Any Administrative Abatement Notice. 
An Administrative Citation issued pursuant to Chapter 4.14 of the Municipal Code. 
A letter from an Enforcement Official indicating an intent to record a Notice of Violation pursuant to Chapter 4.10 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  The appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the Enforcement Official. 
C.  The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  After receiving the written notice of appeal, the Enforcement Official shall request that the Administrative Enforcement Hearing Board schedule a date, time, and place for the hearing. 
E.  Written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing on the person appealing the notice by any one of the methods listed in Chapter 4.03 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.20.020 - Appeal Hearing. 
The appeal hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the administrative enforcement hearing procedures set forth in Chapter 4.22. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.20.030 - Failure to Attend an Administrative Enforcement Hearing. 
Failure to attend the administrative enforcement hearing by the appellant shall constitute a waiver of his or her rights to an administrative enforcement hearing and administrative adjudication of the notice or any portion of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.22 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROCEDURES 
 
4.22.010 - Administrative Enforcement Hearing Procedures. 
This Chapter establishes the procedures for conducting administrative enforcement hearings. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.020 - Declaration of Purpose. 
A.  The City Council finds that there is a need to establish a uniform procedure for administrative enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to the Municipal Code. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law includes: adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing and an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative enforcement action. 
B.  The City Manager is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating to the qualifications, selection and compensation of Hearing Boards, Hearing Board powers, hearing procedures, scope of the hearing, subpoena powers and other matters relating to administrative enforcement hearings. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.030 - Procedures for Notification of Enforcement Hearing. 
A.  Where an administrative enforcement remedy or proceeding authorized by this Title provides for an enforcement hearing, the Enforcement Official may request the Hearing Board to schedule a day, time and place for the hearing. 
B.  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the Responsible Person or Property Owner. 
C.  The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance with rules and policies promulgated by the City Manager. 
D.  The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in Chapter 4.03. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.040 - Qualifications of Enforcement Hearing Board member. 
The City Manager shall promulgate rules and procedures as are necessary to establish a pool of qualified persons who are capable of acting as Enforcement Hearing Board members. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.050 - Selection of Enforcement Hearing Board members. 
Enforcement Hearing Board members presiding at administrative enforcement hearings shall be appointed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.060 - Disqualification of Enforcement Hearing Board members. 
Any person designated to serve as an Enforcement Hearing Board member is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, conflict of interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.070 - Powers of Enforcement Hearing Board. 
A.  The Enforcement Hearing Board may continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing or if the Hearing Board members independently determine that due process has not been adequately afforded. 
B.  The Enforcement Hearing Board, at the request of any party to the hearing, may subpoena witnesses, documents and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary by the Enforcement Hearing Board to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. The City Manager shall develop policies and procedures relating to the issuance of subpoenas in administrative enforcement hearings, including the form of the subpoena and related costs. 
C.  By way of an Administrative Enforcement Order, the Enforcement Hearing Board may reduce, waive or conditionally reduce the penalties or late fees assessed by the citation. The Enforcement Hearing Board may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violations or require payment of any outstanding penalties. The Enforcement Hearing Board may assess reasonable administrative costs. 
D.  The Enforcement Hearing Board has the authority to require a Responsible Person to post a Code Enforcement Performance Bond to ensure compliance with an Administrative Enforcement Order. 
E.  The Enforcement Hearing Board shall retain jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative enforcement hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ensuring compliance with an Administrative Enforcement Order, modifying an Administrative Enforcement Order, or where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.080 - Procedures at Administrative Enforcement Hearing. 
A.  Administrative enforcement hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. 
B.  The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative enforcement hearing or a nuisance abatement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state code, or to establish the existence of a public nuisance. 
C.  The standard of proof to be used by the Enforcement Hearing Board members in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is a preponderance of the evidence standard. 
D.  Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his or her case. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.090 - Failure to Obey Subpoena. 
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by the Enforcement Hearing Board. Failure to obey a subpoena constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as an infraction or a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.100 - Failure to Attend Administrative Enforcement Hearing. 
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of an administrative enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and to an adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.110 - Administrative Enforcement Order. 
A.  The decision of the Enforcement Hearing Board shall be entitled "Administrative Enforcement Order" and shall be issued in accordance with the rules and procedures promulgated by the City Manager. 
B.  The Administrative Enforcement Order shall be served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in Chapter 4.03 of the Municipal Code. 
C.  The Administrative Enforcement Order shall become final on the date of service of the order. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.120 - Judicial Review. 
Judicial review of an Administrative Enforcement Order may be sought pursuant to a writ of administrative mandamus. Once an Administrative Enforcement Order becomes final as provided in this Chapter, the time in which judicial review of the order must be sought shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, except as otherwise specifically provided elsewhere in this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.22.130 - Failure to Comply with Administrative Enforcement Order. 
It is unlawful for a party to an administrative enforcement hearing who has been served with a copy of the final Administrative Enforcement Order pursuant to Section 4.22.110 of the Municipal Code to fail to comply with the order. Failure to comply with a final Administrative Enforcement Order may be prosecuted as an infraction or a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.24 - RECOVERY OF CIVIL PENALTIES AND ABATEMENT COSTS 
 
4.24.010 - Declaration of Purpose. 
The City Council finds that, in addition to the filing of civil collection actions by the City Attorney, the use of nuisance abatement liens collected as personal obligations against property owners, and the use of special assessments on real property will assist in the collection of penalties, abatement costs, administrative costs including attorney fees for the prevailing party, reinspection fees and late fees assessed pursuant to administrative citations, administrative hearings, judicial orders and other appropriate Municipal Code enforcement actions. The City Council further finds that collection of penalties, costs and fees assessed for Municipal Code enforcement violations is important in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the City's Municipal Code enforcement system. The City has the authority to make the expense of enforcement actions and abatement of any nuisance a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.1; or in the alternative, the City has the authority to make the cost of abatement of a nuisance upon a parcel of land a special assessment against that parcel, in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.5. The procedures established in this Chapter shall be used to complement existing administrative or judicial remedies, which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.020 - Procedures for Recovering Costs. 
This Chapter governs the procedures for recovery of all administrative and actual costs incurred by the City in the recovery of civil penalties, in the abatement of a public nuisance, and for recordation and recovery of costs of enforcing nuisance abatement liens pursuant to the procedures and authority found in the California Government Code. The provisions of Government Code Section 38771 through 38773.5 and any amendments to those sections are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.030 - Recovery of Civil Penalties. 
The Enforcement Official may collect all civil penalties and related administrative costs by the use of all appropriate legal means, including referral to the Finance Director or City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.040 - Confirmation of Costs Hearing. 
A.  After the City has abated a public nuisance, the Enforcement Official shall request the City Manager to schedule a cost confirmation hearing before the City Council. A cost confirmation hearing is also appropriate if the City incurred abatement preparation costs before a Responsible Person or Property Owner voluntarily abated the public nuisance. 
B.  A notice of the date, time and place of the cost confirmation hearing shall be served on the Responsible Person or Property Owner at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing by any one of the methods set forth in Chapter 4.03. 
C.  A copy of the report describing the work performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall also be served on the Responsible Person or Property Owner at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing by any one of the methods set forth in Chapter 4.03. 
D.  The City Council at the cost confirmation hearing shall limit the scope of review to the Enforcement Official's report describing the work performed and the itemized account of costs together with any objections to its accuracy. The City Council may make such revisions, corrections or modification in the report or the account as may be just and reasonable. 
E.  The City Council may issue an order, which assesses the costs as either a personal obligation against the Responsible Person or Property Owner or a special assessment against the real property abated by the City. 
F.  At the cost confirmation hearing, the City Council shall not consider evidence regarding the merits of a previous abatement hearing and shall not review a decision ordering administrative or summary abatement, or imposition of penalties. 
G.  The City Council's order confirming or modifying the amount of costs incurred by the City in performing the abatement shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.050 - Recovery of Costs as a Personal Obligation. 
If the City Council orders that abatement costs be charged as a personal obligation of the Responsible Person, the Enforcement Official shall collect the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the recordation of a nuisance abatement lien against the real property on which a nuisance is maintained. An Enforcement Official may assess a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to Government Code section 38773.1 by following the procedures set forth in this Chapter including the requirements set forth below: 
A.  Once a final administrative decision or judicial order establishes the amount of penalties, abatement costs, administrative fees and costs assessed against a Responsible Person for Municipal Code violations, the Enforcement Official may record a nuisance abatement lien against the real property on which the nuisance is maintained. 
B.  Before recordation, the Enforcement Official shall provide to the Responsible Person or Property Owner a written "Notice of Intent to Record Nuisance Abatement Lien" informing such person that a nuisance abatement lien will be recorded unless the City receives full payment for the outstanding amount of civil penalties, costs and fees within the time period prescribed in the notice. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure, commencing at section 415.10 et seq. Payment shall be due a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date of the mailing. 
C.  If the property owner cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice can be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) calendar days and the notice must be published in a general circulation newspaper once at least ten (10) calendar days prior to recordation of the nuisance abatement lien. 
D.  A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the Santa Cruz County Recorder's Office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
E.  The nuisance abatement lien shall include the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the name of the Property Owner, Responsible Party and any financial institution with a legal interest in the property, the property's assessor's parcel number, the property's legal description, the total amount of civil penalties, costs and fees due, including a breakdown of penalty assessments and reimbursement for the City's administrative costs and a copy of any administrative or judicial order which awarded the civil penalties, costs and fees. 
F.  Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the Enforcement Official shall either record a Notice of Cancellation or provide the Property Owner or financial institution with the Notice of Cancellation so they can record this notice with the Santa Cruz County Recorder's office. The Notice of Cancellation shall include the same information as provided for in the original nuisance abatement lien as described in Chapter 4.24. Such Notice of Cancellation shall cancel the nuisance abatement lien. 
G.  A copy of the recorded nuisance abatement lien shall be served upon the Responsible Person or Property Owner by one of the methods of service set forth in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. 
H.  The failure of any person with a financial interest in the property to actually receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the validity of the lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding civil penalties. 
I.  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the City for a money judgment. If unable to collect the nuisance abatement lien, the Enforcement Official may refer the case to the City Attorney to file a court action to recover the costs. 
J.  The City may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the Property Owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.060 - Recovery of Costs by Special Assessment. 
A.  Once a final administrative decision or judicial order establishes that the amount of penalties, abatement costs, administrative fees and costs be charged against the property as a special assessment, the Enforcement Official shall prepare a notice of special assessment. 
B.  The Enforcement Official shall deliver the notice of special assessment to the County Auditor who shall place it on the County Assessment Roll pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. 
C.  The notice of special assessment shall include a copy of the Hearing Board's cost confirmation order and shall summarize the abatement action. The Enforcement Official may record a copy of this special assessment notice to inform any subsequent purchasers or owners of the abatement action, costs and assessment. 
D.  The Enforcement Official shall record a cancellation of special assessment notice with the Santa Cruz County Recorder when either: (i) the Responsible Person or Property Owner pays in full the abatement costs; or (ii) the Santa Cruz County Auditor or Tax Collector posts a lien on the property pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. 
E.  Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code section 38773.5 the Santa Cruz County Tax Collector may collect the amount of a special assessment at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes and impose the same penalties and procedures, including the sale of the property, in case of delinquency, as provided for with ordinary property tax collection. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.24.070 - Repayment to Code Enforcement Civil Penalties Fund. 
All monies recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale or transfer of the property shall be remitted to the City Finance Director who shall credit the appropriate amount to the general fund of the City or, alternatively use the monies to reimburse the department responsible for the subject code enforcement action where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Chapter 4.26 - INVESTIGATION AND REINSPECTION FEES 
 
4.26.010 - Investigation and Reinspection Fees. 
This Chapter governs the general procedures for recovering investigation and reinspection fees assessed by the City unless other provisions of this Municipal Code establish a specific investigation and/or reinspection fee procedure for a particular type of investigation or reinspection. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.020 - Declaration of Purpose. 
A.  The City Council finds there is a need to recover costs incurred by Enforcement Officials and other City personnel who spend considerable time investigating, inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the City of Scotts Valley in an effort to ensure compliance with the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
B.  The City Council further finds that the assessment of an investigation and/or reinspection fee is an appropriate method to recover costs incurred for investigation and additional inspections made by Enforcement Officials and other City personnel. The assessment and collection of investigation and reinspection fees shall not preclude the imposition of any administrative or judicial penalties or fines for violations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.030 - Authorization. 
A.  Whenever an Enforcement Official investigates a property to determine compliance with provisions of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes and determines that a violation or violations exist, the Enforcement Official may assess an investigation fee against the Responsible Person or Property Owner. Investigation fees may be assessed for time spent investigating, reporting, documenting and resolving violations if the Property Owner or Responsible Person fails to comply by the date specified in the Courtesy Notice sent to them informing them of existing violations on their property and a date for compliance. 
B.  Whenever an Enforcement Official reinspects a property to determine compliance with provisions of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes which have been listed in a Notice of Violation, the Enforcement Official may assess a reinspection fee against the Responsible Person or Property Owner. 
C.  Reinspection fees may be assessed for each inspection of the property after the issuance of a Notice of Violation. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.040 - Assessment of Investigation and Reinspection Fees. 
A Code Enforcement fee schedule shall be established and revised as necessary by the City Council to reflect current actual costs. The code enforcement fee schedule shall be filed in and available for public review at, the City Clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.050 - Notice of Assessment of Investigation and/or Reinspection Fees. 
A.  Where the assessment of investigation and/or reinspection fees is authorized under this Chapter, the appropriate City Enforcement Official shall provide the Responsible Person with a written notice assessing investigation and/or reinspection fees. The written assessment shall contain the following information: 
The amount of fees charged; 
The corresponding dates when investigation and/or reinspection took place; 
A deadline by which the investigation and/or reinspection fee must be paid; 
An explanation that additional late fees may be charged for late payment of the investigation and/or reinspection fee. 
B.  Service of notice of the investigation and/or reinspection fee assessment shall be provided to the Responsible Person or Property Owner by any of the means outlined in Chapter 4.03 of this Municipal Code. 
C.  Investigation and reinspection fees may be assessed as part of any judicial or administrative enforcement action as provided for in this Chapter. 
D.  The failure of any Responsible Person or Property Owner to receive notice of the investigation and/or reinspection fee assessment shall not affect the validity of any fees imposed under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.060 - Failure to Pay Investigation and/or Reinspection Fee. 
The failure of any person to pay an investigation and/or reinspection fee by the deadline specified in the written notice of assessment of reinspection fee shall result in the assessment of an additional late fee. The amount of the late fee shall be established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.070 - Collection of Investigation and/or Reinspection Fee. 
The Enforcement Official shall collect the assessed investigation and/or reinspection and late fees by the use of all appropriate legal means, including but not limited to referral to the City Finance Department or City Attorney for collection or recordation of a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to Chapter 4.24. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
4.26.080 - Payment to Code Enforcement Civil Penalties Fund. 
All monies recovered by payment of late payment fees shall be remitted to the City Finance Director. 
(Ord. No. 7.6, § 2, 5-5-04)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
5.04.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, profession, show, exhibition, or game of any type whatsoever in the city, without first paying an appropriate license fee and procuring a license from the finance director. 
(Ord. 15 § 1, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 1, 1992)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Business" means: 
1.  Each and every business, commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, exhibition, game or any means of livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit within the city of Scotts Valley; 
2.  Solicitors and peddlers, as defined in subsections B and C; 
3.  Any person, whether having a fixed place of business in the city or not, who operates a motor vehicle over the streets of the city for the purpose of pickup or delivery of personal property in the city, or who uses the vehicle for any other purpose in connection with the transaction of any business of such person. This includes, without limitation, the delivery of bread and other bakery products, milk, groceries, laundry and dry cleaning, and other goods and merchandise, as well as the nonroute delivery of building materials, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description. 
B.  "Employee" means any person working in Scotts Valley for any person, business, trade, profession, vocation, calling, exhibition, or game or other endeavor subject to a business license. 
C.  "Finance director" means the finance director of the city of Scotts Valley, or an authorized agent or representative. 
D.  "Peddler" means: 
1.  Any person who goes from house to house, or from place to place, within the city, selling and making immediate deliveries or offering for sale and immediate delivery to persons other than manufacturers, jobbers, or retailers of such commodities, any goods, wares, merchandise or any other thing of value in possession of such person, or who offers services to be performed immediately; and shall also include any itinerant vendor who sells merchandise or property from any vehicle by traveling from house to house or place to place within the city; and 
2.  Peddler excludes any persons who conduct the above-referenced activities from a fixed place of business within the city. 
E.  "Person" means individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association, or an agent for the same. 
F.  "Solicitor" means: 
1.  Any person who goes from house to house, or from place to place, in the city, soliciting orders from persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, or retailers of such commodities, for any goods, wares, merchandise or thing of value for future delivery, or soliciting orders from any person for services to be performed in the future; 
2.  Any person taking subscriptions to newspapers, periodicals, magazines, or other publications; or 
3.  Any person who goes from place to place soliciting immediate donations for any cause, benefit, organization, or other reason whether as their only item of business or as part of any campaign, signature drive, or other event. 
4.  Solicitor excludes the owner, agent or representative of any business operated in the city with a fixed place of business in the city. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.1, 1966; Ord. 123 § 1, 1985; Ord. 15.9 § 2, 1992; Ord. 15.12 § 1, 1996)  
5.04.030 - Application to state regulated business. 
Any state regulated business shall pay the appropriate license fee as required under this chapter, without submission of any application. Upon payment of the required fee, the license shall be issued without compliance with any other provision of this chapter except Section 5.04.050. The license fee imposed on any state-regulated business under this chapter shall be and is for revenue purposes only and not for regulation. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.2, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 3, 1992)  
5.04.040 - Unlawful business not authorized. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or any business in violation of any code, provisions or other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.2.1, 1966)  
5.04.050 - State licenses. 
A.  Any person, required by state law to have a state license or permit in order to engage in, conduct, maintain or operate any business, trade, profession, occupation, show, exhibition, game, device or machine shall not be issued a license by the finance director unless the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the finance director that the applicant has the necessary state license. 
B.  The finance director may require each applicant for a license to exhibit the state license or permit to the finance director and to furnish the finance director with the name, number, and all pertinent data relating to the state license or permit. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.3, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 4, 1992)  
5.04.060 - Issuance of licenses. 
A.  The finance director may refuse to issue a license to any person if, in the opinion of the city attorney, the business for which a license is being requested is in violation of any law, code, or ordinance of the city or of any law of the state of the United States of America. 
B.  The finance director may refuse to issue a license to any person who knowingly makes a false statement of fact required to be revealed in an application for a license. 
C.  The finance director may refuse to issue a license pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.52.020 of this Code. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.4, 1966; Ord. 15.2 § 1, 1978; Ord. 15.9 § 5, 1992)  
5.04.070 - Right of appeal. 
Any person to whom the finance director has refused to issue a license may appeal to the city council in writing within ten days after the date of refusal, requesting a hearing for reconsideration. The council shall set the matter for hearing and cause written notice of the hearing to be given to the petitioner not less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the petitioner shall show, to the satisfaction of the council, why a license should not be refused. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.5, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 6, 1992)  
5.04.075 - Art and/or craft fairs, shows or exhibits. 
Any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in or participating with others in any art and/or craft fair, show or exhibit shall pay a license fee of five dollars per day. 
(Ord. 119 § 1, 1985)  
5.04.080 - Exhibition, show or performance for charitable purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applied to any exhibition, show or performance given for the exclusive benefit of any church, school, benevolent or social organization, or for any charitable purpose by any association or society of the city. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.6, 1966)  
5.04.090 - Nonapplicable trades or occupations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following trades or occupations: laborer, mechanic, artisan, clerk, stenographer, nurse; nor shall the same apply to any person selling or otherwise disposing of farm products, livestock, poultry and eggs or wood raised or produced by himself. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person whom the city is not authorized to license for revenue or regulation purposes only because of any law or Constitution of the United States or of the state. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.7, 1966; Ord. 15.2 § 1.7, 1978)  
5.04.091 - Nonapplicable churches and nonprofit entities. 
The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any organization covered by Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. This exemption shall only apply to corporations or organizations which have provided proof, to the satisfaction of the city finance director, of current technical eligibility under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such organizations. 
(Ord. 15.10 § 1, 1992; Ord. 15.12 § 2, 1996)  
5.04.100 - Honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine. 
Every honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine, airman or coast guardsman from the military or naval services of the United States of America who is unable to earn a livelihood by manual labor may hawk, peddle or vend any kind of goods, wares or merchandise, other than spirituous, vinous, malt or alcoholic liquors, in the city without paying a license fee or obtaining a license therefor, upon procuring a written permit signed by the finance director. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.8, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 7, 1992)  
5.04.110 - License procurement and fee payment. 
All licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall be procured from and all license fees hereby imposed shall be paid in lawful money of the United States of America to the finance director. Applications for a license may be made to the finance director at any time during regular office hours, authorized holidays excepted. A nonrefundable fee of forty-five dollars is required with each new business license application. Subject to the conditions of this chapter and upon payment of the application fee and the appropriate license fee, the finance director shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.9, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 8, 1992)  
5.04.120 - Record of license. 
The finance director shall sign all licenses issued, and number and keep a record of all licenses issued. The record shall indicate the number of the license, the date issued and renewed, to whom issued, for what business issued, the location thereof, the time of expiration and the amount of the license fee. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.10, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 9, 1992)  
5.04.130 - License fee payable to city. 
The license fee imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable and shall constitute a debt owing to the city immediately upon the commencement of any kind of business or game engaged in or carried on, or of any show or exhibitions. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.11, 1966)  
5.04.140 - License not transferable. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner assignable or transferable nor shall it authorize any person other than that named herein to engage in, conduct or carry on any business or game, or exhibit any show or exhibition other than therein stated except as otherwise in this chapter provided. Any person engaged in conducting or carrying on more than one kind of business for which a license is hereby required, shall procure a separate license for each and pay the prescribed fee for each such business, except as in this chapter otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.12, 1966)  
5.04.150 - Conspicuous posting of license. 
Every person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter shall keep it conspicuously posted in or about the place where the licensed business is conducted, exhibited or carried on and shall, upon demand, exhibit it to the finance director or to any police officer provided, however, that in the case of solicitors or peddlers, the license shall prominently be displayed on the persons so licensed in such a manner as to show any person being solicited that they are properly licensed. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.13, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 10, 1992; Ord. 15.12 § 3, 1996)  
5.04.160 - Discovery of noncompliance. 
The finance director shall make a diligent effort to discover all persons engaged in conducting or carrying on any business in the city for which a license is required by the provisions of this chapter and shall immediately proceed to collect any unpaid license fees from the same. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.14, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 11, 1992)  
5.04.170 - Duties of city police. 
In addition to the other duties imposed upon them by law, all police officers of the city shall be ex officio license inspectors and shall exercise diligence to cause the provisions of this chapter to be carried into effect. They shall, upon request of the city attorney, furnish the evidence required for the prosecution of any civil or criminal action brought under the provisions of this chapter. City police officers shall examine and ascertain whether every business requiring a license pursuant to this chapter is duly licensed. Any police officer discovering a violation of this chapter shall report in writing to the finance director the name of the person who is operating in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.15, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 12, 1992)  
5.04.180 - Penalty for nonprocurement of license. 
Against any person who engages in, conducts, or carries on any business or game, or exhibits any show or exhibition for which a license is required by the provisions of this chapter, without procuring such license and paying the prescribed license fee, the city administrator may at any time direct the city attorney to bring suit in the name of the city of Scotts Valley for the recovery of such license fee thereby imposed. A penalty of double the regular license fee shall be levied, in addition to the amount of any judgment recovered by the city. 
(Ord. 15, § 1.16, 1966; Ord. 15.4 § 2(part), 1979)  
5.04.190 - Failure to procure license—Misdemeanor. 
Every person who commences, engages in, conducts or carries on any business requiring a license pursuant to this chapter without procuring the license and paying the appropriate fee, or who otherwise violates this chapter, shall be punished to the maximum extent permissible. Every day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.17, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 13, 1992)  
5.04.200 - Additional penalty for nonpayment of license fee. 
In addition to all other penalties and all remedies provided in this chapter and available to the city upon violation of any of the terms of this chapter, a penalty for the nonpayment of license fee as provided in this chapter is established which penalty shall be equal to ten percent per month of the license fee herein provided, and the sum shall be levied as a penalty for each month succeeding the date on which a license fee was due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.18, 1966; Ord. 15.4 § 2(part), 1979)  
5.04.210 - Writ of attachment. 
In all suits instituted by the city as provided in this chapter, for the collection or recovery of any license fee imposed, the finance director or the city attorney may make the necessary affidavit for a writ of attachment against the property of the defendant therein, and such writ shall thereupon be issued without any undertaking or other security being given by or on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.19, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 14, 1992)  
5.04.220 - Civil action not a bar to criminal action. 
No action for a recovery of judgement in any civil action for the collection or recovery of any license fee imposed shall be a bar to any criminal prosecution under the provisions of this chapter, nor shall any such prosecution or conviction be a bar to any such civil action. 
(Ord. 15 § 1.20, 1966)  
5.04.230 - Language. 
Words used in this chapter in the present tense include the future as well as the past; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes a corporation as well as a natural person and the word "business" includes the word "profession." 
(Ord. 15 § 1.21, 1966)  
5.04.240 - License application—Contents. 
Any person making application for the initial license to be issued for any business conducted within the corporate limits of the city shall submit to the finance director, on a form provided by the finance director, such information as may be required therein and as may be necessary to determine the appropriate amount of the license fee owed by the applicant. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.1, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 15, 1992)  
5.04.250 - License fee determination. 
The applicant shall estimate the average number of persons to be employed in the business for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. If the finance director accepts the estimate as being reasonable, it shall be used in determining the amount of license fee owed by the applicant. However, this fee amount shall be tentative only. The finance director may require the applicant to furnish additional proof verifying the number of employees within thirty days after the issuance of the license. If so, the final license fee shall be determined after receipt of the additional proof. The amount paid as a tentative license fee shall be deducted from the amount due as the final license fee. The finance director shall not issue to any applicant another license for the same or any other business until the applicant has furnished to the finance director the necessary proof and paid in full all license fees required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.2, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 16, 1992)  
5.04.260 - License application—Renewal—Contents. 
In all cases, the applicant for renewal of a license shall submit to the finance director a written statement upon a form to be provided by the finance director setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as the finance director deems necessary to ascertain the appropriate amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.3, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 17, 1992)  
5.04.270 - License application and statements not conclusive. 
A.  No statement, evidence or proof required in this chapter shall be conclusive against the city or any of its departments, bureaus, officers, agents or employees. 
B.  If the finance director determines, based on good cause, that a licensee has knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the license application, the finance director may revoke the license. Prior to revoking the license, the finance director shall give not less than five days' written notice to the licensee to show cause, at a time and place set by the notice, why the license should not be revoked. At the hearing, the licensee shall appear and submit evidence why the license should not be revoked. Within ten days after the hearing, the finance director shall make a written determination as to whether the license should be revoked, and the decision shall be mailed to the licensee. 
C.  If the finance director determines, based on good cause, that a license fee has not been properly charged for any license issued, the finance director shall give not less than five days' written notice to the licensee to show cause, at a time and place set by the notice, why an amended fee, determined by the finance director and specified in the notice, should not be charged for the license. At the hearing the licensee shall appear and offer evidence why the amended fee should not be charged. Within ten days after the hearing, the finance director shall make a written determination as to whether the license fee should be amended, and the decision shall be mailed to the licensee. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.4, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 18, 1992)  
5.04.280 - Right of appeal. 
The licensee may appeal any of the matters set forth in Section 5.04.270(B) and (C) in writing to the city council within ten days of receipt of the finance director's written decision. The city council shall immediately schedule the matter for hearing, and cause written notice of the hearing to be given to the applicant or licensee not less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall appear and offer evidence why the decision of the finance director should be overturned. Within ten days after the hearing, the city council shall make a written determination, and the decision shall be mailed to the licensee. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.5, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 19, 1992)  
5.04.290 - Payment of determined fee. 
Any fee finally determined shall be due and payable as of the date the original licensee fee was due and payable, together with any penalties that may be due thereon; provided, however, if such fee shall be fixed in accordance with the original statement of the licensee, then no penalty shall attach to such fee by reason of any delinquency. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.6, 1966)  
5.04.300 - Serving of notice. 
Any notice herein required shall be deemed to have been served when the same is posted in the United States mail enclosed in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the addresses at the addressee's place of business as the address of the same appears on the records of the finance director. 
(Ord. 15 § 2.7, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 20, 1992)  
5.04.310 - Term of license. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, commencing January 1, 1992, all licenses shall be issued on a fiscal year basis, as follows: from the first day of July to the thirtieth day of the succeeding June, inclusive. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all licenses issued or renewed between January 1, 1992 and June 30, 1992, shall be in effect until July 1, 1992. 
(Ord. 15 § 3.1, 1966; Ord. 15.7 § 1, 1984; Ord. 15.9 § 21, 1992)  
5.04.320 - License fee—When payable. 
A.  All license fees shall be paid annually on or before July 1st of each year for the fiscal year commencing July 1st and ending June 30th of the succeeding year. 
B.  For the year of transition from a calendar year to a fiscal year basis as set out in Section 5.04.310, fees for licenses issued for the period January 1 through June 30, 1992, shall be charged and collected at the annual rate but shall only be effective through June 30, 1992. All business licenses that expire on June 30, 1992, shall be renewed on or before July 1, 1992, and the city shall issue a new business license which shall be effective July 1, 1992, through June 30, 1993. The fee for this renewal shall be one half of the annual license fee. All other new business licenses issued on or after July 1, 1992, shall be paid annually as set forth above in subsection A. 
(Ord. 15 § 3.2, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 22, 1992)  
5.04.330 - Licenses of quarterly prorated business. 
The owners and/or operators of any business (including, without limitation, a contractor duly licensed by the state of California) conducting business operations (or contracting activities) in Scotts Valley during any part of the fiscal year shall first pay the annual license fee established by the provisions of Section 5.04.390 and shall be issued a business license for the remainder of the fiscal year, except that the fee shall be one-half the annual amount if business operations (or contracting activities) are or will be conducted over a period not exceeding three months in the fiscal year, in which case a business license valid only for the pertinent three-month period shall be issued. 
(Ord. 15 § 3.3, 1966; Ord. 15.5 § 1(B), 1982)  
5.04.350 - License fee and license fee rate. 
The license fee required and rate of license fee fixed and charged for conducting, engaging in or carrying on any business shall be as set forth in Sections 5.04.350 through 5.04.390, inclusive. 
(Ord. 15 § 4, 1966; Ord. 15.9 § 23, 1992)  
5.04.360 - Issuance of business license for duration of summer season. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any business or concession not having a regularly established place of business in the city and being established in the city on a temporary basis only for the duration of the summer season shall be issued a license for a period of six months from April 1st to September 30th of a calendar year, and the license fee for the business or concession shall be fifty dollars for the season. In the event of a dispute between the applicant for a business license and the taxing authorities of the city as to whether said business is being established temporarily and solely for the summer season or is being established permanently as a business enterprise in the city, then the council of the city, after due inquiry and investigation, shall find whether the business is temporary or permanent within the meaning of this section, and the finding of the council in such matters shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 15 § 4.1, 1966)  
5.04.370 - Peddlers and solicitors. 
Any person engaged as a peddler or solicitor within the city shall pay a license fee as established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 15 § 4.2, 1966; Ord. 15.12 § 4, 1996)  
5.04.380 - Carnival and circus. 
For the business of conducting a carnival or circus in the city on any occasion, the license fee shall be three hundred dollars per day. Applications for carnival or circus license must be filed at least fifteen days before the commencement of the carnival or circus. The council, under its police power, reserves the right to reject any or all applications for such license and to direct and require that shows, exhibitions or entertainment or activities are proper and that may be permitted. Its action in the premises shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 15 § 4.3, 1966; Ord. 15.5 § 1(C), 1982)  
5.04.390 - Fee schedule for all other businesses. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the license fee for any business is fifty dollars, plus forty dollars for each employee without limitation on the maximum amount of employees. The term "employee" includes the owner or owners of the business who work for or manage the business, but does not include stockholders of a corporation unless they are employees of a corporation. 
B.  The number of employees for purposes of calculating the license fee shall be the average of the number of employees working in each of the preceding four quarters. If the business has been in operation less than one year at the time of renewal, the number of employees shall be the average of the number of employees for each quarter of operation. 
C.  The number of employees shall be subject to audit and verification by the finance director, the city attorney, or a qualified accountant deputized by the finance director with the consent of the city attorney. In determining the number of employees, the finance director or deputized accountant is authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any person refusing to exhibit the necessary books and records upon request from the finance director or deputized accountant is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 15 § 4.4, 1966; Ord. 15.1 § 1, 1975; Ord. 15.5 § 1(D), 1982; Ord. 15.6 § 1, 1983; Ord. 15.8 § 1, 1986; Ord. 15.9 § 24, 1992)  
5.04.400 - Storage and warehouse facilities. 
For the business of operating a storage or warehouse facility in the city, the license fee shall be fifty dollars, plus ten dollars for each ten thousand square feet of buildings, rounded to the nearest ten thousand square feet. The minimum license fee shall be ninety dollars. 
(Ord. 15.11 § 1, 1994)  
Chapter 5.06 - BINGO 
 
5.06.010 - Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority provided in Section 19(c) of Article IV of the California State Constitution and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, the following requirements are established for the conduct of bingo games by authorized organizations as defined in Section 5.06.030. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.020 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbol that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player's possession and that conform to numbers or symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller. The game of bingo shall include tangible cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. Electronics or video displays shall not be used in connection with the game of bingo, except in connection with the caller's drawing of numbers or symbols and the public display of that drawing. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All preprinted cards shall bear the legend, "for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance." Only a covered or marked tangible card possessed by a player and presented to an attendant may be used to claim a prize. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 159.1, § 1, 12-6-2017)  
5.06.030 - Organizations permitted to conduct bingo games. 
No person, organization or other legal entity shall be permitted to conduct bingo games in the incorporated area of the city unless such persons, organizations or other legal entities possess a valid certificate or letter from the Franchise Tax Board and the Internal Revenue Service stating that they are exempted from the payment of the bank and corporate tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701w, and 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobilehome park associations, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district ("authorized organizations"); provided that such authorized organization holds a valid license and pays a license fee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and provided that the authorized organization has been in continual existence within the city for a period of three years prior to the date application is made for bingo license; and provided that the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 159.1, § 2, 12-6-2017)  
5.06.040 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  Minors. No minors shall be allowed within the room in which a bingo game is being operated. 
B.  Open to the Public. All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization. 
C.  Staffing and Operation. A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of an authorized organization which organized it. Only an authorized organization which holds a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter shall operate such game, or engage in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. This subsection does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the authorized organization conducting the game. 
D.  No Profit, Wage or Salary. No person or agent of such person shall receive a profit, wage, salary, or other income from any bingo game authorized by this chapter, except as a bona fide prize received as a participant in such bingo game. 
E.  Where Bingo May be Conducted. An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the authorized organization, and which property is used by such authorized organization solely for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the authorized organization is organized and solely within the room designated on the licensee's application. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the authorized organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that authorized organization. 
F.  Bingo Equipment. All equipment used in the operation of bingo games shall be owned by the authorized organization conducting such bingo games. 
G.  Financial Interest. No individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the authorized organization shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
H.  Profits and Proceeds. For authorized organizations covered by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Tax Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account and with respect to those authorized organizations, all profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. Proceeds derived from authorized organizations other than those covered by 23701d of the Revenue and Tax Code shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games and shall only for charitable purposes except as follows: 
1.  The proceeds may be used for prizes; 
2.  A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel; 
3.  The proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
I.  Records. Each authorized organization conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of all profits, expenditures, prizes and other expenses associated with the operation of bingo games. The records shall be retained for such period of time as required by state and federal law and for a period of three years for purposes of this chapter. 
J.  Total Value of Prizes. The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed five hundred dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
K.  Physical Presence at Bingo Game Required. No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted. 
L.  Number of Days and Hours of Operation. There shall be no more than two days of bingo per calendar week for each authorized organization and all bingo games shall be conducted during the hours of twelve p.m. to eleven p.m. 
M.  No Alcohol. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or licensed within the room within which a bingo game is operated. No person under the influence of an alcoholic beverage shall be allowed within the room within which a bingo game is operated. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 159.1, § 3, 12-6-2017)  
5.06.045 - Exceptions. 
In reviewing applications for bingo licenses submitted under Section 5.06.080 of this Code, and issuing licenses under Section 5.06.070, the finance director may, with the advice and consent of the chief of police, waive the requirement in subsection D of Section 5.06.110 that the applicant have been in existence three years prior to submitting the application. This waiver may be granted upon finding that the applicant was organized to address a topic of public importance that attained public attention within the past three years. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.050 - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates Sections 5.06.030, 5.06.040, 5.06.060, 5.06.070, 5.06.150, 5.06.180 and 5.06.190 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties provided in Title 1, Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.060 - Authority to inspect premises and records. 
A.  The chief of police and any official city inspector shall have the authority to enter licensee's premises free of charge to inspect the premises in order to insure that the operation of bingo games at the premises does not constitute a violation of any state or federal law or provisions of this Code. 
B.  The chief of police and finance director may inspect the records and special bank accounts containing moneys derived from bingo games of any authorized organization conducting bingo games whenever deemed reasonable and appropriate to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.070 - License required. 
No person, corporation, partnership, association or organization of any sort shall conduct a bingo game without first obtaining a license from the finance director to do so. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.080 - Application for license required—Contents of license. 
An application for a bingo license or renewal of such license shall be filed with the finance director, shall be in writing on forms provided by the city, shall be in duplicate, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee. The application and renewal fees for a bingo license shall be set be resolution of the city council. Fees are established to cover actual cost of issuing such license. Applications shall be verified as provided by the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. Such application shall include: 
A.  Name or organization, names, signatures, addresses, and phone numbers of all officers of the organization and the number of years the organization has had continuous active existence at a fixed address in the city prior to the application date; 
B.  Days and hours of operation of bingo games; 
C.  Attached copies of certificates or letters evidencing exempt status under Section 170 c2 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, received from the Franchise Tax Board and the Internal Revenue Service or proof that the organization is a validly existing mobile home park association, senior citizens' organizations, or charitable organization affiliated with a school district; 
D.  Address of the premises for which the license is required and the seating capacity, the name, residence, business address, business phone number and written consent of the owner of the premises, who shall indicate consent to bingo games being conducted upon the premises by signing the application in the space provided; 
E.  Statement of ownership or lease of premises; 
F.  Purpose for which such premises are used by the authorized organization; 
G.  Statement of ownership of bingo equipment used in the operation of bingo games; 
H.  Statement of consent for chief of police to investigate any bank accounts containing moneys derived from bingo games; 
I.  Names of each individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which has a financial interest in the conduct of bingo games; 
J.  Name and birth date, residence and business address of each staff member or person operating or assisting in the operation of bingo games; 
K.  Whether or not any person who will operate or assist in the operation of bingo games has been convicted within the last five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, burglary, robbery, or similar crimes; and 
L.  Such further information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 159.1, § 4, 12-6-2017)  
5.06.090 - Authority of and investigation and recommendation by chief of police. 
A.  The finance director shall submit each application to the chief of police for investigation and approval. 
B.  The chief of police shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether the license should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The chief of police shall have the authority to obtain criminal history information for each person operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game for the purposes of his investigation. If he/she finds that such operators or persons assisting in the operation of a bingo game have been convicted within the past five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, burglary, robbery, or similar crimes he/she may not approve issuance of the license in question. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.100 - Investigation and recommendation by other city departments. 
The finance director shall submit each application to the following departments for investigation and recommendation: 
A.  Fire department as to any fire hazard on the premises in question. 
B.  County health department as to the health and sanitary conditions of the premises in question. 
C.  Building inspection department as to compliance with city building regulations. 
D.  Planning director as to compliance with city zoning requirements and the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.110 - Approval and issuance of license. 
After investigation the chief of police shall approve the application and the finance director shall issue a bingo game license or renewal of such license, if the chief of police finds: 
A.  That a completed written application form therefore has been filed; and 
B.  That the required fee therefore has been paid to the city finance director; and 
C.  That as a result of the investigation all applicable provisions of this chapter with regard to such license application have been met; and 
D.  That the organization has had continuous active existence at a fixed address in the city for at least three years prior to the application date or that requirement has been waived as provided in chapter; and 
E.  That the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building, structure and location which complies with and meets all of the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city applicable to such premises; and 
F.  That the applicant and the persons who will operate or assist in operating bingo games have not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment, within the last five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, burglary, robbery or similar crimes; 
G.  That the applicant has not had a similar type license previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant has shown a material change in circumstances since the date or revocation. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.120 - License conditions. 
If the license is approved, the chief of police may include such restrictions and conditions in the license as deemed reasonable and necessary under the circumstances to insure compliance with the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.130 - Notice of decision. 
Notice of decision with reference to issuance of a license under this chapter shall be made to the applicant or any other person requesting such notice in writing within thirty days after receipt of the application for a license or a renewal of a license. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.140 - Denial of license. 
The chief of police shall refuse to approve a license if the license application of proposed mode of operation of the bingo game is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.150 - Notice of change, further investigation by chief of police. 
A.  Any changes as to the staff operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game or any other changes in the information furnished under Section 5.06.080 made subsequent to the issuance of a bingo license shall be reported within twenty days to the chief of police for any further investigation which he deems necessary and appropriate. 
B.  If, after such investigation, the chief of police finds that the changes require suspension, the chief of police may suspend any license issued. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.160 - Duration and license renewal. 
Licenses shall be granted for one-year terms; each term is renewable annually. Written application for renewal of a license shall be made to the finance director at least one month prior to its expiration date. Licenses shall automatically expire upon repeal of authority to conduct bingo games within the city. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.170 - Display of license and posting of rules and regulations. 
Every licensee shall keep the license and a copy of the rules and regulations set forth in Section 5.06.040 posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises in open and clear view. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.180 - Filing of annual report. 
At the end of each fiscal year during the term of the license, each authorized organization which has been issued a license shall file a report made under penalty of perjury with the finance department containing the following information: 
A.  Any changes in or additions to the information required under Section 5.06.080. 
B.  The total amount of money received from the operation of bingo games in the previous year. 
C.  The total amount paid out in prizes. 
D.  Detailed costs to the authorized organization for the operation of the bingo games. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.190 - Licenses nontransferable. 
Licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the license or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the license in question invalid. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.200 - Suspension of license authorized. 
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended by the chief of police for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any provisions of this Code or of federal or state law. The chief of police in case of such suspension, shall serve the licensee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for the suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited postage pre-paid in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service. Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the license shall cease all operations under such license. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.210 - Revocation. 
The suspension shall become a revocation within ten days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the licensee files an appeal of the order of suspension. Where an appeal is filed, the order shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the city council. The suspension shall become a revocation of the suspension of the chief of police is upheld. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
5.06.220 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police with reference to the approval or denial of an application of a license may appeal such decision according to the appellate procedures set out for appeals to the city council in Title 17, Chapter 17.50, Section 17.50.060 of the code. 
(Ord. 159 § 1(part), 1994)  
Chapter 5.10 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 5.10, §§ 5.10.010—5.10.140, and enacted a new Ch. 5.10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 176.1, § 1, adopted June 21, 2006. 
 
5.10.010 - Purpose. 
A.  In enacting this chapter, the city council recognizes that commercial massage therapy is a professional pursuit which can offer the public valuable health and therapeutic services. The city council further recognizes that, unless properly regulated, the practice of massage therapy and the operation of massage businesses may be associated with unlawful activity and pose a threat to the quality of life in the local community. Accordingly, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the orderly regulation of businesses providing massage therapy services, discouraging prostitution and related illegal activities carried on under the guise of massage therapy, and establishing certain sanitation, health, and operational standards for massage businesses. 
B.  It is the city council's further purpose and intent to rely upon the uniform statewide regulations applicable to massage practitioners and establishments that were enacted by the state legislature in 2008 as Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. by Senate Bill 731, and amended in 2011 by Assembly Bill 619 and in 2014 by Assembly Bill 1147 and in 2017 by Assembly Bill 2194, to restrict the commercial practice of massage in the city to those persons duly certified to practice by the California Massage Therapy Council and to provide for the registration and regulation of massage businesses for health and safety purposes to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  As used in this chapter "massage" or "massaging" shall mean the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissues of the human body with the purpose of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client. The practice includes the external application of water, heat, cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations, and the use of devices that mimic or enhance the actions of the hands. Massage does not include the prescription of legend drugs or controlled substances, the diagnosis of illness or disease, or any treatment for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required. "Massage" does not include touching that meets either of the following criteria: (A) It is done as part of movement education, energy balancing, or any other technique, profession, or modality in which any soft tissue manipulation is incidental to, and not the central aim of, the practice. (B) It is done while engaging in the practice of another somatic technique, profession, or modality with established standards and ethics in which a practitioner is qualified, provided that such services are not designated or implied to be massage or massage therapy. 
B.  "Massage establishment" shall mean any business that offers massage therapy in exchange for compensation, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the customer or client through outcall massage services. Any business that offers any combination of massage therapy and bath facilities - including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot tubs - shall be deemed a massage business under this chapter. The term "massage business" includes a certified massage practitioner who is the sole owner, operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship. 
C.  "Out call massage service" shall mean any business where a function of such business is to engage in or carry on massage, not at a fixed location but at a location designated by the customer, massage therapist or other person. 
D.  "Massage practitioner" means any person who administers massage to another person for any form of consideration. 
E.  "Person" shall mean any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
G.  "Employee" shall mean any and all persons, other than the massage therapist, employed by the massage establishment who may render any service to the permittee, and who receives compensation from the establishment and who has no physical contact with customers and clients. The term "employee" shall include independent contractors who are regularly employed by the establishment and who work at the massage establishment. 
H.  "Recognized school" shall mean any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage which furnishes the student with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning, and which has been approved pursuant to the provisions of the California Education Code, or an existing school or institution of learning outside the State of California. 
H.  Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. The city shall have the right to confirm that the applicant has actually attended class in a recognized school. 
I.  "Permittee" shall mean the operator of a massage establishment and out call massage service. 
J.  "CAMTC" shall mean the California Massage Therapy Council, which was created by the California Legislature through the enactment of Senate Bill 731 and re-authorized by Assembly Bill 1147 and again in 2016 by Assembly Bill 2194. 
K.  "Massage establishment permit" or "permit" shall mean the permit required to operate a massage establishment. 
L.  "Massage practitioner certificate" or "certificate" shall mean the certificate provided to a massage practitioner after verification from the police department of a valid CAMTC certification. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.030 - Required permits and certificates. 
A.  Massage Business Establishment Permit: It shall be unlawful for any business to provide massage for compensation within the City of Scotts Valley unless all individuals employed by the massage business to perform massage, whether as employee, independent contractor, or sole proprietorship, are CAMTC certified massage practitioners and said business has obtained a valid massage establishment permit as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Massage Practitioner Certificate: It shall be unlawful for any individual to practice massage therapy for compensation as a sole proprietorship, independent contractor or employee of a massage business or in any other capacity within the City of Scotts Valley unless that individual has received a massage practitioner certificate from the chief of police and is a CAMTC certified massage practitioner or exempt therapist. However, all massage practitioners operating within the City of Scotts Valley who are non-CAMTC certified but have valid massage permits issued by the chief of police on the effective date of this chapter shall have until June 30, 2021 to obtain a CAMTC certification and to apply for and obtain a massage practitioner certificate under the terms of this chapter. Any such non-CAMTC certified massage therapists shall renew their massage permit issued by the chief of police by July 1, 2019 and July 1, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of persons while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
A.  Persons licensed to practice any healing art pursuant to Division 2 of the Business and Profession Code or the Chiropractic Act, including, but not limited to, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California and are acting within the scope of that license; 
B.  Nurses registered under the laws of the State of California acting within the scope of that license; 
C.  Persons licensed or certificated pursuant to Division 3, Chapter 10 of the Business and Professions Code, including, but not limited to, cosmetologists, barbers and estheticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California and are acting within the scope of that license; 
D.  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California acting within the scope of that license; 
E.  Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities where coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment; 
F.  Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams acting within the scope of their employment; 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.050 - Filing applications and fees. 
A.  Massage Establishment Permit: Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage establishment or out call massage service shall obtain a business license from the city finance director. After obtaining a business license from the city finance director, the applicant shall file a massage establishment permit application with the chief of police upon a form provided by the city. The application for a massage establishment permit shall include all of the following: 
1.  Legal name of the massage business. 
2.  Address and telephone number of the massage business. 
3.  Legal names of all owners of the massage business. 
4.  A list of all of the massage business' employees and independent contractors who are performing massage and their CAMTC certification information. 
5.  Residence address and telephone number of all owners of the massage business. 
6.  Business address and telephone number of all owners of the massage business. 
7.  The form of business under which the massage business will be operating (i.e., corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability company, or other form). 
8.  Each owner or operator of the massage business who is not a CAMTC certified massage practitioner shall submit an application for a background check, including the following: the individual's business, occupation, and employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application; the inclusive dates of such employment history; the name and address of any massage business or similar business owned or operated by the individual whether inside or outside the County of Santa Cruz and its incorporated cities; proof that the applicant(s) has submitted her/his fingerprints to the Department of Justice via LiveScan. 
9.  For all owners, a valid and current driver's license and/or identification issued by a state or federal governmental agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government. 
10.  For all owners, a signed statement that all of the information contained in the application is true and correct; that all owners shall be responsible for the conduct of the business' employees or independent contractors providing massage services; and acknowledging that failure to comply with the California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., and local, state, or federal law, or the provisions of this chapter may result in revocation of the business' city massage establishment registration certificate. 
B.  Massage Practitioner Certificate: Massage practitioner certificate applications shall be submitted using forms provided by the police department and shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
1.  The applicant's full name, all other names the applicant uses or has used, the applicant's residential address, and residence telephone number; 
2.  The name and address of the massage establishment where the applicant is to be employed and the name of the massage establishment owner; 
3.  The names and addresses of any and all previous establishments where the applicant has been employed as a massage professional for the past two years; 
4.  CAMTC certification document; 
5.  A statement signed by the owner or operator of a massage establishment indicating an intent to employ the applicant as a massage professional (unless the applicant is the massage establishment owner or operator). 
C.  Fees: Any application for a city massage establishment permit, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be used to defray the costs of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the city from establishing additional fees for safety inspections as may be conducted from time to time by the chief of police, and for the background checks, fingerprinting, and subsequent arrest notification for owners of a massage business who are not CAMTC certified and who are subject to such background checks pursuant to this chapter. There shall be no fee for the massage practitioner certificate unless established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.060 - Term of permit. 
All permits and certificates shall be issued on a fiscal year basis from the first day of July to the 30th day of the succeeding June, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.070 - Issuance of permits and certificates. 
A.  Issuance: Upon provision by the massage business owner of the foregoing acceptable documentation to obtain a massage establishment permit, or 2) the massage practitioner of the foregoing acceptable documentation to obtain a massage practitioner certificate, the chief of police shall issue the appropriate permit or certificate, which shall be valid until the end of the current fiscal year. No reapplication for massage establishment permits will be accepted within one year after an application or renewal is denied or a permit is revoked. Standards to deny, city massage establishment permits shall not be issued to a massage business seeking to operate at a particular location if: 
1.  Another massage business is or was operating at that particular location and that massage business is currently serving a suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 5.10.110, during the pendency of the suspension or one year following revocation; 
2.  Another massage business is or was operating at that particular location and that massage business has received a notice of suspension, revocation, or fine issued pursuant to Sections 5.10.100 and 5.10.110, during the ten-day period following receipt of the notice or while any appeal of a suspension, revocation or fine is pending; 
3.  Another massage business is or was operating at that particular location and that massage business has outstanding fines issued pursuant to Section 5.10.100 that have not been paid; 
4.  A massage business owner has previously failed to comply with the California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., and local, state, or federal law, or the provisions of this chapter and is seeking to open a massage business of a different name or at a different location within the City of Scotts Valley. 
B.  Amendment: A massage business shall apply to the city to amend its city massage establishment permit within thirty days after any change in the registration information, including, but not limited to, the hiring or termination of certified massage practitioners, the change of the business' address, or changes in the owner's addresses and/or telephone numbers. 
C.  Renewal: Massage establishment permits and massage practitioner certificates shall be renewed annually on or before July 1st of each fiscal year. The permit and/or certificate will be valid for the fiscal year unless suspended or revoked. If an application of renewal has not been received by July 1st of each fiscal year, the permit or certificate shall be deemed suspended until such time as the renewal application has been received and approved. If a permit is suspended, neither the massage establishment nor the massage practitioner may perform massage within the city. If a renewal application and all required information for the renewal is not received within sixty days after expiration, the permit or certificate shall be deemed expired and no privilege to provide massage shall exist. 
Massage establishment permit renewal applications shall only require (1) filling out a massage establishment permit application, (2) either (a) the applicant resubmitting her/his fingerprints to the Department of Justice via LiveScan or (b) by the applicant signing a waiver form with the city authorizing the Department of Justice to utilize the subsequent arrest notification process, (3) submitting a list of all of the massage business' employees and independent contractors who are performing massage and their CAMTC certification information. 
Massage practitioner certificate renewal applications shall only require (1) filling out the massage practitioner certificate registration application, and (2) providing a current CAMTC certification document. 
D.  Transfer: A city massage establishment permit shall not be transferred except with the prior written approval of the chief of police. A written request for such transfer shall contain the same information for the new ownership as is required for applications for a massage establishment permit. In the event of denial, notification of the denial and reasons therefor shall be provided in writing and shall be provided to the applicant by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail. A city massage establishment permit may not be transferred during any period of suspension or one year following revocation pursuant to Section 5.10.110, during the ten-day period following a massage business's receipt of a notice of suspension, revocation or fine issued pursuant to Sections 5.10.100 or while any appeal of a suspension, revocation or fine is pending. Further, a city massage establishment permit may not be transferred until all outstanding fines issued pursuant to Section 5.10.100 have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.080 - Massage establishment and outcall operating requirements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator, responsible managing officer/employee, or permittee to employ or permit a person to act as a massage practitioner who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked massage practitioner certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of massage or act as a massage practitioner and provide any type of massage service without having a valid massage practitioner certificate issued by the chief of police for the purposes of providing massages. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of any massage establishment or out call massage service to employ any person who is under eighteen years of age. 
D.  Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted shall display such permit and a valid business license in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the permit may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. Persons engaged in an out call massage service shall have their permit available for inspection at all times while providing out call massage services. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.090 - Application of regulations to existing massage establishments, outcall services, and massage technicians. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses whether the business was established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except that massage establishments or outcall services legally in business prior to the effective date shall have ninety days to file for a massage permit and to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Massage practitioners who have valid massage permits from the city shall have until June 30, 2021 to obtain a CAMTC certification and to apply for and obtain a massage practitioner certificate under the terms of this chapter. Any such non-CAMTC certified massage therapists shall renew their massage permit issued by the chief of police by July 1, 2019 and July 1, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.100 - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
The chief of police shall revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if s/he finds: 
A.  That the permittee, or his employees, agents, or any person connected or associated with the permittee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder, or manager, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment within the last ten years of an offense involving lewd conduct. 
B.  That the permittee has violated any provision of this chapter or is in violation of any general or special condition of the permit; 
C.  That the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause and has not shown a material change in circumstances since the date of such revocation. 
D.  An owner or sole proprietor fails to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registration); is convicted of California Penal Code Sections 266i (pandering), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill fame), 316 (keeping disorderly house), 318 (prevailing upon person to visit a place for prostitution), 647(b) (engaging in or soliciting prostitution), 653.22 (loitering with intent to commit prostitution), 653.23 (supervision of prostitute); has a business permit or license denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; is subject to an injunction for nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 (red light abatement); is convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance; is convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence, or moral turpitude; or is convicted in any other state of an offense which, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more referenced offenses in this subsection. 
E.  Violations of any of the following occurred on the premises of a massage business or were committed by a massage practitioner: California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.; any local, state, or federal law; or the provisions of this chapter. 
Prior  to revoking or suspending the permit, the chief of police shall give not less than five days written notice to the permittee to show cause, at a time and place set by the notice, why the permit should not be revoked. At the hearing, the permittee shall appear and submit evidence why the permit should not be revoked. Within ten days after the hearing, the chief of police shall make a written determination as to whether the permit should be revoked, and the decision shall be mailed to the permittee. If a permit has been revoked, the permittee shall not reapply for one year. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.110 - Right of appeal. 
The permittee may appeal any of the matters set forth in Section 5.10.110 in writing to the city council within ten days of receipt of the chief of police's written decision. The city council shall immediately schedule the matter for hearing, and cause written notice of the hearing to be given to the applicant or permittee not less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee shall appear and offer evidence why the decision of the chief of police should be overturned. Within ten days after the hearing, the city council shall make a written determination, and the decision shall be mailed to the permittee. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.120 - Notifications. 
A.  A massage business shall notify the chief of police of any changes described in Section 5.10.050 pursuant to the timelines specified therein. 
B.  A registrant shall report to the chief of police any of the following within ninety-six hours of the occurrence: 
1.  Arrests of any employees or owners of the registrant's massage business for an offense other than a misdemeanor traffic offense; 
2.  Resignations, terminations, or transfers of practitioners employed by the registrant's massage business; 
3.  Any event involving the registrant's massage business or the massage practitioners employed therein that constitutes a violation of this chapter or state or federal law. 
C.  This provision requires reporting to the chief of police even if the massage business believes that the chief of police has or will receive the information from another source. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.130 - Other Code provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to all other regulations, laws, requirements, and fees set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.140 - Unlawful business practices may be enjoined—Remedies cumulative. 
Any massage business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17200 et seq., and the city attorney or district attorney may, in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of taking any other action permitted by this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings in the superior court of Santa Cruz County, seeking an injunction prohibiting the unlawful business practice and/or any other remedy available at law, including but not limited to fines, attorneys' fees and costs. All remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.150 - Administrative fines. 
A.  Violations. Upon a finding by the police chief that a business or person has violated any provision of this chapter, the police chief may issue an administrative fine of up to five hundred dollars. 
B.  Separate Violations. Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. Each client to whom massage is provided or offered in violation of this chapter shall also constitute a separate violation. Each day upon which a massage business remains open for business in violation of this chapter shall also constitute a separate violation. 
C.  Fine Procedures. Notice of the fine shall be served in accordance with Chapter 4.03 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
5.10.160 - Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for a massage business to be operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or for a person to conduct massage in violation of the terms of this chapter. The city may exercise its discretion, in addition to or in lieu of imposing an administrative fine, to commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of that business in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 176.4, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
Chapter 5.12 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM 
 
5.12.010 - Amends Chapter 4.40 of Santa Cruz County Code. 
Chapter 4.40 of the Santa Cruz County Code, which code was adopted by Ordinance 10 of the city and Santa Cruz County Ordinances 490 and 593, which ordinances the city succeeded to pursuant to Chapter 4.40, are each amended to conform to the provisions of exhibits "A" and "B" on file in the office of the city clerk. Except as amended by exhibits "A" and "B" all of the terms and conditions of Chapter 4.40, Ordinance 490 and of Ordinance 593, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 67 § 1, 1976)  
Chapter 5.16 - ENTERTAINMENT 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be constructed herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Applicant" means a person applying for a new or renewal permit as provided in this chapter. 
B.  "Chief" is the chief of police of the city of Scotts Valley, or his designee. 
C.  "Entertainment" means any amusement which is open to the public and rendered by performers from a stage platform, terrace or other place of central prominence with respect to the audience, whether performed indoors or outdoors and includes: 
1.  Any act, play, presentation, exhibition, review, pantomime, dance, music or dance act, performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons are compensated for such performances; 
2.  A circus, carnival or similar exhibition or entertainment at which acrobatic feats are performed and trained or wild animals are exhibited and displayed or at which clowns, jugglers or similar persons perform, or at which there are side shows, parades and processions; 
3.  Any form of live music, bands, live vocal or instrumental sound, performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons are compensated for the music; 
4.  Any form of recorded and amplified music whether or not such person or persons are compensated for the music; 
5.  Any form of dancing upon the premises by patrons of an establishment whether performed inside or outside; 
6.  Any fashion or style show, except when the same is conducted by a person as a part of a commercial business which primarily involves the sale or manufacture of clothing or wearing apparel. 
D.  "Lewd conduct" means, but is not limited to any violation of Section 288, 288(a), 311.6, 314, 647(a) or 647(b) of the Penal Code. 
E.  "Nonprofit corporation" means any religious, governmental or nonprofit organization which operates without private profit for a charitable, educational, fraternal or religious purpose which has provided proof to the satisfaction of the city's finance director of current technical eligibility under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
F.  "Performer" means any person who performs any entertainment. 
G.  "Permittee" means any person or other lawful entity which has been granted a permit as provided herein. 
H.  "Person" shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or any other legal entity of any sort whatsoever; provided, however, that person shall not include any federal, state or local governmental agency. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.020 - Entertainment—Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting, operating, owning, or in control of any premises whether open to the public or a private club, within the city, to allow any entertainment upon the premises, or in or upon any adjoining room, premises or outdoor space, unless such person holds a valid permit therefor, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A permit shall be required of any bona fide nonprofit organizations which own premises upon which entertainment takes place; provided, however, that the permit application fees and permit renewal fees as provided for in Section 5.16.040 shall not be required of any such bona fide nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.030 - Unlawful activities. 
It is unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Perform any entertainment on any premises in the city without having obtained a valid entertainment permit; 
B.  Assist, permit or counsel any person to violate any provisions of this chapter; or 
C.  Violate any of the regulations set out in Section 5.16.140. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.040 - Written applications required. 
An application for an entertainment permit or for a renewal of a permit shall be filed with the city finance director, shall be in writing no later than fifteen days prior to the date when the event is to occur on forms provided by the city, shall be in duplicate, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. The application and renewal fees for an entertainment permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. Applications shall be verified. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.050 - Application contents. 
Each application shall contain the information required by forms provided by the city, as well as such other related information as the chief may require. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.060 - Notice of change. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 5.16.050, the applicant or permittee shall give notification of such change to the police department within ten days after the change. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.070 - Investigation. 
The police department shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether the permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.080 - Inspection. 
The police department shall inspect any and all establishments licensed pursuant to this chapter. As an express condition to every permit, police officers and any official city inspectors shall be allowed by every applicant or permittee to enter the premises which will be used for the entertainment for the purpose of inspecting any establishment licensed or to be licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.090 - Approval of permit. 
After an investigation, the chief shall approve the application for the entertainment permit or renewal of such permit if the chief finds that: 
A.  A completed written application form has been filed; 
B.  The required fee has been paid to the city finance director; 
C.  As a result of the investigation, all applicable provisions of this chapter with regard to such permit application have been met; 
D.  The operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building, structure or location which complies with and meets all of the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city applicable to such business operation; 
E.  The applicant, his employees, agents or any persons connected or associated with applicant as partners, directors, officers, stockholders or managers have not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment, within the last ten years, of: 
1.  An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play, 
2.  An offense involving lewd conduct, or 
3.  A felony offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; 
F.  The applicant has not had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant has shown a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.100 - Permit conditions. 
Upon approval of the application for an entertainment permit or renewal of such permit, the chief shall issue such permit upon any special terms and conditions and restrictions not in conflict with any paramount law, as may be necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.110 - Notice of decision. 
Notice of decision of the chief regarding a permit applicant pursuant to this chapter shall be provided to the applicant or to any other person requesting such notice within ten days after receipt of the application for the permit or renewal of a permit. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.120 - Duration. 
The permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance, however, such permits may be renewed for additional periods of one year upon the approval of the chief. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.130 - Permit nontransferable. 
Every permit issued under this chapter shall set forth the name of the person to whom issued, the location by street and number, and shall be signed by the permittee and posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises to which it is issued. The permit shall not be transferable. Any transfer or attempt to transfer of the permit shall render the permit null and void. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.140 - Rules and regulations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the following rules and regulations: 
A.  No person shall conduct, show, stage, perform, produce or permit any entertainment between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. in any establishment for which a permit is required under this chapter except by specific prior written authorization from the chief in accordance with any conditions required by the chief. 
B.  No person shall conduct or permit any dancing between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. on any day. 
C.  No person shall be permitted to enter or remain in any establishment for which a permit is required under this chapter in excess of the room capacity set by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.150 - Suspension. 
A.  The chief shall suspend any permit issued hereunder, if the chief finds: 
1.  That the operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply with all the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the state of California and city applicable to such business operation. 
2.  That the applicant, his employees, agents or any persons connected or associated with applicant as partners, directors, officers, stockholders or managers have been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment, within the last ten years, of: 
a.  An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play; 
b.  An offense involving lewd conduct; or 
c.  A felony offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another. 
3.  That the applicant has violated any provisions of this chapter or is in violation of any general or special conditions of the permit. 
4.  That the applicant, his employees, agents or any persons connected or associated with applicant as partners, directors, officers or stockholders, or managers have knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent statement(s) of material fact in the application for permit, or in a report or record required to be filed with any public agency. 
5.  That the applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause and has not shown a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation. 
B.  The chief, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for the suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited in the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid. Immediately upon the effective date of the order, the permittee shall cease all operations under the suspended permit. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.160 - Revocation. 
A suspended permit shall automatically be revoked ten days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee had filed an appeal of the order of suspension. Where an appeal is filed, the order shall be stayed pending a determination of the appeal by the city council. The suspension shall become a revocation if the chief's actions are upheld. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.170 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. No. 17.4, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2016, repealed § 5.16.170, which pertained to exemption—City property and derived from Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998.  
5.16.180 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief with reference to the approval, denial or suspension of an application for a permit may appeal such decision to the city council within ten days after notice of the decision is received by the applicant. A hearing shall be set with the city council not later than thirty days following the notice of appeal and may be continued from time to time by the city council. Following the hearing the city council shall determine whether to sustain, modify or overturn the decision being appealed. The decision shall be in writing and shall be rendered within ten days of the completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.190 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an infraction. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.200 - Public nuisance abatement. 
Any business establishment providing entertainment maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or without a valid permit shall be deemed unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of, any criminal action taken under this title, commence an action or proceeding to abate, remove or enjoin the illegal activities in the manner provided by law and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate or remove such establishments and to enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment where entertainment is provided contrary to the provisions of this chapter. All costs including reasonable attorney fees required to enforce this section shall be deemed recoverable costs from any person required to abate, remove or otherwise cease activities in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
5.16.210 - Duty of operation to preserve peace. 
The person who owns or operates the premises conducting the entertainment required to be permitted by this chapter shall, at all times during the permitted operations, preserve the peace and good order in connection with the activities and shall be responsible for breaches of the peace and disturbances made and created by guests or patrons of the premises both inside the premises and after leaving the premises but remaining in front of or in the near vicinity of such place of business. The person owning or operating the premises shall, if ordered by the chief, maintain at the place of entertainment, private security by persons approved by the chief and shall be responsible for all costs related thereto. 
(Ord. 17.3 § 2(part), 1998)  
Chapter 5.17 - NOISE RESTRICTIONS 
 
5.17.010 - Council findings and declarations. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  That the making, creation or maintenance of loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; and 
B.  That the necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions set forth in this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions of this chapter are in pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
5.17.020 - Special definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Chief" is the chief of police of the city of Scotts Valley, or his designee. 
B.  "Offensive noise" means any sound or vibration caused by sound which occurs with such intensity, frequency or in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace or safety of other persons within the city, and includes, but is not limited to, noise produced by pets and livestock, by an individual alone or by a group of people engaged in any business, meeting, gathering, game, dance, or amusement, or by industrial equipment, construction, motor vehicles, home appliances, electrical motors, combustion engines and any other noise-producing objects. 
C.  "Lawfully conducted activities" means any and all activities conducted by the city for public health, safety or welfare reasons. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 180, § 1, 11-19-2008)  
5.17.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  The proper use of a siren or other alarm by a police, fire or authorized emergency vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. Likewise, any stationary fire alarm operated by the fire district of the city is exempt from the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  The proper use of emergency generators by any privately owned service facility, up to a maximum of 75 dbA measured at the property line, necessary to maintain service essential to the public health, safety or welfare; 
1.  Noise generated by city-permitted construction activities occurring during authorized construction hours as set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 174, § 1(part), 2-4-2004)  
5.17.040 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  No person shall make, cause, suffer or permit to be made any offensive noises which disturb or annoy people of ordinary sensitiveness or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time or place as to cause physical discomfort to any person, and which are not necessary in connection with any lawfully conducted activities. 
B.  No person shall, between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m., make, cause, suffer or permit to be made any offensive noise within the vicinity of any building or place regularly used for sleeping purposes. 
C.  Except as provided hereinafter, a violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. Any person who violates any section of this Chapter and is cited for such a violation, and who within forty-eight hours after receiving such a citation again violates the same section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A person is cited for a violation when he or she is issued and signs an infraction or misdemeanor citation, or when he or she is arrested and booked, or when a complaint is filed and the person is notified of the filing of such a complaint. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
5.17.050 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter are enforceable without reference to any other regulations concerning noise set forth in this Code and the fact that the city officer issuing a citation has not obtained a scientific noise measurement prior to issuing the citation shall not constitute a defense. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
5.17.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 180, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2008, repealed § 5.17.060, which pertained to police response to loud or unruly gatherings and derived from Ord. 167, § 1 (part), adopted 1998. The user's attention is directed to Ch. 9.20.  
5.17.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 180, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2008, repealed § 5.17.070, which pertained to cost recovery for police services and derived from Ord. 167, § 1 (part), adopted 1998. The user's attention is directed to Ch. 9.20.  
5.17.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 180, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2008, repealed § 5.17.080, which pertained to billing and collection and derived from Ord. 167, § 1 (part), adopted 1998. The user's attention is directed to Ch. 9.20.  
5.17.090 - Sound amplifiers—Permit required. 
No person shall use or cause to be used at any place in the city whether on public property or private property any sound-amplifying device or equipment without first having secured a permit to do so from the city. 
A.  Application for Permit. Any person desiring to obtain an amplification permit shall submit a written application to the city. The application shall describe in detail the activity proposed to be conducted for which the sound amplification permit is requested, shall describe the amplification equipment or devices to be used, shall set forth the steps that the applicant will take to insure that the sound amplification will not unreasonably disturb other people within the vicinity, shall describe the location where the sound amplification is to take place, shall describe the neighborhood surrounding the location where the sound amplification is to take place, shall include the name of the person who shall be responsible for monitoring and insuring compliance with the terms of any permit that is granted, and shall include such other information as the city may require. 
B.  Granting or Denial of Permit. The chief may conditionally grant the sound amplification permit only if (i) he/she determines that the sound amplification will be conducted in such a manner as not to unreasonably disturb neighbors or other persons in the vicinity of the sound amplification, and (ii) that if actually implemented, the steps to be taken by the applicant to minimize or avoid such disturbances will be adequate. In making the determination whether to grant the permit, the chief may impose such conditions as may be appropriate or necessary in order to protect the public peace and safety. 
C.  Revocation of Permit. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall be revocable at any time by the chief for a violation of the conditions of the permit or a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision rendered by the chief pursuant to this chapter, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
5.17.100 - Sound amplifiers—Exceptions to permit. 
The sound amplifier permit required by this chapter shall not be required for sound amplifying equipment or devices under the following circumstances: 
A.  Sound-amplification equipment or devices used on privately owned property, whether indoors or outdoors, where the sound produced does not carry beyond the property line or does not unreasonably disturb the person outside the property where the sound is generated; 
B.  Sound-amplification equipment or devices used in conformity with an entertainment permit issued by the city; 
C.  Radios, record players, televisions and tape players wherever used, when the volume does not exceed the level of normal conversational speech; 
D.  Sound-amplification equipment or devices used on emergency vehicles or by government employees in connection with any activity undertaken for the protection of the public welfare or safety; 
E.  When a permit has been issued by the city for sound amplification in a city park. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
5.17.110 - Sound amplifiers—Violations. 
Any person who uses or causes to be used any sound-amplifying equipment or device in violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether by failing to obtain a permit when required or by failing to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit when issued, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 167 § 1(part), 1998)  
Chapter 5.18 - PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS 
 
5.18.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing private patrol operations within the city. It is an attempt to insure that the public is provided with private patrol operators who have complied with all state, county and city regulations, thereby insuring that the public safety is not jeopardized by unlicensed and improperly trained private patrol operators and their employees. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Private patrol operator" or "operator of a private patrol service" means any person or persons who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person to protect persons or property, or to prevent a disturbance or breach of the peace, or to control entry or access to any public or private function, party or celebration, amusement or entertainment place or event, or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman or other person for any such purpose. 
B.  "Watchman," "guard" or "patrolman" means an employee of a private patrol operator or other lawful business who performs the services of or for the private patrol operator or other lawful business, whether uniformed or not. 
C.  "On duty" means the time the employee reports for his or her duty assignment, to the completion of that duty assignment. 
D.  "Off duty" means any time other than on-duty time. 
E.  "Private patrol operator's permit" means a permit issued by the Santa Cruz County sheriff's office to the private patrol operator. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.030 - State license and sheriff's permit required. 
No person shall engage in the business or practice of being a private patrol operator or operator of a private patrol service or act as a watchman, guard or patrolman within the city without first obtaining a valid private patrol operator's license from the state of California and a private patrol operator's permit from the Santa Cruz County sheriff's office. Employees of a private patrol operator must possess a valid registration card from the state of California. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.040 - Post permit requirements. 
A.  Every private patrol operator shall continually update the list of guards, watchmen or patrolmen and supply all information required in Santa Cruz County Ordinance No. 3241, and report such information promptly to the Santa Cruz County sheriff's department. 
B.  Any private patrol operator shall obtain a permit card from the Santa Cruz County sheriff's department. The individual employees (guards, watchmen or patrolmen) must have in their immediate possession, while on duty, guard registration cards issued by the state of California. This card must be presented to any peace officer on demand. 
C.  A private patrol operator must notify the sheriff's patrol bureau chief deputy of any contract he or she has engaged for the purpose of providing security services for any public or private gathering of two hundred persons or more. Such notice shall be given to the sheriff's department as soon as possible after contracting with the parties involved. It will be the responsibility of the sheriff's department watch commander to notify the appropriate jurisdiction that the gathering is taking place. 
D.  The permit issued to the private patrol operator's business shall be displayed in a prominent place at the business and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.050 - Advertisement approval. 
No advertisement, notice, card or insignia used by a private patrol operator shall be designed so as to deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing that the patrol service is a governmental agency. Any operator shall submit any such proposed advertisement, notice, card or insignia to the Santa Cruz County sheriff's office for prior review to insure that such advertisement, notice, card or insignia does not violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.060 - Titles, insignias and items similar to police prohibited. 
No employee, officer, member, owner, guard, watch- man, or patrolman of any private patrol operator shall wear or display any badge, insignia, or uniform which so resembles that of a law enforcement officer of any county, city, state or federal agency within the city as would deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing said person was a law enforcement officer. Any operator shall submit any such proposed badge, insignia or uniform to the Santa Cruz County sheriff's office for prior review to insure that such badge, insignia or uniform does not violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.070 - Private patrol vehicles. 
A.  A private patrol service shall not use or permit to be used any vehicle which would deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing such vehicle is a police vehicle or a vehicle representing a governmental agency. 
B.  No insignias or decals may be placed upon the vehicle other than the company name or seal, which must comply with Section 5.18.060, and words "Private Patrol" or "Private Security." 
C.  All marked security vehicles must have displayed on the sides and rear the words "Private Patrol" or "Private Security" in lettering not less than two and one-half inches in height and in contrast to the color of the background. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.080 - Wearing of uniforms. 
A.  Private patrol operators, guards, watchmen or patrolmen may wear their uniforms while on duty. 
B.  Uniforms may also be worn while off duty to and from work; and the badge, insignias, patches, hat piece or other identifying symbols shall be visible to the public view. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.090 - Weapons. 
A.  Weapons shall include firearms, tear gas and batons. Weapons may be carried only while on duty and while holding a valid California state consumer affairs permit. 
B.  The owner or his designee of each private security or patrol service shall hold monthly inspections of all weapons and ammunition used by his employees to insure proper function. Records of inspections shall be maintained for a period of one year and shall include the weapon type, serial number and condition. These records shall be made available to the Scotts Valley police department upon request. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.100 - Enforcement—Investigative responsibility. 
The chief of police shall enforce all provisions of this chapter and investigate all reports of violations within the city. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.110 - Periodic inspection of the place of business, vehicles and employees. 
The chief of police or his designee may make periodic inspections of the patrol operator's place of business, vehicles, and may demand to see all permits, licenses and other documents required by this Code and state law. Any peace officer may request to see, at any time, any employee's state licenses, permits or other certificates. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.120 - Punishment for violation. 
Any violation of this chapter or submission of a false application is a misdemeanor and upon conviction the violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
5.18.130 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be held invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 108 § 1(part), 1983)  
Chapter 5.20 - OCCASIONAL SALES 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following words shall have the following meaning: 
A.  "Occasional Sale" means the sale of tangible personal property on any parcel(s) of land in any zone of the city where the actual and principal use of the parcel(s) is for residential or commercial purposes when the sale is advertised in a newspaper or by sign, on or off the parcel(s), designating the sale as a "yardsale, patio sale, lot sale, garage sale, rummage sale, flea market," or use of other words having a similar connotation or meaning including those sales where the newspaper advertisement or sign advertises the sale of four or more items upon the parcel(s); or where four or more items are actually sold within a one-day period. 
B.  "Permit" means a permit issued by the finance department designating the address where an occasional sale is to be conducted and the names of all sellers of property at the occasional sale, along with the dates for which the permit shall be valid. 
C.  "Seller" means any and all of the following: (1) the person actually selling the personal property at an occasional sale; (2) the tenant of the premises where an occasional sale is conducted; and (3) the owner of the premises where an occasional sale is conducted if the owner occupies the premises. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No seller shall engage, in any way, in an occasional sale on commercially zoned property without first obtaining a permit from the finance department. No permit shall be effective for more than three calendar days. No more than four permits shall be issued to the same seller during any one calendar year. No permit shall be issued unless, and until, the seller has submitted the following: 
1.  The address of where the occasional sale is to be conducted; 
2.  The dates requested for the occasional sale; and 
3.  The names and addresses of all seller(s). 
B.  For occasional sales on non-commercially zoned property, only one occasional sale may be conducted in any three-month period and shall be limited to not more than three consecutive days. 
C.  An occasional sale shall only be conducted between the hours of eight in the morning (8:00 a.m.) and eight in the evening (8:00 p.m.) of the same day. 
D.  Where a permit is required, the permit shall be prominently displayed during the occasional sale upon the parcel(s) where the occasional sale is being conducted. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.030 - Compliance with information contained in application. 
All sellers on commercially zoned property shall comply with the information and directions contained in the application for the permit. No such person shall engage in an occasional sale unless the person is named in the application as a seller. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.040 - Time for filing application. 
Any application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the finance department at least five days prior to the first date for which the occasional sale is to be conducted. The application shall be executed under penalty of perjury. Upon written notice from the chief of police, the applicant shall produce the personal property to be sold for physical examination by the police department. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.050 - Display of property. 
Personal property offered for sale at any occasional sale shall not be displayed or stored in the front yard within five feet of the front property line, nor on corner lots between the side yard setback line and the side property line. A vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within either the front or side setback. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.060 - Sign. 
Signs advertising an occasional sale shall be in conformance with Section 17.56.160 (sign ordinance) of this Code. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.070 - Fees. 
An applicant for a permit shall be required to pay a fee, as set by resolution of the city council from time to time, upon submission of a signed application to the finance department. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.080 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to persons selling personal property pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
5.20.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to promote, advertise or conduct any occasional sale on commercially zoned property without a permit having been first issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or to violate any of the conditions of the permit, or the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 78.1 § 2(part), 1995)  
Chapter 5.22 - TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSES 
 
5.22.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Chief of police" shall refer to the City of Scotts Valley Chief of Police or the person designated by the chief of police. 
B.  "Drug paraphernalia" shall have the definitions set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, as that section may be amended from time to time. 
C.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. 
D.  "Person" shall mean any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
E.  "Proprietor" shall mean a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
F.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" shall mean any item designed for the consumption, use, or preparation of tobacco products. 
G.  "Tobacco product" shall mean: 
1.  Any product containing, made or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and 
2.  Any electronic smoking device. Notwithstanding any provision of subsections 1. and 2. to the contrary, "Tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
H.  "Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
I.  "Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. 
J.  "Significant tobacco retailer" means any tobacco retailer for which the principal or core business is selling tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both, as evidenced by the fact that (1) twenty percent or more of floor or display area is devoted to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; (2) sixty-seven percent or more of gross sales receipts are derived from tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; or (3) fifty percent or more of completed sales transactions include tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.020 - Tobacco retailer license—Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer, or to display or advertise the sale of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia or electronic smoking devices, without complying with Chapter 8.20 and obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. 
B.  Tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
C.  Each tobacco retailer license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location. 
D.  Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
E.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
F.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited, except in a tobacco retail store as defined above. 
G.  In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of a business or maintenance of a location for which a tobacco retailer's license has been issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, tobacco retailing, narcotics or electronic smoking devices. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.030 - Limits on tobacco retail license. 
A.  No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed business place. 
B.  No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location for which a tobacco retailer license suspension is in effect or during a period of ineligibility following a revocation. 
C.  After the effective date of this ordinance, no license shall be issued to a significant tobacco retailer at any location, measured from the nearest property line, that is within one thousand feet of a school, or five hundred feet of a park, or other business or institution whose primary business or purpose is the instruction or education of children or those under the age of eighteen. Examples of such places include, but are not limited to, tutoring centers, child care centers, recreational facilities and gyms. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.040 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. The application shall include a statement signed by each proprietor that no drug paraphernalia is or will be sold at the location for which the license is sought. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. 
C.  No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
D.  A license issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.22.090. 
E.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
F.  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city planning department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business that is seeking a license. 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought. 
3.  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection F.2. 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California State Board of Equalization, if the tobacco retailer sells products that require such license. 
5.  Whether a proprietor has previously been issued a tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter that is or was at any time suspended or revoked, and, if so, the dates and locations of all such suspensions or revocations. 
6.  Such other information as the chief of police deems reasonably necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
7.  All information required to be submitted in order to apply for a tobacco retailer's license shall be updated with the city planning department whenever the information changes. A tobacco retailer shall provide the city planning department with any updates within ten business days of a change. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.050 - Issuance of tobacco retail license. 
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee required by this chapter, the city planning department shall forward the application to the chief of police. The chief of police shall have the final authority to issue a tobacco retail license unless one or more of the following exists: 
A.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which a current proprietor's suspension is in effect pursuant to this chapter, for which a current proprietor's license has been revoked pursuant to this chapter, or for which this chapter otherwise prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses; 
B.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom a suspension is in effect pursuant to this chapter for the subject location or another location, whose license has been revoked pursuant to this chapter for the subject location or another location, or to whom this chapter otherwise prohibits a tobacco retailer license to be issued; 
C.  The city has information that the proprietor or his or her agent or employee has violated any local, state or federal tobacco control law, including this chapter, within the preceding twelve months; or 
D.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter or Chapter 8.20, that is otherwise unlawful pursuant to this Code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state, or federal law. 
Any denial of an application shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for denial of the permit. Such denial shall be subject to appeal in accordance with Section 5.22.130 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.060 - License renewal and expiration. 
A.  A tobacco retailer license is invalid unless the appropriate fee has been paid in full and the term of the license has not expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year beginning each fiscal year on July 1st and ending on June 30th of the same year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's license and submit the license fee no later than thirty days prior to expiration of the term. 
B.  A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired, or to renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subsection A., the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the license fee, if required. 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: 
i.  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia or electronic smoking devices after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; or 
ii.  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in Section 5.22.090B. before seeking renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.070 - License nontransferable. 
A.  A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. Whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor a new tobacco retailer's license is required. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
1.  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and 
2.  The new proprietor(s) provides the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) has acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. As used in this section, the term "arm's length transaction" shall mean a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.080 - Suspension or revocation of license by chief of police. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license may be suspended and eventually revoked if the chief of police finds pursuant to this chapter that the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, "no contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 5.22.020. During any period of license suspension, the retailer must remove all tobacco products from public view and cannot sell such products. 
B.  Time Period of Suspension of License. 
1.  Upon the first time that the chief of police makes a finding as set forth in subsection A., the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended for up to thirty days. 
2.  Upon the second time that the chief of police makes a finding as set forth in subsection A. within sixty months of the first determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended for ninety days. 
3.  Upon the third time that the chief of police makes a finding as set forth in subsection A. within sixty months of the prior determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended for one hundred eighty days. 
4.  Upon the fourth and each subsequent time that the chief of police makes a finding as set forth in subsection A. within sixty months of the prior determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked, and no new license may be issued for the location until five years have passed from the date of revocation. 
C.  Revocation of License Issued in Error. A tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the chief of police finds, after written notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 5.22.030 existed at the time the application was made or at any time before the license was issued. The decision by the chief of police shall be final. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for license. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.090 - Notice of intended decision. 
A.  Upon determining the existence of any of the grounds for suspension or revocation of a license, the chief of police shall issue to the license holder a notice of intended decision. 
B.  The notice of intended decision shall state all the grounds upon which the revocation or suspension is based. 
C.  The notice of intended decision shall advise the permit holder that the suspension or revocation shall become final unless the licensee files a written request for hearing before the chief of police within ten calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision. 
D.  The notice of intended decision shall specify the effective date of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.100 - Procedure for hearing before the chief of police. 
A.  The written request for a hearing before the chief of police must be received by the chief of police within ten calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision. 
B.  Upon timely receipt of a written request for a hearing, the chief of police shall schedule a hearing which shall be held no later than thirty calendar days after receipt of a timely request for hearing. 
C.  The chief of police shall serve a notice of hearing on the licensee at least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
D.  At the hearing before the chief of police, or before a hearing officer at the chief's option, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. 
E.  The hearing will be conducted informally, and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the chief of police or hearing officer deems reliable, relevant, and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.110 - Decision of the chief of police. 
A.  The chief of police, or hearing officer, shall serve on the licensee a written decision sustaining, reversing, or modifying the chief's or hearing officer's intended decision. 
B.  The decision by the chief of police, designee, or hearing officer after hearing shall become final unless the licensee files an appeal within the time period specified in Chapter 4.20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.120 - Appeal. 
If a licensee is dissatisfied with the written decision of the chief of police or designee, the licensee may file a written appeal. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 4.20 of this Code. For purposes of Chapter 4.20, the written decision of the chief of police or designee shall constitute an abatement order and the chief of police shall be the designated enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.130 - Tobacco retailing without a license—Seizure. 
A.  Tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia and electronic smoking devices offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure by the chief of police, or any peace officer, and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia or electronic smoking devices seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia or electronic smoking devices were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. 
B.  Forfeited tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia and e-cigarettes shall be maintained and destroyed pursuant to the police department's policy for seized evidence. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
B.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter, and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
C.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
E.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied or prosecuted pursuant to Title 4 of this Code. 
F.  1.  A first violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars. 
2.  A second violation of this chapter committed within one year of a first violation shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars. 
3.  A third violation of this chapter committed within one year of a second violation shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of three thousand dollars. 
4.  A fourth or subsequent violation of this chapter committed within one year of a prior violation shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five thousand dollars. 
Each day a violation of this chapter exists is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.150 - Notice. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this chapter, it shall be addressed to such person to be notified at the authorized address provided in the application for a tobacco retail license pursuant to Section 5.22.040 or, if an authorized address is not supplied, to the business address provided pursuant to Section 5.22.040. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
5.22.160 - Stipulated fine in lieu of hearing. 
For a first or second alleged violation of this chapter within any sixty-month period, the city attorney may allow a tobacco retailer alleged to have violated this chapter to stipulate to the penalties provided for in this section in lieu of the penalties that would otherwise apply under this chapter and to forego a hearing on the allegations. Notice of any stipulation shall be provided to the police department and no hearing shall be held. Stipulations shall not be confidential and shall contain the following terms, plus any other noncriminal provisions established by the city attorney in the interests of justice: 
A.  After a first alleged violation of the chapter at a location: 
1.  An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for one day; and/or 
2.  An administrative penalty of one thousand dollars; and/or 
3.  An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be considered in determining the penalty for any future violation. 
B.  After a second alleged violation of the chapter at a location within any sixty-month period: 
1.  An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for ten days; and/or 
2.  An administrative penalty of at least five thousand dollars; and/or 
3.  An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be considered in determining the penalty for any future violations. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 12-16-2015)  
Chapter 5.24 - UNIT PRICE MARKING ON PACKAGED CONSUMER COMMODITIES 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Consumer commodity" includes: 
1.  Food, including all material whether solid, liquid or mixed, and whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption or household pets, and all substances or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose; the definition shall not apply to individual packages of cigarettes or individual cigars; 
2.  Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, foil wrapping, plastic foil wrapping, paper toweling, and disposable plates and cups; 
3.  Detergents, soaps and other cleaning agents; 
4.  Pharmaceuticals, including nonprescription drugs, bandages, female hygiene products, and toiletries. 
B.  "Grocery department" means an area within general retail merchandise store which is engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises. 
C.  "Grocery store" means a store engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. 85 § 1(c—e), 1980)  
5.24.020 - Readable price marking required. 
Every retail grocery store or grocery department within a general retail merchandise store which uses an automatic or electronic checkout system shall cause to have a clearly readable price indicated on each packaged consumer commodity offered for sale on and after January 1, 1980. 
(Ord. 85 § 1(a), 1980)  
5.24.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Any unpackaged fresh food produce, or to consumer commodities which are under three cubic inches in size, weigh less than three ounces, and are priced under thirty cents; 
B.  Any business which has as its only regular employees the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, or child or such owner, or in addition thereto, not more than two other regular employees; 
C.  Identical items within a multi-item package; 
D.  Items sold through a vending machine. 
(Ord. 85 § 1(b), 1980)  
5.24.040 - Private enforcement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 85 § 2, 1980)  
5.24.050 - Private recovery. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or association who violates this chapter shall be liable to any person injured for any losses and expenses thereby incurred, and for the sum of fifty dollars in addition thereto. The remedy set forth in this section shall apply only to actions brought on behalf of a single plaintiff and shall not apply to multiple plaintiffs or class actions. 
(Ord. 85 § 3, 1980)  
Chapter 5.26 - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS  
Article I. - Purpose and Definitions 
 
5.26.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare by providing a measure of administrative control over security alarm systems and security alarm businesses as defined in Section 5.26.020 of this article. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Alarm businesses" or "security alarm business" means any business operated by a person, firm, or corporation which engages in the activity of alerting, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing security alarm systems. 
B.  "Alarm system" means "security alarm system" as the term is defined in subsection H of this section. 
C.  "Audible alarm" means an alarm system which, when actuated, generates an audible sound on the premises. 
D.  "Existing security alarm system" means an alarm system which is installed or becomes operational before October 1, 1987. 
E.  "False alarm" means an alarm signal, either silent or audible, prompting a response by the police department when an emergency situation for which the alarm system was intended does not exist. Such terminology shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, storms, power outages, or other factors or conditions beyond human control. 
F.  "New security alarm system" means an alarm system which is installed or becomes operational on or after October 1, 1987. 
G.  "Preentry security alarm system" means any security alarm system which is designed or used to detect any activity outside the secured perimeter of a building, structure, or facility. 
H.  "Security alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, and which device is designed or used so as to transmit, when actuated, a sound, signal, or message which is audible, visible, or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility. "Security alarm system" includes a system installed on residential property as well as a system installed on commercial property. The following devices are not included within the definition of security alarm system: 
1.  Auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system; 
2.  Audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles; and 
3.  Alarm systems which are designed or used solely for the detection of fire, smoke, gas, failure of fire suppression equipment, or other fire-related hazards. 
I.  "Silent alarm" means that type of alarm system which, when activated, sounds a bell or buzzer or turns on a light at a predesignated place other than the location where the alarm has been installed. 
J.  "Subscriber" means the person, firm, corporation, or other entity who files (or on whose behalf is filed) an application for registration of a security alarm system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
Article II. - Security Alarm Regulations 
 
5.26.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.  New Security Alarm Systems. It is unlawful for any person to install, permit to be installed, operate, or maintain any new security alarm system within any building or structure on or after October 1, 1987, unless the alarm system is properly registered pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Existing Security Alarm Systems. It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any existing security alarm system within any building or structure, on or after April 1, 1988, unless the alarm system is properly registered pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Preentry Security Alarm Systems. It is unlawful for any person to operate any preentry security alarm system within any building or structure, excluding residential dwellings or units, on or after October 1, 1987, in such a manner as may prompt a response from the police department. 
D.  Telephone Emergency Messages. It is unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used any electrical, mechanical, or electronic attachment or other device to any telephone or communication instrument which automatically reproduces any taped or otherwise recorded message to report a police emergency to the police department without the prior written consent of the chief of police. 
E.  Compliance with Standards and Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to install, operate, or maintain any security alarm system in violation of any of the standards and regulations provided for such systems as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987; Ord. 38.2 § 1(part), 1988)  
5.26.040 - Registration. 
A.  Each application for registration as required by this section shall be submitted by the subscriber or by an authorized agent of the subscriber to the chief of police. 
B.  All applications for registration shall be submitted on numbered forms provided by the police department and shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The name and telephone number of each subscriber and of the person(s) who is principally responsible for the maintenance and operation of the security alarm system if such person is someone other than the subscriber; 
2.  The address to which all notices to the subscriber may be mailed; if more than one subscriber is listed, notice given by mail to one subscriber at the address listed for such subscriber shall be deemed to be notice given to each subscriber listed; 
3.  If the subscriber is a business organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the individual person or persons who are officers, agents, or employees of the subscriber and who are principally responsible for the maintenance and operation of the security alarm system on behalf of the subscriber; 
4.  The name, address, and telephone number of the business, property, or structure protected by the security alarm; 
5.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of three persons who can be contacted twenty-four hours per day in case of an alarm; 
6.  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business responsible for maintenance; 
7.  The type of alarm system; 
8.  The presence of any firearms, ammunition, guard dogs, explosives, flammable liquids, poisonous materials, or any other hazardous materials on the property to be protected by the security alarm system; and 
9.  Any other information relevant to alarm technology, a particular alarm installation, or a description of a particular premises deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
C.  Each application shall be signed by the subscriber. If the subscriber is a business organization, the application shall be signed by the president, the managing partner, or other senior executive official of the subscriber who is authorized by the subscriber to sign the application. 
D.  The application for registration shall be granted if the chief of police determines that the system will meet the standards set forth in this chapter and that the subscriber will comply with all the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Whenever any change occurs rendering the written information required by this section obsolete, the subscriber shall give written notice thereof to the police department within five days after such change occurs and shall provide current, correct information with respect to such change; provided, however, the subscriber shall forthwith give written notice to the police department whenever there is a change in the person(s) principally responsible for the maintenance and operation of the security alarm system. In addition, in the event a material change in the subscriber occurs within the meaning of subdivision 2 of subsection A of Section 5.26.060 of this article, the subscriber shall forthwith give the notice required by this subsection and shall submit a new application for registration, unless the security alarm system is deactivated or removed from the premises. 
F.  The registration of a security alarm system shall not constitute a representation, warranty, or guarantee on the part of the city that the alarm system will operate to the satisfaction of the city or the satisfaction of the subscriber, nor shall such registration relieve the subscriber of responsibility to comply with all the other provisions of this chapter, nor shall such registration relieve the subscriber of the responsibilities under this chapter in case of a failure to comply with such provisions. 
G.  Registration, once granted, shall continue in effect for one year or until terminated as provided in this article, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.050 - Registration fees. 
An annual registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the council shall be due and payable upon an application for the registration of any security alarm system. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.060 - Termination of registration. 
A.  A security alarm system registration shall terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
1.  The removal of the registered security alarm system from the address listed on the registration; or 
2.  A material change in the subscriber that occurs under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  If one individual is listed on the registration documents as the subscriber, when such person ceases to have the ownership interest, leasehold interest or authority of a subscriber, or 
b.  If a business organization is listed as the subscriber in the registration documents, when ten percent of the stock of said organization or ten percent of its ownership interest is transferred or otherwise changes hands. 
B.  Upon the termination of registration, the security alarm system shall immediately be deactivated or removed from the premises, or both; provided, however, the chief of police may permit a continued operation of the system upon a change in a subscriber if a new application for registration is filed within ten days. 
C.  If the registration for a particular security alarm system is terminated or expires, such system may not continue to be used, nor may its use be reinstituted until a new registration for the system has been granted. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987; Ord. 38.3 § 1, 1993)  
5.26.070 - Security alarm system standards. 
A.  All security alarm systems subject to registration shall be designed, manufactured, installed, operated and maintained so as to sufficiently minimize the occurrence of false alarms. 
B.  All audible security alarm systems subject to registration shall be equipped with a device which will automatically reset the audible alarm system within fifteen minutes after the alarm system is actuated. 
C.  No audible security alarm system subject to registration shall emit a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning siren. 
D.  Existing security alarm systems subject to registration shall conform to the provisions of subsections A, B, and C of this section not later than April 1, 1988. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.080 - False alarm regulations. 
A.  Registered persons or their agents shall notify the police department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation which might actuate a false alarm. 
B.  After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of the security alarm system, the subscriber, or if the subscriber is a business organization, the individual person or persons who are principally responsible for the maintenance and operation of the security alarm system, shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate the malfunction before reactivating the alarm. No person shall reactivate such alarm until such repairs are made. 
C.  Should any registered security alarm system actuate more than the number of false alarms allowed in any calendar month, as established by resolution of the council, the city shall charge the registered person the amount prescribed in the security alarm system fee schedule established by resolution of the council. 
D.  False alarms occurring during the first thirty days of operation of a registered, newly installed security alarm system shall not be counted for the purposes of subsection C of this section. 
E.  If any security alarm system activates, the subscriber (or if the subscriber is a business organization, the individual(s) principally responsible for maintenance and operation of the security alarm system) shall respond to the scene within thirty minutes. 
F.  Alarms caused by earthquakes, storms, power outages or other factors beyond the control of the subscriber, as determined by the police department, shall not be counted for the purposes of subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987; Ord. 38.3 § 2, 1993)  
Article III. - Security Alarm Business Regulations 
 
5.26.090 - Alarm business—City business license required. 
It is unlawful for any person who owns or operates an alarm business to conduct, cause, or permit to be conducted an alarm business within the city without a valid city business license issued for the conduct of such business. Such license shall be in addition to the State Department of Consumer Affairs license which such person shall acquire under state laws. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.100 - Conditions. 
Each alarm business licensee shall comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Each license shall provide the chief of police with the address of each building, place, or premises, for which the licensee sells or installs an alarm system. 
B.  Audible alarm systems serviced or maintained on or in any building, place, or premises by a licensee shall have the name and emergency telephone number of the licensee's alarm business posted on or near the front door of such building, place, or premises. Upon notification by the police department that an audible alarm is activated, the licensee or the licensee's alarm agent shall immediately proceed to silence the alarm. 
C.  Each licensee who installs or services an alarm system subject to the conditions set forth in this section shall clearly instruct the subscriber in the proper use and operation of the alarm system, especially in those factors which can cause false alarms. 
D.  Each licensee who services an alarm system subject to the conditions set forth in this section shall respond to service each alarm within forty-eight hours after the licensee has been notified by the subscriber or the police department that an alarm system has malfunctioned. 
E.  Each licensee shall display to the chief of police, upon request, the licensee's records of inspections and repairs of any alarm system subject to the conditions set forth in this section. 
F.  Each licensee shall notify, in person, the police department's communications center whenever an alarm system is under service or repair so as to cause a police response. 
G.  Each alarm system sold, leased, maintained, serviced, or installed by a licensee that operates on commercial current shall be equipped with a standby power supply sufficient for at least four hours. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987; Ord. 38.2 § 1(part), 1988)  
5.26.110 - Administrative regulations—Adoption and approval. 
In order to carry out the provisions and purposes of this chapter, the chief of police, from time to time, may implement such provisions by adopting and enforcing administrative regulations concerning the safety and security of alarm systems, the installation of alarm equipment, and the keeping of records concerning alarm systems. The administrative regulations adopted by the chief of police, and amendments thereto, shall not become effective until they have been ratified by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.120 - Alarm monitoring systems terminating at the police department prohibited. 
A.  The installation of any alarm monitoring system in a manner which, when the system is activated, would cause a signal or message to be sent directly to the police department by a telephone line or by any other means shall be prohibited. 
B.  It is unlawful to install any system prohibited by subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.130 - Restrictions. 
A.  No person, except a public utility engaged in the business of providing communications, services, and facilities, shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices which, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, will initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number used for the receipt of emergency or governmental administrative messages by the police department or any administrative office or department of the city. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "telephone number" means and includes any additional numbers associated with such emergency or governmental administrative telephone number through the use of a rotary or other system whereby additional telephone calls to the number are connected to other numbers when the first number is in use. 
C.  No alarm shall be used to summon help for any other cause than that for which it was installed. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
Article IV. - Appeals 
 
5.26.140 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person interested in or aggrieved by any decision of the chief of police rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten days after the date thereof, file an appeal with the city clerk. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, and shall specify the ground(s) upon which the appeal is taken. 
B.  Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing not less than ten days nor more than thirty days thereafter, and shall provide the appellant with not less than ten days written notice of the date, time and place thereof. The filing of such an appeal shall stay the effect of the decision until the city council hears the appeal and affirms, reverses, or modifies the decision appealed. 
C.  The hearing before the city council may be continued from time to time but shall be concluded within thirty days after it commences. Notice of the decision of the city council shall forthwith be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
Article V. - Violations—Penalties—Public Nuisances 
 
5.26.150 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, save and except for the provisions of Section 5.26.090, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable as provided in Section 1.08.010 C and D of this Code. Any person who violates the provisions of Section 5.26.090 relating to the requirement of obtaining a city business license shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.08.010 B of this Code. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.160 - Public nuisances. 
Any security alarm system installed, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Code or state laws authorizing the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
Article VI. - Applicability of State Law—Severability 
 
5.26.170 - Applicability of state law. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be subordinate to and superseded by the controlling provisions of any applicable state law or laws in the event of conflict as said state law or laws presently exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
5.26.180 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held void, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and an independent provision, and such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. 38.1 § 2(part), 1987)  
Chapter 5.28 - STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, adopted April 2, 2008, amended Ch. 5.28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.28, §§ 5.28.010—5.28.270, pertained to cable television franchise regulations, and derived from Ord. 67.1, § 1(part), adopted 1986. 
 
5.28.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is applicable to all video service providers who are eligible for, and have been awarded, a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code § 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006), to provide video services in any portion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.020 - Rights reserved. 
The rights reserved to the city under this chapter are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by other applicable law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.030 - Compliance with this chapter. 
No person may construct or operate a cable system or provide video service in the city without having been issued a state franchise in accordance with California Public Utilities Code § 5800 et seq., the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, and as it may be amended. Nothing contained in this chapter exempts a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code § 5800 et seq., or obligations under any franchise previously issued by the city, insofar as those may be enforced under California Public Utilities Code § 5800. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, § 5800 et seq. ("DIVCA"). When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
A.  "Access channel" means any channel on a network set aside by a state franchise holder for public, educational, or governmental use. 
B.  "Applicable law" means all lawfully enacted and applicable federal, state, and city laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time. 
C.  "Applicant" means any person submitting any application required under Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
D.  "Cable service" means: (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
E.  "City" means the City of Scotts Valley, California. Any act that may be taken by the city may be taken by the city council or any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on the city's behalf. 
F.  "City council" means the governing body of the City of Scotts Valley, California. 
G.  "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city or the city engineer's designee. 
H.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city. Any act that may be taken by the city manager may be taken by any agency, department, agent or other entity now or hereafter authorized to act on behalf of the city manager. 
I.  "Construction," "operation," or "repair," and similar formulations of those terms, mean the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and tree trimming. The term "operation" does not encompass or regulate the provision of services, but refers to activities affecting rights-of-way and other property subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
J.  "DIVCA" means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Division 2.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, § 5800 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
K.  "Gross revenues" means all revenues (whether in the form of cash or other consideration) of a state franchise holder or its affiliates any way derived from its operations within the city. 
L.  "Incumbent cable operator" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA. 
M.  "Network" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA. 
N.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, organization, corporation, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term does not include the city. 
O.  "Public rights-of-way" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA. 
P.  "State franchise" means a franchise issued by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in DIVCA, within any portion of the city. 
Q.  "State franchise holder" means a person who holds a state franchise. 
R.  "Subscriber" means the city or any person who legally receives any cable service video service from a state franchise holder operator delivered over that state franchise holder's network. 
S.  "User" means a person or the city utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber. 
T.  "Video service" shall have the same meaning as in DIVCA. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.050 - State franchise fees. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee equal to five percent of the gross revenues of it or any affiliate that are subject to a franchise fee under California Public Utilities Code § 5860. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.060 - PEG fees. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a PEG fee equal to one percent of the state franchise holder's gross revenues. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.070 - Payment of fees. 
The state franchise fee required pursuant to Section 5.28.050, and the PEG fee required pursuant to Section 5.28.060, shall each be paid to the city quarterly, in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code § 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by check or other means specified by the city, a payment for the state franchise fee and a separate payment for the PEG fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing how the payment was calculated, containing such information as the city manager may require consistent with DIVCA. Unless the city manager provides otherwise, the summary statement shall identify: 
A.  Revenues received from subscribers, by category, with service revenues broken out by service levels; 
B.  Any charges to subscribers for which revenues were received, but on which a franchise fee was not paid; 
C.  Where the fee is paid on an allocated portion of revenues received, the total revenues received; the allocation factor; and how the allocation factor was calculated. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.080 - Audits. 
The city may audit the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code § 5860(i). 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.090 - Late payments. 
In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the city shall, to the extent consistent with DIVCA, impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.100 - Lease of city-owned network. 
In the event a state franchise holder leases access to a network owned by the city, the city may set a franchise fee for access to the city-owned network separate and apart from the franchise fee charged to state franchise holders pursuant to Section 5.28.050, which fee shall otherwise be payable in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.110 - Customer service and consumer protection. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, including, to the extent consistent with California Public Utilities Code § 5900, all existing and subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards established by state and federal law and regulation. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.120 - Penalties for violations of standards. 
A.  The city shall enforce the provisions of Section 5.28.110. 
B.  For material breaches, as defined in California Public Utilities Code § 5900, by a state franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, the city may impose the following penalties: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation. 
2.  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation. 
3.  For a third material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation. 
C.  Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code § 5900. 
D.  The city manager is authorized to provide any notices required in California Public Utilities Code § 5900. The city manager shall coordinate with the Division of Ratepayer Advocate to protect consumers in the city. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.130 - Construction in the public rights-of-way. 
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of Title 12 of this Code, and all city administrative rules and regulations developed pursuant to Title 12, as now existing or as hereafter amended, shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder in any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.140 - Permits. 
A.  Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by Title 12 of this Code, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of Title 12. A permit application is complete when the state franchise holder has complied with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, all city administrative rules and regulations, and all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code, § 21000 et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act). 
B.  The city engineer shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder's application for any permit required under Title 12 of this Code within sixty days of receiving a complete permit application from the state franchise holder. 
C.  If the city engineer denies a state franchise holder's application for a permit, the city engineer shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial. 
D.  A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the city engineer may appeal the denial to the city council. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Affirm the action of the city engineer without any further hearing; or 
2.  Refer the matter back to the city engineer for further review with or without instructions; or 
3.  Set the matter for a public hearing before the city council. 
E.  In rendering its decision on the appeal, the city council shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of the matter received from the city engineer unless the city council is itself conducting a public hearing on the matter. 
F.  The issuance of a permit is not a franchise, and does not grant any vested rights in any location in the public rights-of-way, or in any particular manner of placement within the rights-of-way. Without limitation, a permit to place cabinets and similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the permittee required to place facilities underground, upon reasonable notice to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.150 - Construction standards. 
A.  The construction, operation, or repair and maintenance of a state franchise holder's network shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including without limitation, zoning laws, construction codes, and the city's standard provisions and details. In addition, the construction, operation and maintenance shall be performed in a manner consistent with high industry standards, which obligation shall, without limitation, require a state franchise holder to comply with the latest edition of all applicable federal, state and local laws, including without limitation, zoning laws, construction codes, electrical codes, and occupational safety and health acts. A state franchise holder shall at all times employ reasonable care, within the meaning of applicable law, and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public. 
B.  Without limiting the foregoing, all of a state franchise holder's network shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced and properly trained maintenance and construction personnel. 
C.  Except in underground utility service areas, a state franchise holder's network may be constructed overhead where poles now exist and either electric and telephone lines are now overhead, but where either electric or telephone lines are underground, or are being initially placed underground, the network shall be constructed underground in accordance with existing city practices at the time the network is constructed subject to any waivers that may be granted. Whenever and wherever the owner of the poles moves its plant from overhead to underground placement in an area, all network facilities and plant in that area shall be similarly moved underground by the state franchise holder as directed by the city engineer in accordance with then-existing city practices, subject to any waivers that may be granted. The city will cooperate in good faith with a state franchise holder in any waiver process. Other facilities installed in the rights-of-way will be placed aboveground or underground in accordance with the city's practices, as amended from time to time. 
D.  A state franchise holder shall construct, operate and maintain its network so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the city shall deem appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner with the public rights-of-way or legal rights of any property owner or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. A state franchise holder shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, telecommunications, water, sewer, or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner such entities' use of any public rights-of-way. Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged by a state franchise holder during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction of a network shall be promptly repaired by the state franchise holder. 
E.  A state franchise holder shall by a time specified by the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the city or any other governmental entity by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public rights-of-way construction; public rights-of-way maintenance or repair (including resurfacing or widening); change of public rights-of-way grade; construction, installation or, repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of government-owned communications system, public work or improvement or any government-owned utility; public rights-of-way vacation; or for any other purpose where the work involved would be aided by the removal or relocation of the network, provided, however: 
1.  Except in the case of emergencies, the city shall provide written notice describing where the work is to be performed at least one week prior to the deadline for performing the work; a state franchise holder may seek an extension of the time to perform the work where it cannot be performed in a week even with the exercise of due diligence, and such request for an extension shall not be unreasonably refused; 
2.  That the state franchise holder may abandon any property in place upon notice to the city, unless the city determines, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion exercised within ninety days of the date the city receives notice, that the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public rights-of-way and facilities in the public rights-of-way will be adversely affected thereby; and 
3.  If a state or local statute requires the city to compensate users of the right-of-way (including state franchise holders) for the cost of relocation or removal, nothing in this chapter shall be read to abrogate any right a state franchise holder may have to obtain an appropriate share of funds available for relocation or removal. 
F.  Within thirty days after its receipt of a written request from the city, a state franchise holder shall expose its subsurface network facilities by potholing (digging a test hole) to a depth of one foot below the bottom of such facilities. 
G.  If any removal, relaying, or relocation is required to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of another person that is authorized to use the public rights-of-way, a state franchise holder shall, after thirty days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract or a state or federal law or regulation, the reasonable cost of removal, relaying or relocation shall be borne by the party requesting the removal, relaying or relocation. The city may direct a state franchise holder to remove, relay or relocate its facilities pending resolution of a dispute as to responsibility for costs, if the person requesting removal, relaying or relocation posts a satisfactory bond or provides other adequate security. 
H.  In the event of an emergency, or where a network creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the city may remove, relay, or relocate any or all parts of that network without prior notice; however, the city shall make reasonable efforts to provide prior notice. 
I.  A state franchise holder shall, on the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the state franchise holder shall have the authority to estimate the reasonable material and labor costs and require payment of the same in advance. The state franchise holder shall be given not less than seven days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
J.  A state franchise holder shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang public rights-of-way of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the state franchise holder's network. Notwithstanding that grant of authority, if the state franchise holder performs the work, it shall be fully liable for any damages caused thereby, and shall be responsible for replacing damaged trees and shrubs. A state franchise holder shall be responsible for notifying affected property owners prior to trimming trees. At the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it. 
K.  The state franchise holder shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision or parcel map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing without obtaining the prior written approval of the city manager. 
L.  Any contractor or subcontractor used for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of network equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable local ordinances, and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as the state franchise holder would have under this chapter and applicable law if the work were performed by state franchise holder. The state franchise holder shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of contractors and subcontractors is performed consistent with this chapter and other applicable law, shall be responsible for all acts or omissions of contractors or subcontractors, shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by any contractor or subcontractor, and shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the work is properly performed. This section is not meant to alter tort liability of a state franchise holder to third parties. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.160 - Publicizing proposed construction work. 
A.  A state franchise holder shall publicize the initial build or any substantial rebuild or upgrade of its network in each affected neighborhood at least one week prior to commencement of that work by causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the city and by notifying those persons whose property is within three hundred feet of the work in at least two of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail, by distribution of flyers to residences, by publication in local newspapers, or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice. Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or upgrade, any underground construction will be publicized in accordance with applicable notice requirements. In addition, before entering onto any person's property, a state franchise holder shall contact the property owner or (in the case of residential property) the resident at least one day in advance. If a state franchise holder must enter a residence or building, it must schedule an appointment at the convenience of the owner or resident. 
B.  During the period of any network initial build or rebuild, a state franchise holder shall maintain a file open to public inspection showing its timetable for construction of the network by area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.170 - Participation with other utilities. 
Each state franchise holder shall cooperate in the planning, locating and construction of its network in utility joint trenches or common duct banks with other telecommunications providers. The city will provide advance notice to any state franchise holder when it plans to open a trench and each state franchise holder shall provide notice to the city when it plans to open a trench. A state franchise holder and the city will offer to make space available to the other, and to other persons who participate in joint trenching, on reasonable terms. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.180 - Underground services alert. 
Each state franchise holder shall be a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (underground services alert) and shall field mark, at its sole cost and expense, the locations of its underground network facilities upon notification in accordance with the requirements of § 4216 of the Government Code, and any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.190 - Emergency alert systems. 
A.  Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder's network. 
B.  To the extent consistent with Public Utilities Code § 5880, each state franchise holder provide an emergency alert override capability to permit the city in times of emergency to interrupt and cablecast an audio message on all channels simultaneously, as such capability was required under local cable franchise. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.200 - Interconnection for PEG programming. 
Each state franchise holder, and each incumbent cable operator operating under a city franchise, shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under Public Utilities Code § 5870(h). Each state franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder's network as identified by the state franchise holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, each state franchise holder will make an interconnection available to each channel originator providing PEG programming to an incumbent cable operator, and will provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection will be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the state franchise holder and the incumbent cable operator. 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
5.28.210 - Notices. 
A.  Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the public utilities commission. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this chapter or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to the city manager." 
(Ord. No. 67.2, § 1, 4-2-2008)  
Chapter 5.32 - TAXICABS 
 
5.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by regulating taxicab transportation services pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.020 - Taxicab driver's permit required. 
A.  No person shall operate a taxicab, as defined in Chapter 5.50 of the Santa Cruz County Code, or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated, as a vehicle for hire upon any street of the city, unless the driver of the taxicab has been issued a taxicab driver's permit which is in full force and effect. No person shall engage in taxicab transportation services as may be permitted thereunder except in accordance with such terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations as may be set forth in such permit and in this chapter. 
B.  Except as expressly specified herein, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any taxicab business, and the owners, operators, drivers or taxicabs thereof, whose principal place of business is located outside the corporate limits of the city and whose taxicab services within the city are limited solely to the discharge of passengers who were picked up from points outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.030 - Taxicab driver's permit application and issuance. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a taxicab driver's permit shall submit an application and the appropriate fees to the city clerk. The application must be verified under penalty of perjury, and must include the following information: 
1.  The name, age, business address and residence of the applicant, if a natural person; if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal office, and the names of its principal officers together with their respective addresses; if a partnership, association or other unincorporated entity, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, with the place of business and residence of each. 
2.  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant, and the description of each vehicle, giving the model, serial and license number, where available, the seating capacity and the name of the manufacturer, and the location of proposed depots and terminals, if any. 
3.  A sworn statement that each taxicab will be equipped with a taximeter, as defined in Chapter 5.50 of the Santa Cruz County Code, which will correctly compute and indicate the amount charged, the distance traveled and the waiting time elapsed. 
4.  Proof that the applicant holds any and all requisite state of California vehicle operator's licenses. 
5.  Proof that the applicant holds valid owner's and driver's licenses issued by the county of Santa Cruz pursuant to Chapter 5.50 of the Santa Cruz County Code. 
6.  A sworn statement that the applicant is in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 5.50 of the Santa Cruz County Code. 
7.  A sworn statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of California or of the United States. 
B.  After reviewing the application and determining that it is complete and that the applicant qualifies for a taxicab driver's permit, and after receipt of the appropriate fees, the city clerk shall issue the permit. The city clerk may deny the permit if the applicant formerly held a permit and it was: (1) revoked or suspended for the reasons set forth in Sections 5.32.060(A)(3)—(6); or (2) has been revoked or suspended more than once. The permit shall be valid for so long as the permittee operates the vehicle(s) specified in the application, unless the permit is revoked or suspended. The city clerk shall sign each taxicab driver's permit issued, and keep a record of all permits issued, showing the numbers, the dates issued, and the person to whom issued. 
C.  Any applicant for whom a taxicab driver's permit has been refused may appeal in writing to the city council within ten days of the date of refusal. The city council shall set the matter for hearing and shall cause notice of the hearing to be given to the petitioner not less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant shall show cause why the taxicab driver's permit should not be refused. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.040 - Conspicuous posting of taxicab driver's permit. 
Every person to whom a taxicab driver's permit is issued shall keep it conspicuously posted in the taxicab and shall, upon demand, exhibit to the city clerk or to any police officer. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.050 - Nontransferability of taxicab driver's permit. 
No taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.060 - Revocation or suspension of taxicab driver's permit. 
A.  The chief of police is authorized to revoke or suspend any taxicab driver's license issued under this chapter on the following grounds: 
1.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, with Chapter 5.50 of the Santa Cruz County Code or any other applicable law; 
2.  Suspension or revocation by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the privilege of the permittee to operate a motor vehicle; 
3.  Conviction of a violation of Sections 23103, 23104, 23152 or 23153 of the California Vehicle Code or conviction of any offense involving the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics; 
4.  The consumption by permittee of an alcoholic beverage while on duty; 
5.  Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining a permit; and 
6.  The commission of any act by the permittee or the existence of any fact or condition, which, had it existed at the time the application for the taxicab driver's permit was originally filed, would have warranted the disapproval or denial of the permit. 
B.  Procedure on Suspension. 
1.  Subject to subdivision 2 of this subsection B, prior to revocation of a permit, the permittee shall be given ten days' notice by personal service or registered mail. Permits shall be suspended or revoked upon notice as herein provided and upon a hearing at which the permittee may attend and show cause why his permit should not be revoked. The chief of police shall issue written findings within ten days of the hearing. 
2.  In the event of an immediate hazard to life, limb, health, safety, property or general welfare, the chief of police may issue an order suspending a driver from engaging in all or any part of the activities which constitutes such hazard. The chief of police may further order that the driver show cause why the chief of police should not suspend or revoke the driver's taxicab driver's permit. The order shall specify the time, date and place of hearing, which must be held within ten days. 
C.  Appeal. 
1.  Within thirty days after the date on which the decision of the chief of police is mailed to the permittee, the permittee may appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal must contain the decision, and specify the grounds and reasons for appeal, and the name and address of the appellant or his or her representative. 
2.  Within thirty days after receipt of the appeal, the city council shall conduct a hearing. Ten days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the appellant and chief of police. The appellant and the chief of police shall each have the right to be present personally or through representatives, to introduce oral and documentary evidence, examine and cross-examine witnesses, to be heard and defend their respective positions. 
3.  Within fifteen days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render a written decision, specifying the action taken and the grounds for the action. This decision shall be final. 
D.  Any permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not operate a taxicab unless he or she has applied for, and received, a new taxicab driver's permit. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.070 - Rates and fares. 
A.  The rates and fares in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter shall remain in effect unless amended by the city council as set forth herein. 
B.  The city council shall have the power and authority to regulate and fix by resolution from time to time, all rates, fares and charges for taxicab transportation services. It is unlawful, except for trips from points outside the city limits when the charge is fixed on a trip basis, for any permittee to fix, charge or collect a rate in excess of such fare. 
C.  Before any action is taken by the city council to regulate and fix rates and charges under this section, each person holding a taxicab driver's permit shall be given ten days written notice and an opportunity to be heard before the city council. 
D.  A copy of the rate schedule shall be filed in the offices of the city clerk and the chief of police. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.080 - Permit and license fees. 
A.  The city council shall have the power and authority to establish by resolution from time to time the amount of the taxicab driver's permit fee. 
B.  Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or association engaged in the business of operating a passenger vehicle for hire shall obtain a business license in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.04. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.090 - Enforcement. 
The city clerk and the chief of police, acting for themselves or through their respective deputies, are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to perform those duties imposed upon them under this chapter. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
5.32.100 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all of the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
B.  In addition to any other penalty, the operation of a taxicab upon the streets of this city in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated as such by the city. As part of the abatement remedy the city may, without limitation, confiscate and impound the taxicab until such time as any and all violations have been otherwise abated. 
C.  In addition to any other penalty, any person who knowingly or intentionally misrepresents any material fact in applying for a taxicab driver's permit under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 50.3 § 2(part), 1991)  
Chapter 5.36 - PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY FRANCHISE  
Article I. - Electricity 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  The word "grantee" means Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and its lawful successors or assigns. 
B.  The word "city" means the city of Scotts Valley, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
C.  The word "streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within city, including state highways now or hereafter established within city, and freeways hereafter established within city. 
D.  The phrase "poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances, and, without limitation to the foregoing, any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of city, and used or useful in transmitting and/or distributing electricity. 
E.  The phrase "construct, maintain and use" means to construct, erect, install, lay, operate, maintain, use, repair or replace. 
(Ord. 14 § 1, 1966)  
5.36.020 - Franchise granted. 
The franchise to construct, maintain and use poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances necessary or proper for transmitting and distributing electricity to the public for any and all purposes, in, along, across, upon, under and over the streets within city is granted to grantee. 
(Ord. 14 § 2, 1966)  
5.36.030 - Relocation—Cost to franchise. 
Grantee shall relocate, without expense to city, any poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances constructed, maintained or used under this franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any streets by city, including the construction of any subway or viaduct; provided, however, that the cost of any such relocation made necessary by the construction or any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any freeway constructed by the state of California shall be divided equally between grantee and the state of California. 
(Ord. 14 § 3, 1966)  
5.36.040 - Franchise indeterminate. 
Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by grantee, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate in the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by grantee. 
(Ord. 14 § 4, 1966)  
5.36.050 - Payment to city. 
Grantee shall during the term of said franchise pay to city two percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee derived from the sale of electricity within the limits of city. 
(Ord. 14 § 5, 1966)  
5.36.060 - Verified statement required—Payment. 
Grantee shall file with the city clerk of city, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting hereof, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of grantee during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within city. Grantee shall pay to city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for such calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the time and in the manner specified, shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder. 
(Ord. 14 § 6, 1966)  
5.36.070 - Authority. 
Said franchise is granted under the Franchise Act of 1937. 
(Ord. 14 § 7, 1966)  
Article II. - Gas 
 
5.36.080 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  The word "grantee" means Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and its lawful successors or assigns. 
B.  The word "city" means the city of Scotts Valley, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
C.  The word "streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city, including state highways, now or hereafter established within city, and freeways hereafter established within city. 
D.  The word "gas" means natural or artificial gas, or a mixture of natural and artificial gas. 
E.  The phrase "pipes and appurtenances" means pipes, pipelines, mains, services, traps, vents, vaults, manholes, meters, gauges, regulators, valves, conduits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances and, without limitation to the foregoing, any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of city, and used or useful in transmitting and/or distributing gas. 
F.  The phrase "install, maintain and use" means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair or replace. 
(Ord. 14A § 1, 1966)  
5.36.090 - Franchise granted. 
The franchise to install, maintain and use in the streets of city all pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas to the public for any and all purposes is granted to grantee. 
(Ord. 14A § 2, 1966)  
5.36.100 - Relocation—Cost to franchise. 
Grantee shall relocate, without expense to city, any pipes and appurtenances installed, maintained or used under this franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any streets by city, including the construction of any subway or viaduct; provided, however, that the cost of any such relocation made necessary by the construction or any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any freeway constructed by the state of California shall be divided equally between grantee and the state of California. 
(Ord. 14A § 3, 1966)  
5.36.110 - Franchise indeterminate. 
Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by grantee, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate in the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by grantee. 
(Ord. 14A § 4, 1966)  
5.36.120 - Payment to city. 
Grantee shall during the term of said franchise pay to city two percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 14A § 5, 1966)  
5.36.130 - Verified statement required—Payment. 
Grantee shall file with the city clerk of city, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting hereof, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of grantee during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of gas within city. Grantee shall pay to city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for such calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the time and in the manner specified shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder. 
(Ord. 14A § 6, 1966)  
5.36.140 - Authority. 
Said franchise is granted under the Franchise Act of 1937. 
(Ord. 14A § 7, 1966)  
Chapter 5.38 - FIREARMS DEALERS 
 
5.38.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to state law, as set forth in Article 1, Chapter 2, Division 6, Title 4, Part 6 of the California Penal Code beginning with Section 26700 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A  "Firearm" means a device as defined by California Penal Code Section 16520. 
B.  "City license" means a license issued by the local licensing authority pursuant to this chapter authorizing a person to engage in the sale, lease, transfer, delivery, advertisement or offer for sale, lease, or transfer of firearms. 
C.  "Local licensing authority" or "licensing officer" means the City Manager of the City of Scotts Valley, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.030 - City license. 
On and after the effective date of this ordinance, no person required to obtain a Federal Firearms License and a State Department of Justice License to sell firearms shall establish a business that engages in the sale, lease, transfer, delivery, advertisement or offer for sale, lease, or transfer any firearm without first also obtaining and keeping a one-time city license issued pursuant to this chapter by the local licensing authority. Existing firearms dealers at the effective date of this ordinance have twelve months to comply with the conditions and obtain a city license. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.040 - Application for city license. 
A.  Each person applying for a city license under this chapter shall submit an application to the local licensing authority. 
B.  In order to obtain a city license, the applicant must first provide the following to the licensing officer: 
1.  A valid federal firearms license; 
2.  A valid seller's permit issued by the State Board of Equalization; 
3.  A valid certificate of eligibility issued by the Department of Justice; 
4.  Payment of a nonrefundable administrative fee, in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Where the applicant is a corporation, each of the requirements contained in this chapter must be completed and/or adhered to by a legally recognized corporate officer of said corporation. Where the applicant is a partnership, each of the requirements contained in this chapter must be completed and/or adhered to by a legally recognized general partner of said partnership. Both the individual and the corporation or partnership shall be liable for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Each application shall specify only one location at which the sale or transfer of firearms shall take place. If any firearms dealer licensed under either federal, state or local law changes his or her place of business, an application for the new location shall be submitted, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee (in the form of a check or cash) as set forth in the schedule of fees. That application shall be considered an initial application and not an application for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.050 - Approval by licensing officer. 
The licensing officer shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the issuance of the city license. For the purpose of considering requests for a city license, the licensing officer shall apply the minimum standards set forth in this chapter. Factors to be considered by the licensing officer in approval or denial of the application for a city license include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Evidence of the applicant's compliance with all applicable city, state and federal laws; 
B.  Whether applicant has violated any provisions of this chapter; 
C.  Whether the applicant has made any false statements as to any material fact in applying for the city license; 
D.  Whether the applicant has done or caused or permitted to be done any act which if done by an authorized firearms dealer would be grounds for suspension or revocation of the city license; 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.060 - Denial of application. 
If the applicant does not meet all of the written standards, hereinabove set forth, the licensing officer shall not issue a city license to such applicant. 
It shall be the duty of the licensing officer to notify an applicant that his or her application has been denied by serving such person, either personally or by first class United States mail, with a letter setting forth the reason(s) for such denial. The notice, if served by mail, shall be deemed to have been served on the date of its deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant's address of record. The notice shall also inform the applicant of his or her right to a hearing before the city council at which time the applicant may appear, with a representative if so desired, and be heard on the matter. The applicant shall also be given notice that any request for a hearing before the city council must be made in writing to the city clerk within ten calendar days after the date on which such notice is served on the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.070 - Appeal from denial. 
An applicant whose application has been denied by the licensing officer shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council. The city council shall hold a hearing thereon pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.38.110. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.080 - Requirements. 
A.  The permitted business location shall be secured by a third party monitored alarm system. The alarm system shall be of sufficient quality to thwart the bypassing of the alarm (e.g., wireless, hardened security of the wire system, etc.). 
B.  The permitted business location shall be monitored by a video surveillance system. 
C.  Any person licensed under this chapter shall obey all applicable city, state and federal laws; and in addition, comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the city license; 
2.  The city license or a copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be seen. 
D.  Any time a permitted business is not open for business, every firearm shall be stored in one of the following ways: 
1.  In a locked safe or vault in the licensee's business premises that meets the standards of 11 California Code of Regulations Section 4100; or 
2.  Secured with a hardened steel rod or cable of at least one-fourth inch in diameter through the trigger guard of the firearm. The steel rod or cable shall be secured with a hardened steel lock that has a shackle. The lock and shackle shall be protected or shielded from the use of a bolt cutter and the rod or cable shall be anchored in a manner that prevents the removal of the firearm from the premises. No more than five firearms may be affixed to any one rod or cable at any time. 
E.  Prior to issuance of a firearms dealer license, the chief of police shall inspect the proposed business location and determine if additional safety measures are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, any structural changes to the building in which the firearms are sold or stored that are necessary to secure such firearms from burglary or theft. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015; Ord. No. 190.1, § 1, 12-20-2017)  
5.38.090 - Suspension and revocation. 
Every city license issued under this chapter shall be subject to summary suspension and revocation by the licensing officer if he or she determines that: 
A.  The city license holder has failed to meet any of the requirements specified under this chapter; 
B.  The city license holder and/or any employee(s) has violated any of the conditions or provisions of this chapter; 
C.  The city license holder and/or any employee(s) has violated any provision of federal or state firearms sales laws; 
D.  The city license holder's federal firearms sales license has been revoked; or 
E.  The city license holder has committed any act which could have resulted in the denial of issuance of a firearms license. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.100 - Notification of suspension or revocation. 
It shall be the duty of the licensing officer or his or her designee to notify any city license holder charged with any violation or misconduct, as described above, by serving such person, either personally or by first class United States mail, with a letter setting forth the particular written standard or condition which has been violated. The letter shall inform such city license holder of the right to a hearing before the city council, at which time the city license holder may appear with a representative if so desired and be heard in defense of the charges. The city license holder shall also be given notice that any request for a hearing before the city council must be made in writing to the city clerk within ten calendar days after the date on which notice is served on the city license holder. The suspension or revocation shall be effective on the date the notice is served on the city license holder. Such notice, if served by United States mail, shall be deemed to have been served on the date of its deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, to the city license holder's address of record. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.110 - Hearing on revocation or suspension. 
A.  Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by any action taken in regard to a city license may request an appeal hearing before the city council. Request for such hearing shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk, and a copy filed with the licensing officer on or before ten calendar days after the action appealed from was taken, and shall state the grounds upon which the aggrieved party claims there was improper denial, suspension or revocation of his or her license. 
B.  Upon receipt of such request for hearing, the city council shall set the matter for hearing not later than twenty calendar days thereafter unless the council is not in session in which case the council shall set the matter for hearing at the next available regular meeting date. The council may also determine whether to stay the denial, suspension or revocation pending decision on the appeal. Written notice of the time and place of hearing on the matter shall be given by the city clerk to the aggrieved party and to the licensing officer, and upon receipt of the notice of hearing the licensing officer shall forward to the city council and provide to the appellant a report on this action with respect to the matter, attaching all relevant notices and any other materials relied upon by the licensing officer in making the decision. 
C.  Upon hearing of the matter, the city council may take such action or make such orders as the council deems just and proper in the disposition of the matter. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.120 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity to operate a firearms business within the City of Scotts Valley without a valid city license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
5.38.130 - Penalties. 
Any person or entity, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction for the first offense, or of a misdemeanor for any subsequent offense(s) occurring within the one year after the first offense. Upon conviction, the person convicted shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 4.04 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 190, § 1, 9-16-2015)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 86 and 86.1. 
 
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the "animal control ordinance." 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the contest that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  "Animal" means any mammal, bird, reptile, fish or other vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
B.  "Animal at large" means: 
1.  While on the owner's premises, or while on the premises of a third party with the permission of that party, any animal which is not confined to the premises by a leash, tether, adequate fence, or other physical control or constraint; or which is not under the immediate custody and control of its owner. The phrase "immediate custody and control" shall be construed narrowly. Any dog which is not within the sight and range of verbal command of its owner, while on the owner's premises, shall be presumed to be outside of the immediate custody and control of its owner, and shall be presumed to be "at large"; 
2.  While off the owner's premises, any animal (a) not restrained by a leash, tether or other physical control not exceeding six feet in length and (b) not under the physical control of a person. 
C.  "Animal exhibition" means to present any animal for public view, for the purpose of entertainment, sale, or competition, and includes, but is not limited to, rodeos, circuses, zoos and animal auctions. 
D.  "Bucking strap" or "flank strap" means any device, strap or object generally made of leather and sometimes padded with a woolen lining which is placed around the flank regions of a horse or bull, behind the rib cage and just forward of the hind legs, and which is tightened immediately before the animal is scheduled to perform. 
E.  "Cat" means any member of the Felis domesticus species and shall be considered personal property. 
F.  "Commercial animal establishment" means any location where the business of grooming, training, renting or boarding of animal(s) is conducted. This definition shall not apply to: 
1.  The Santa Cruz SPCA-operated animal shelter (herein alternatively referred to as "the animal shelter" or "Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter"); 
2.  State-licensed veterinary facilities. 
G.  "Dangerous, wild or exotic animal" means any animal which is not commonly domesticated or which is not native to North America, or which, irrespective of geographic origin, is of a wild or predatory nature, or any domesticated animal, which because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner. 
H.  "Dangerous, wild or exotic animal facility" means any site for the keeping of dangerous, wild or exotic animals. 
I.  "Director" means the executive director of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority. 
J.  "Dog" means any member of the Canis familiarus species or any combination of Canis familiarus and other Canis species including but not limited to so called wolf-dog or coyote-dog crosses. 
K.  "Euthanasia" means putting an animal to death in a humane manner. 
L.  "Impounded" means having been received into the custody of the animal shelter, or of any authorized agent or representative thereof, or of any duly sworn law enforcement officer in the course of their duty. 
M.  "Livestock" means animals kept for husbandry including, but not limited to, horses, mules, burros, asses, cattle, sheep, swine and poultry. 
N.  "Livestock facility" means any facility for the keeping of livestock. 
O.  "Owner" means any person, firm or corporation owning, having an interest in, or having control, custody or possession of any animal. 
P.  "Person" means any natural person, association, partnership or corporation. 
Q.  "Pet shop" means any person, firm or corporation operating an establishment where live animals are kept for sale, for barter, or sold. 
R.  "Poundmaster" means the executive director of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority. Any reference to poundmaster in this title shall also include the poundmaster's duly authorized deputies or designees. 
S.  "Sexually unproductive" means being incapable of reproduction by reason of age or physical condition, or by reason of being subjected to a medical procedure to be rendered unreproductive and certified by a licensed veterinarian as such. 
T.  "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which a current license has not been paid or to which the tag provided for in this title is not attached. 
U.  "Vicious animal" means any dog which qualifies as vicious dog in accordance with California Food and Agricultural Code section 31603. Additionally, any dog which while off its owner's or custodian's property and not controlled by leash or lead in the hands of an adult capable of restraining the animal attacks any domestic animal and causes injuries which result in the recommendation of a veterinarian that the animal be euthanized, or any injury that results in the death of any domestic animal while such animal is on its owner's property, custodian's property or controlled by leash or lead in the hands of an adult capable to restrain the animal in compliance with this title. 
V.  "Potentially dangerous dog" means any dog which qualified as a potentially dangerous dog in accordance with California Food and Agricultural Code section 31602. Additionally, any dog which while off its owner's or custodian's property and not controlled by leash or lead in the hands of an adult capable to restrain the animal attacks and inflicts injury to any domestic animal which such animal is on its owner's property, custodian's property, or controlled by leash or lead in the hands of an adult capable to restrain the animal in compliance with this title. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], §§ 1—4, 10-21-09)  
6.04.030 - Poundmaster—Office established. 
The office of the poundmaster is established. The poundmaster shall be the executive director of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority (herein alternately referred to as "SPCA" or "Santa Cruz SPCA"), his/her duly authorized deputies and his/her designees. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], § 5, 10-21-09)  
6.04.040 - Poundmaster—Duties. 
The poundmaster shall supervise the animal shelter, and the care of animals impounded therein, and shall administer and enforce the sections of this title and applicable state laws relative to animal control. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.050 - Animal shelter. 
All animals which are subject to being impounded, as provided herein, shall be kept, safely held, and as authorized herein, disposed of, in a suitable building or enclosure which shall be known and designated as the "Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter." 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.060 - Delegation of powers and duties. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon the poundmaster or other public officer, the power may be exercised by a person authorized pursuant to law, by the officer unless this title expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.070 - Accounting of sums collected. 
A.  All charges collected by the poundmaster for impounding and keeping animals pursuant to this title, together with all sales proceeds received by the poundmaster from the sale of animals impounded or brought in from the city shall be paid over to the city. 
B.  All fees for the issuance of city dog license tags and all fines collected under the provisions of this title shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be used: 
1.  First, to pay fees, salaries, costs, expenses or any or all of them, for the enforcement of Division 14 of the California Agricultural Code, commencing with Section 30501, and of this title; 
2.  Second, to pay damages to owners of livestock which are killed by dogs; 
3.  Third, to pay costs of any hospitalization or emergency care of animals pursuant to Section 597(f) of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.080 - Reporting stray animals. 
A.  Every person except the poundmaster or a deputy poundmaster taking up any stray animal found at large contrary to the provisions of this title shall within eight hours thereafter give notice to the Santa Cruz Animal Shelter of: 
1.  The fact that he has such animal in his possession; 
2.  A complete description of such animal, including tattoos or other distinguishing marks, if any; 
3.  The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal corporation issued; if such animal has no license, such person shall so state; 
4.  The place where the animal is confined. 
B.  The poundmaster shall pick up and shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been found at large and impounded. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.090 - Duty to report animal bites. 
Whenever any person has knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, the person having such knowledge shall report said fact forthwith to the county health officer or to the poundmaster. The report shall state, to the best of his or her knowledge, the name and address of the person bitten, the time and place such person was bitten, and the location, description and ownership of the animal involved. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.04.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 86.3[a], § 6, adopted Oct. 21, 2009, repealed § 6.04.100, which pertained to quarantine of dogs and cats and derived from Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987.  
6.04.110 - Impoundment of other biting animals. 
In conjunction with the county health officer, the poundmaster may order the impoundment of any animal other than a dog or cat which has bitten any person. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 6.08 - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
6.08.010 - Impoundment of animals. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to impound on sight, after making such investigation as is reasonable under the circumstances for the purpose of locating the owner, any animal found at large contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or of Division 14 of the Agricultural Code (commencing with Section 30501), and to keep such animal so impounded as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Whenever an owner is in violation of Section 6.16.010, 6.16.020, 6.16.050, 6.16.055, 6.16.060, 6.16.080 or 6.16.110 or whenever a vicious animal as described in Section 6.04.020(U) or a potentially dangerous dog as described in Section 6.04.020(V) has done any of the acts described in those subsections, the victim or any citizen with personal knowledge may submit to the poundmaster a signed written statement describing the incident and the animal or animals involved. 
C.  If, after making such investigation as is reasonable under the circumstances to determine the validity of the allegations contained in the statement, the poundmaster, or his designated deputy, finds that the animal or animals should be impounded, he shall personally serve upon the owner written notice of his intent to impound said animal or animals at the expiration of seventy-two hours, and the reasons therefor, a copy of the victim's or citizen's statement, and notice of the owner's right to respond either orally or in writing, to the poundmaster, or his designated deputy, prior to said impoundment. 
D.  Upon the expiration of the seventy-two-hour period, the poundmaster is hereby expressly authorized to impound said animal or animals whether found on or off the premises of its owner, and to keep or abate any such animal so impounded as provided in this chapter. 
E.  However, if after making his investigation, the poundmaster, or his designated deputy, finds that extraordinary circumstances exist such that immediate seizure of the animal or animals is necessary to protect the personal safety and/or property rights of the public, the poundmaster is hereby expressly authorized to immediately impound said animal or animals, whether found on or off the premises of its owner and to keep or abate any such animal so impounded as provided in this chapter, without otherwise complying with the requirements of subsection B of this section. 
F.  Refusal of the owner to release or deliver said animal to the poundmaster, or his designated deputy, upon demand made pursuant to this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], § 7, 10-21-09)  
6.08.020 - Care of impounded animals. 
When any animal is so impounded, it shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the poundmaster. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.030 - Cost of seizure and care—Owner liable. 
If any animal is properly seized under this chapter, the owner or keeper shall be personally liable to the seizing agency for the cost of the seizure and care of the animal. Furthermore, if the charges for the seizure or impoundment and any other charges permitted under this chapter are not paid within fourteen days of the seizure, or, if the owner, within fourteen days of notice of availability of the animal to be returned, fails to pay charges permitted under this chapter and take possession of the animal, the animal shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of by the impounding officer. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], § 8, 10-21-09)  
6.08.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 86.3[a], § 9, adopted Oct. 21, 2009, repealed § 6.08.040, which pertained to additional charges for keeping animals and derived from Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987.  
6.08.050 - Immediate seizure or impound—Lien for care and treatment. 
Whenever the poundmaster has reasonable grounds to believe that very prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals or of persons, the poundmaster shall immediately seize the animal and comply with the procedure established in Section 6.08.051. In all other cases, the poundmaster shall comply with the provisions of Section 6.08.052. The costs of caring for and treating any animal properly seized under this chapter shall constitute a lien on the animal and the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are paid, unless the hearing officer determines that the seizure was unjustified. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987, Ord. 86.3[a], § 10, 10-21-09)  
6.08.051 - Post seizure hearing for animal subject to immediate seizure or impound. 
Whenever the poundmaster seizes or impounds an animal based on a reasonable belief that prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of others, the poundmaster shall provide the owner or keeper of the animal, if known or ascertained after reasonable investigation, with the opportunity for a post seizure hearing as hereinafter provided to determine the validity of the seizure or impoundment, or both. 
A.  The poundmaster shall cause a notice to be affixed to conspicuous place where the animal was situated or personally deliver a notice of the seizure or impoundment, or send by first class mail, to the owner or keeper within forty-eight hours, excluding weekends and holidays. The notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  The name, business address and telephone number of the officer providing the notice; 
2.  A description of the animal seized, including any identification upon the animal; 
3.  The authority and purpose for the seizure, or impoundment, including the time, place and circumstances under which the animal was seized; 
4.  A statement that, in order to receive a post seizure hearing, the owner or person authorized to keep the animal, or his or her agent, shall request the administrative hearing by signing and returning an enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep the animal to the poundmaster within ten days, including weekends and holidays, of the date of the notice. The declaration may be returned by personal delivery or first class mail; 
5.  A statement that the cost of caring for and treating any animal properly seized under this section is a lien on the animal and that the animal shall not be returned to the owner until the cost is paid, and that the failure to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in liability for this cost. 
B.  The post seizure administrative hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provision of Section 6.08.053. 
C.  Failure of the owner or keeper, or of his or her agent, to request a hearing within the prescribed time periods, or to attend a scheduled hearing, shall result in forfeiture of any right to a post seizure hearing or right to challenge his or her liability for costs incurred. 
D.  The poundmaster or the law enforcement agency that directed the seizure shall be responsible for the costs incurred for caring and treating the animal, if it is determined in the post seizure hearing that the seizing officer did not have reasonable grounds to believe very prompt action, including seizure of the animal, was required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals or person. If it is determined the seizure was justified, the owner or keeper shall be personally liable to the seizing agency for the cost of the seizure and care of the animal and the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are paid and the poundmaster has determined that the animal is physically fit or the owner demonstrates to the poundmaster satisfaction that the owner can and will provide the necessary care. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 11, 10-21-09)  
6.08.052 - Hearing prior to seizure of animal. 
Where the need for immediate seizure is not present, the animal control officer shall provide the owner or keeper of the animal, if known or ascertainable after reasonable investigation, with the opportunity for a hearing prior to any seizure or impoundment of the animal. The owner shall produce the animal to the poundmaster prior to the hearing unless, prior to the hearing, the owner has obtained consent from and made placement arrangement with the poundmaster that the animal need not be brought to the poundmaster prior to the hearing. Any person who willfully fails to produce the animal or obtain consent from the poundmaster prior to the hearing regarding placement arrangement for the animal is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars. 
A.  The poundmaster or law enforcement agency shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place where the animal was situated, personally deliver or mail by first class mail, a notice stating the grounds for believing the animal should be seized. The notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  The name, business address and telephone number of the officer providing the notice; 
2.  A description of the animal to be seized, including any identification upon the animal; 
3.  The authority and purpose for the possible seizure or impoundment; 
4.  A statement that, in order to receive a hearing prior to any seizure, the owner or person authorized to keep the animal, or his or her agent, shall request the hearing by signing and returning the enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep animal to the officer providing the notice within two days, excluding weekends and holidays, or the date of the notice; 
5.  A statement that the cost of caring for an treating any animal properly seized is a lien on the animal, that any animal seized shall not be returned to the owner until the charges are paid, and that failure to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in a conclusive determination that the animal may properly be seized and that the owner shall be liable for the charges. 
B.  The preseizure hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after receipt of this request. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure established in Section 6.08.053. 
C.  Failure of the owner or keeper, or his or her agent, to request a hearing within the prescribed time period or to attend a scheduled hearing, shall result in a forfeiture of any right to a preseizure hearing or right to challenge his or her liability for costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 12, 10-21-09)  
6.08.053 - Hearings. 
All hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer, who shall not have been directly involved in the subject action and shall not be subordinate in rank to the person seizing or impounding the animal. Hearings shall be conducted in the following manner: 
A.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing for a reasonable period of time, if the hearing officer deems such continuance to be necessary and proper or if the owner or custodian shows good cause for such continuance. 
B.  The poundmaster shall have the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, the existence of the condition or conditions which give rise to the need for the seizure or impoundment. 
C.  In a case where the poundmaster is also seeking to terminate the owner's rights in the animal, the poundmaster shall have put the owner or keeper of the animal on due written notice thereof and shall establish the existence of the owner's or keeper's acts or omissions resulting in cruelty or neglect to the animal by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 
D.  The poundmaster shall present its case first, followed by the party against whom the seizure or impoundment is being proposed. The poundmaster may present rebuttal in the discretion of the hearing officer. 
E.  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
F.  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any other matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness and to rebut evidence. 
G.  The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized in the hearing. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
H.  At the conclusion of the hearing, each side shall be given an opportunity to summarize its position. 
I.  The hearing officer shall render, in writing, his or her finding, decision and order thereon, and shall give notice, in writing, of the findings, decision and order to the owner or custodian of the animal. 
J.  In the event a sufficient quantum of evidence presented at the hearing supports a determination for seizure, impoundment and/or termination of the owner's rights in the animal, the hearing officer as a part of his or her decision may order, but is not limited to ordering, that one or more of the following actions be undertaken: 
1.  That the owner's and/or custodian's rights in the dog, cat or other animal are terminated; 
2.  That the owner or custodian of the dog, cat or other animal shall remove the animal(s) from the premises by a specified date; 
3.  That the poundmaster after a specified date, shall impound the animal or animals; 
4.  That the poundmaster shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, the animal(s) with the owner or custodian of the animal(s) being responsible to reimburse the city for all costs and expenses including, but not limited to, board, care, veterinary services, and costs of disposal. If the animal(s) are sold, the proceeds from the sale shall go to the city. 
K.  A decision upholding seizure or impoundment shall become effective upon issuance. 
L.  A decision terminating an owner's rights in the animal shall become effective thirty days from the date the decision is mailed unless a stay of execution is granted. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 13, 10-21-09)  
6.08.060 - Disposal of infirm or dangerous animals. 
The poundmaster is authorized, directed and empowered forthwith to destroy in a humane manner any animal lawfully impounded which is by reason of disease or injury unfit for further use, or is dangerous to keep impounded. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.070 - Disposal of domestic pets upon request. 
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to dispose of any domestic animal pet or pets at the request of the owner thereof when the owner delivers the pet to the poundmaster. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.080 - Disposal of unclaimed animals. 
A.  The poundmaster may, and is authorized and empowered to, destroy in a humane manner, or otherwise dispose of, any animal lawfully impounded without a license or identification tag which remains unclaimed by its owner, if any, for more than seventy-two hours excluding Sundays and holidays. 
B.  Stray dogs and cats impounded by the poundmaster, if wearing a license or identification tag, shall be held for a minimum period of seven days. During the period that the animal is held by the poundmaster, the poundmaster shall attempt to inform the owner of the location of the impounded animal and how the owner may claim the animal. If telephone contact is unsuccessful, the owner shall be notified by mail sent to the last recorded address of the owner. Seven days after mailed notice is sent, the poundmaster may destroy or otherwise dispose of such animal in a humane manner. 
C.  Disposal of unclaimed livestock shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.090 - Reclaiming impounded animals. 
The owner of any impounded animal shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the lawful disposition thereof, provided payment is made to the poundmaster of the costs and charges hereinafter specified for the impounding and keeping of animals; and provided further, that as to any dog without a current license, that a deposit is made with the poundmaster to cover the license fee and the cost of a rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.100 - Sale of impounded animals. 
Unless impounded animals without a license or identification tag shall have been redeemed within seventy-two hours, or animals wearing a license or identification tag within seven days, they may be sold by the poundmaster to the person offering to pay the highest cash amount therefor, provided all reasonable effort has been made to notify the owner of the animal; and provided further, that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any dog or dogs, including dogs under six months of age, until he has deposited with the poundmaster a sum sufficient to cover the license fee required under Chapter 6.12, together with the cost of a rabies vaccination for any dog which does not have a current vaccination. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.110 - Spaying or neutering of adopted animals. 
Unless a licensed veterinarian states in writing that the date specified in the adoption agreement is inappropriate for the animal in question, any person adopting an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat from any animal shelter, pound, humane society, or SPCA shelter shall have the animal spayed or neutered on or before a date specified in the adoption agreement. On submission of a written statement from a licensed veterinarian to the officer at the shelter or pound responsible for insuring compliance with this section, the adoption agreement will be modified accordingly. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.120 - Prohibition against furnishing animals for research. 
The poundmaster shall not furnish any animals from the animal shelter for research purposes. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.130 - Records of impounded animals. 
The poundmaster shall keep a record of the number of all animals impounded, showing in detail in the case of each animal the description, dates of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of any person redeeming or purchasing, and any fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional records as may be required by the city council of the city. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.08.140 - Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs. 
A.  California Food and Agriculture Code sections 31601—31683 shall be operative in the City of Scotts Valley for the control of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs except as modified below. 
B.  The poundmaster may request a dog be humanely euthanized after it is determined to be vicious. Such request will be made at the time of the hearing. A hearing officer or judge may order a dog be humanely euthanized upon making a determination that the dog is vicious. 
C.  Conditions for keeping potentially dangerous or vicious dogs. In addition to any conditions ordered by the court any person who has possession of a dog that has been declared potentially dangerous or vicious at a hearing shall comply with the following conditions: 
1.  All dogs determined after a hearing to be potentially dangerous or vicious dogs shall be properly licensed, micro chipped, and vaccinated at the owner's expense, prior to the release to the dog's owner or custodian or within fifteen days if the dog is not in the custody of animal control. The licensing authority shall include the potentially dangerous designation in the registration records of the dog. 
2.  A potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog, while on the owner's property, shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced area from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot enter or trespass. The area must be kept locked at all times with a substantial lock. The fencing and other components of the confinement shall be maintained in good order to prevent escape and to prevent children from entering or trespassing. It shall be within the authority of the poundmaster to require a dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious to also be properly muzzled when off its owner's property to prevent harm or injury to the public. 
3.  A potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog may be off the owner's premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash, not exceeding six feet in length, and if it is under the control of a responsible adult who is capable of restraining and controlling the dog. 
4.  The yard or enclosure must be inspected and approved in writing by animal control prior to release of the dog to its owner or custodian if the dog is in the custody of animal control. 
D.  At no time may a potentially dangerous or vicious dog be left unattended while off the owner's premises except as set forth herein. A potentially dangerous or vicious dog may be boarded at a veterinarian hospital or at a licensed boarding kennel if the owner has informed such facility that the dog has been designated as a potentially dangerous or vicious dog and the facility is able to properly confine the dog. 
E.  Owners or custodians of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs are subject to the following legal duties: 
1.  The owner or custodian of the dog shall notify the poundmaster immediately if the dog is at large or has bitten or attacked any person or animal. 
2.  The dog must be spayed or neutered at the expense of the owner prior to the release of the dog to its owner or custodian or within thirty days of the hearing order if the dog is not in the custody of animal control. 
3.  A potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall be required to wear at all times a bright fluorescent collar visible at fifty feet in normal daylight, which will be provided by the poundmaster at the owner's expense. The collar shall be maintained in such a manner that the color is visible and shall be worn in such a manner that is clearly visible. 
4.  The owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, which has been involved in injury to a human, shall be required to maintain general liability insurance or post bond covering property damage and bodily injury caused by a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, with a combined single limit of one hundred thousand dollars per occurrence, and will be required to show proof of such insurance thirty days after the court has made it determination. 
5.  The owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous or vicious dog must give written notice of the potentially dangerous or vicious dog determination to all of the following entities that apply: local law enforcement agency, fire department, United States Post Office (local branch), all utility companies which provide services to the premises where the dog is kept, veterinarian, grooming facility, homeowner's or renter's insurance carrier and landlord. The notice shall include all of the following: Owner(s) name(s), address, telephone number, the actions of the dog that resulted in the declaration, the designation ("potentially dangerous or vicious"), description of dog, breed, color(s), markings, name, location(s) on property that dog is kept. The owner or custodian shall provide a copy of such notice to the poundmaster within thirty days after the court determination that the dog is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
6.  The owner or custodian of a dog declared to be a potentially dangerous or a vicious dog after a hearing shall post one or more signs on the premises at a location or locations that would be visible to anyone entering the property at normal access points stating, "A dog which has been determined to be dangerous or vicious lives on this property." The signs shall be in both English and Spanish. 
F.  When any dog is in the custody of the poundmaster for the purpose of a hearing to determine if it is potentially dangerous, all applicable charges for services performed by the poundmaster pursuant to this section and all fines shall be paid prior to the release of the dog to its owner or custodian. If said charges are not paid or the dog is not claimed within fourteen days after the dog is available to be released to its owner, the date the services are performed, or the order is issued, the dog shall be deemed to be abandoned by the owner, and thereafter subject to disposal by the county. Any dog so abandoned is not adoptable and shall be humanely euthanized by the poundmaster. 
G.  Any dog that has been designated as a potentially dangerous or vicious dog in any other jurisdiction and has been moved to the City of Scotts Valley shall be subject to all of the provisions of the prior order and shall be maintained in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
H.  Any dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious in the City of Scotts Valley will retain that designation for the remainder of its life. An owner may petition the court having jurisdiction over the matter after the initial thirty-six-month period to submit evidence to support a change or modification of the condition. 
I.  An additional fee for initial registration shall be charged. The annual dog license fee for a potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall be greater than a non-potentially dangerous or vicious dog license. The additional fee shall be used to defray the cost of record keeping, inspections and administration of potentially dangerous and vicious dog program. The amount of the initial registration fee and dog license fee shall be set by resolution of the board of supervisors. 
J.  The failure of an owner or custodian of a dog, declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious at a hearing pursuant to California Food and Agriculture Sections and/or this chapter, to comply with any of the conditions of any court order, this section, or conditions imposed by the court is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 14, 10-21-09)  
6.08.150 - Penalty and impoundment authorized. 
If upon receiving written notification the owner fails to restrain or control a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, as ordered by the director, the owner is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment and the director is empowered to seize and impound the animal at the expense of the owner pending the outcome of a potentially dangerous and vicious dog hearing. The city attorney has the discretionary authority to make violations of this chapter an infraction if the circumstances warrant such an action. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 15, 10-21-09)  
6.08.160 - Investigation. 
Whenever a dog suspected of being potentially dangerous or vicious is reported, the poundmaster shall investigate the circumstances and if they find that the animal shows a propensity to attack, bite, inflict injury to a human or domesticated animal, or harass people or other animals without provocation, the poundmaster shall notify the owner in writing, stating all the facts and circumstances. The poundmaster may order that the animal be kept within a substantial enclosure or securely fenced area from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot enter or trespass, securely leashed or otherwise controlled. If the owner of the dog cannot provide restraint as so directed by the director within forty-eight hours, the animal shall be temporarily impounded at the expense of the owner pending the outcome a potentially dangerous or vicious dog hearing. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 16, 10-21-09)  
6.08.170 - Noncompliance with order to provide veterinary care. 
If the animal requires veterinary care and the poundmaster is not assured, within fourteen days of the seizure of the animal, that the owner will provide the necessary care, the animal shall not be returned to its owner and shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of by the poundmaster. A veterinarian may humanely destroy an impounded animal without regard to the prescribed holding period when it has been determined that the animal has incurred severe injuries or is incurably ill or crippled. A veterinarian also may immediately humanely destroy an impounded animal afflicted with a serious contagious disease unless the owner or his or her agent immediately authorizes treatment of the animal by a veterinarian at the expense of the owner or agent. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 17, 10-21-09)  
6.08.180 - Return to owner—Conditions. 
No animal properly seized under this chapter shall be returned to its owner until, in the determination of the poundmaster or hearing officer, the animal is physically fit or the owner can demonstrate to the poundmaster's or hearing officer's satisfaction that the owner can and will provide the necessary care. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 18, 10-21-09)  
6.08.190 - Transfer to veterinarian. 
Any peace officer, humane society officer, poundmaster or animal control officer shall convey all injured cats and dogs found without their owners in a public place directly to a veterinarian who ordinarily treats dogs and cats for a determination of whether the animal shall be immediately and humanely destroyed or shall be hospitalized under proper care and given emergency treatment. If the owner does not redeem the animal within the locally prescribed waiting period, the veterinarian may personally perform euthanasia on the animal. If the animal is treated and recovers from its injuries, the veterinarian may keep the animal for purposes of adoption, provided the responsible animal control agency has first been contacted and has refused to take possession of the animal. Whenever any animal is transferred to a veterinarian in a clinic, such as an emergency clinic which is not in continuous operation, the veterinarian may, in turn, transfer the animal to an appropriate facility. If the veterinarian determines that the animal shall be hospitalized under proper care and given emergency treatment, the costs of any services which are provided pending the owner's inquiry to the poundmaster shall be paid from the dog license fees, fines, and fees from impounding dogs, subject to the provision that this cost be repaid by the animal's owner. The cost of caring for and treating any animal seized under this section shall constitute a lien on the animal and the animal shall not be returned to the owner until the charges are paid. No veterinarian shall be criminally or civilly liable for any decisions, which he or she makes, or for services which he or she provides pursuant to this section. If the poundmaster takes possession of an animal pursuant to this section, he/she shall keep records of the whereabouts of the animal for a seventy-two hour period from the time of possession, and those records shall be available for inspection by the public upon request. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 19, 10-21-09)  
Chapter 6.10 - REGULATION OF ANIMAL BREEDING 
Sections: 
 
6.10.010 - Findings. 
The city council of the city of Scotts Valley ("city council") finds and declares that a program for mandatory spaying/neutering of cats and dogs combined with a certification system for unaltered cats and dogs owned, harbored or kept within the incorporated areas of the city is a reasonable and effective means of reducing the population of homeless or stray cats and dogs, reducing the need to euthanize healthy cats and dogs, and providing for the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
"Unaltered animal certification" means a written authorization, issued annually by the poundmaster, giving permission to maintain an unaltered dog or cat. Fees for the certification shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
"Feral cat" means a feline which is by its nature wild, or is no longer domesticated. 
"Feral cat colony" means a group of two or more feral cats. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.030 - Mandatory spaying/neutering. 
A.  No person shall own, harbor or keep within the incorporated area of the city a dog or cat over the age of six months which has not been spayed or neutered unless such person holds an unaltered animal certification for the animal issued pursuant to Section 6.10.050. 
B.  Any person intentionally providing care or sustenance for a dog or cat shall be deemed the owner of such dog or cat and shall comply with this section. 
C.  The following animals are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1.  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by public law enforcement agencies for law enforcement activities, or dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the poundmaster after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
2.  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used as a service dog such as a guide dog, hearing dog or social/therapy dog, or a dog designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the poundmaster after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
3.  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by search and rescue agencies for search and rescue activities, or dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the poundmaster after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
4.  Dogs or cats certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being spayed/neutered; 
5.  Dogs which are appropriately trained and actually being used for herding of other animals, or as livestock guardian dogs, or dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the poundmaster after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
6.  Dogs or cats boarded in a licensed kennel or a business which boards such animals for professional training or resale. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.040 - Care of feral cats. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person within the incorporated area of the city intentionally to provide food, water or other forms of sustenance to a feral cat colony unless the person furnishes the poundmaster with a signed statement agreeing to the following conditions: 
1.  Register with the poundmaster as caring for feral cats; 
2.  Regularly feed the cat colony, including weekends and holidays; 
3.  Regularly and frequently trap the cats over the age of eight weeks and have them spayed or neutered; 
4.  Arrange to have all trapped cats tested for feline leukemia and feline immune deficiency virus, and to have those who test positive humanely euthanized or isolated indoors; 
5.  Identify all trapped cats by tipping their ears; and 
6.  Arrange to have all trapped cats vaccinated for rabies in addition to any other vaccination or immunization requirement imposed by the state. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.050 - Unaltered animal certification— Administration. 
A.  The poundmaster shall administer a certification program to allow for unaltered animals over the age of six months when the poundmaster determines that the following conditions have been met: 
1.  The animal is examined annually by a licensed veterinarian and is following the preventative health care program recommended by the veterinarian; 
2.  The owner has not had more than two violations of the animal control ordinance, Title 6 of this code, within the preceding twenty-four months; 
3.  The animal is properly housed and cared for as follows: 
a.  The animal is provided sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water, 
b.  The animal is provided shelter than will allow the animal to stand up, turn around and lay down without laying in his/her feces and the area where the animal is kept is properly cleaned and disinfected, 
c.  If the animal is a dog, it must be fully contained on the owner's property and be provided appropriate exercise, 
d.  The animal owner otherwise complies with any applicable state law concerning the care and housing of animals; 
4.  The owner furnishes the poundmaster with a signed statement agreeing to the following conditions: 
a.  The female unaltered animal will have no more than one litter per year, unless the owner furnishes the poundmaster in advance of any breeding, a written statement from a licensed veterinarian recommending that the female feline be allowed to have up to two litters per year. This written recommendation may result from the annual examination required pursuant to subsection A1 of this section. 
b.  Offspring of the unaltered animal will not be sold or adopted until they are at least seven weeks of age. 
c.  Records will be kept documenting how many offspring were produced and who adopted or purchased them. 
B.  Any owner advertising to the public the availability of any dog for adoption, sale, barter or other transfer must prominently display his or her unaltered animal certification number in the advertisement. The certification number shall also be provided to any person adopting or purchasing any dog or cat bred in the incorporated area of the city. 
C.  Commercial establishments selling locally bred dogs or cats shall prominently display the unaltered animal certification number of the animal's owner. 
D.  Any owner of an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat who has been cited for failing to obtain an unaltered animal certification may have his or her citation dismissed if there is proof that the animal has been spayed or neutered within thirty days of the issuance of the citation. 
E.  Any owner who is denied an unaltered animal certification or whose certification is revoked by the poundmaster for failure to comply with the requirements of this section may appeal such denial or revocation to the city council by following the provisions of Section 17.50.060 (I) of this code. 
F.  The issuance of an unaltered animal certification does not allow breeding in violation of any zoning restrictions found elsewhere in Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.060 - Use of certification revenue. 
All certification revenue collected pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be applied by the city as follows: 
A.  To recover and/or offset the costs for the enforcement, administration and support of this chapter; 
B.  To advance the purpose of this chapter by providing for the spaying and neutering of animals, and/or providing for the testing and immunization of feral cats. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or causing or permitting the violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and shall be punished by a fine as follows: 
A.  A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
C.  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each additional violation in excess of two violations of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.080 - Enforcement responsibility. 
The poundmaster shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.090 - Sale or adoption of dogs or cats. 
A.  Any person who provides or offers any dog or cat to the public, whether or not for compensation, shall provide to the prospective owner, free of charge, information relating to the vaccination status of the dog or cat. In addition, the provider shall supply to the client, free of charge, information related to pet care and ownership, including information on city laws pertaining to animal control and spay/neuter programs available in the city. 
B.  Any person offering a dog for sale, barter, exchange or adoption, whether or not for compensation, shall disclose to any prospective owner, information regarding the licensing requirements of the city applicable to such animal. 
C.  No person shall present any dog or cat for sale, barter, exchange or adoption, whether or not for compensation, in any public place. "Public place" shall include, but not be limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, carnivals, shopping malls, flea markets and areas in front of commercial establishments. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
1.  Any animal rescue or humane organization or agency recognized by the poundmaster; or 
2.  Any cat breeder selling cats at a nationally sanctioned cat show. 
D.  No person shall give away any dog or cat as an inducement to enter a place of business or to enter into a business arrangement. This prohibition shall not apply to any licensed veterinarian who offers dogs or cats for sale or adoption. 
E.  No person shall sell, barter, exchange or offer for adoption, whether or not for compensation, any dog or cat to any person who is under the age of eighteen without the written permission of the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
6.10.100 - Review. 
This chapter shall be reviewed by the city one year after its effective date, or earlier upon the direction of the city council or the recommendation of staff, and annually thereafter. The poundmaster shall prepare a written report concerning the effectiveness of this chapter for consideration by the city in its review. 
(Ord. 86.3 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 6.12 - LICENSING 
 
6.12.010 - Dog licensing requirements—Term of license. 
A.  Dogs shall be licensed within thirty days of obtaining the age of four months, or within thirty days of acquisition by the owner, whichever occurs later. 
B.  Licenses shall be valid for twelve months from date of issuance and shall be issued upon payment of the fee set by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Licenses issued under prior existing city ordinances shall remain valid until expiration. 
D.  No license shall be issued unless proof of anti-rabies vaccination is presented and is valid for the license period. 
E.  A license may be sold for less than the full twelve-month license period if the antirabies vaccination expires prior to the full license period. Fees for partial-term licenses will be prorated on a monthly basis, with a minimum fee of five dollars to cover administrative costs. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.020 - Display of tags—Nontransferable. 
A.  License tags shall be securely displayed upon dogs at all times, except when the dog is confined to the owner's premises or displayed in an exhibition. 
B.  A license is not transferable to another dog and shall be void upon transfer of a licensed dog to another owner; provided, however, that a new license may be purchased for the license replacement fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.030 - Vaccination—Requirements. 
Every owner of any dog over the age of four months within the limits of the city shall, at intervals specified by the California State Department of Health Services, procure the vaccination of the dog by a licensed veterinarian with an approved canine antirabies vaccine. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.031 - Certificate of antirabies vaccination. 
Any veterinarian who vaccinated or causes or directs to be vaccinated in the City of Scotts Valley any dog with the antirabies vaccine shall: 
A.  Use a certificate approved by the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter, to certify that such animal has been vaccinated; and 
B.  Send a copy of the completed certificate to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter within 30-days from the date the dog is vaccinated; and 
C.  If the dog is vaccinated for rabies by a veterinarian located outside the City of Scotts Valley and the vaccinated dog resides in the City of Scotts Valley, the owner/guardian or person with a right to control the dog must submit a copy of the vaccination certificate to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter within 30-days from the date that a dog is vaccinated or brought into the city, whichever date is later in time. 
(Ord. No. 86.5, § 1, 9-21-2011)  
6.12.040 - Licensing authority—Remittance of fees. 
The Santa Cruz SPCA is authorized and declared to be the pet licensing authority for the city, and shall collect all related fees. License fees and related fees shall be remitted to the city for licenses sold to pet owners residing in the city. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.050 - Fees—Licenses, duplicates and transfers. 
A.  Fees for licenses, duplicate tags and transfer of ownership shall be as established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The full amount of such fees will be payable for any portion of the year, except as may otherwise be provided in Section 6.12.010(E). The license collector shall keep a record of the name and address of the owner, and the number and date of issuance of the certificate and tag. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.060 - Fees—Late payment penalty. 
A.  A penalty fee, as set by resolution of the city council, shall be charged for late renewal of a license. "Late renewal" is defined as the first day of the month past the due date. 
B.  A penalty fee, as set by city council resolution, shall be charged to any owner who fails to apply for an initial license within the times specified in this chapter. 
C.  Any penalty shall be in addition to the applicable license fee and payable at the time of issuance. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.070 - Exceptions from licensing and waiver of fees. 
A.  Fees shall be waived for licenses issued for any recognized guide, signal or service dog upon presentation of an affidavit by the dog's owner. A guide, signal or service dog license shall be valid for the life of the dog, or so long as the dog remains the property of the person named in the affidavit. 
B.  License fees for dogs owned by persons aged sixty-five or older shall be reduced by the amount equal to the license fee for a sexually unreproductive dog for one dog per household. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.080 - Dog licensing compliance programs—Vendor fees. 
A.  The licensing authority may establish a program to promote dog licensing compliance by training and authorizing outside sales persons and vendors to sell licenses to the public at specified places or areas throughout the city. 
B.  The licensing authority may also deduct a fee, as set by resolution of the city council, from each license fee collected by the authority, to cover commissions paid to outside sales persons. The commission shall only be deducted from licenses actually sold by outside sales persons. 
C.  The licensing authority may deduct a fee, as set by resolution of the city council, from each license fee collected by the authority, to cover fees paid to license vendors. The vendor fee shall only be deducted from licenses actually sold by vendors. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.090 - Dogs with licenses from other jurisdictions. 
A dog displaying a current license from jurisdictions outside the city, but within the state, shall not require licensing under this chapter until expiration of the current license; provided, that the dog remains in the possession of the owner to whom the license was duly issued and the appropriate transfer fee, as set by city council resolution, is paid by the dog owner and upon surrender to the licensing authority of the license tag and certificate issued by the other jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.100 - Duplicate tags. 
Whenever a tag, issued for the then current year by the city, has been stolen or lost, the owner or possessor of the dog for which the same was issued may, upon payment of the fee established by resolution of the city council and upon making and subscribing to an affidavit of such loss and filing the same with the license collector of the city receive a duplicate tag from the license collector for the remaining portion of the then current year. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.12.110 - Transient dogs. 
The provisions of this title with respect to registration and payment of fees shall not apply to any dog if the owner thereof establishes to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that said owner is a nonresident of the city and the dog has been present in the city for less than thirty consecutive days within the preceding twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 6.16 - VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Prohibition against permitting dogs at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to permit or allow such dog to be at large anywhere in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: (1) a dog at large on any ranch or similar undeveloped property with permission of the property owner; and (2) a dog entered in a dog show or field trials, and under the reasonable control of a competent person. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.020 - Leash requirement in specified areas. 
It is unlawful within the city for the owner of any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to permit or allow such dog to be away from the premises of its owner at any time if not securely restrained by a leash except in facilities enclosed by a fence or other restraining barrier where dogs are allowed to be un-leashed such as lawfully established and operated dog parks, and then only to the extent authorized by regulations applicable to the facility. 
(Ord. 86.4, 2002: Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.030 - Safety of animals in motor vehicles. 
No person shall transport or carry on any public highway or public roadway any dog or other animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle, or if travelling in an unenclosed vehicle, including, but not limited to, convertibles, pick-up and flat bed trucks, shall be confined by a container, cage, or other device that will prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.040 - Safety of animals in parked vehicles. 
No person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety, or welfare. An animal control officer, state humane officer, or police or safety officer is hereby authorized to use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety, or welfare is or will be endangered. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.050 - Prohibition against dogs harassing, threatening, or injuring persons. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to suffer or permit the same to annoy and harass, chase, threaten to inflict, or inflict injury on any person. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.055 - Dogs killing domesticated animals or other dogs. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or other domesticated animal to suffer or permit the same to cause the death of another dog or other domesticated animal, except where the offending animal is acting in self-defense, or where the incident occurs on the property of the owner of the offending animal. The poundmaster may impound any dog or domesticated animal found at large in violation of this section, and the poundmaster may declare the dog or domesticated animal to be a vicious animal and proceed under the procedure set forth in Section 6.20.050 of this code. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.060 - Prohibition against dogs threatening or injuring wild game or livestock. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to suffer or permit the same, under any circumstances, to chase, threaten to inflict or inflict injury, of any kind on any wild game or on any domestic livestock, including cows, sheep, horses, and chickens. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.070 - Defecating on public or private property. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow or permit such animal to defecate on any public property or improved private property other than that of the owner. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.080 - Unrestrained vicious animals or potentially dangerous dogs. 
It is unlawful to permit any vicious animal or potentially dangerous dog to go unrestrained. Any vicious animal or potentially dangerous dog may be required by written order of the poundmaster to be confined to its owner's premises and allowed at liberty only under the direct control of the owner while on a substantial leash, not exceeding six feet in length, and properly muzzled to prevent harm or injury to the public. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], § 20, 10-21-09)  
6.16.090 - Prima facia evidence of violations. 
Proof that an animal was found at large in violation of any of the provisions of this title, together with proof that the defendant was the owner of such animal at the time, shall constitute prima facia evidence that the defendant allowed or permitted the animal to be at large or otherwise act in violation of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.100 - Number of dogs/cats kept in any one place. 
It is unlawful for any person other than a duly licensed veterinarian or dog kennel operator to keep or maintain more than four cats or four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four at or within any one residence within the city. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. No. 16.132, § 5, 5-1-2013)  
6.16.110 - Habitual animal noise. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog, cat, or other animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking, or other noise disturbs or annoys any person. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.120 - Prohibition against permitting livestock or wild animals to trespass or be at large. 
No person owning or having care, custody, or control of any ox, steer, bull, cow, horse, calf, sheep, goat or hog, or any animal commonly referred to as a wild species shall: 
A.  Permit such animal to be at large in the city; 
B.  Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley, park or other public place; 
C.  Tie, stake or pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the city, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit any such animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property; 
D.  Permit any such animal to be, or remain during the nighttime, secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.130 - Possession of wild animal species prohibited. 
A.  Prohibition. No person shall possess, keep, or have custody or control of, any animal belonging to a "wild species" as defined in Section 2118 of the California Fish and Game Code, anywhere in the city. 
B.  Exemption. This title shall not apply to persons having a valid permit from the State Department of Fish and Game under Fish and Game Code Sections 2150 et seq., to possess an animal belonging to a wild species on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. However, this title shall apply to any such person whose preexisting valid permit expires and is not renewed, or is revoked. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.140 - Cinches, saddle girths and bucking and flanking straps. 
No sharp or cutting objects in cinch, saddle girth or flank straps shall be permitted. Only sheepskin-lined flanking straps shall be used on bucking stock and shall be of the quick-release type. Flank straps shall be placed on the animal so the sheepskin-covered portion is over both flanks and belly of the animal. Flanking straps shall be released immediately upon the completion of any event in which they are employed. Bucking or flanking straps shall not be overtightened, or otherwise used to torment, torture or practice any cruelty on any animal, as such terms are defined in Section 599(b) of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.150 - Electric prods. 
The use of electric prods on livestock in rodeos and similar contests shall not be permitted to be used to torture, torment or practice cruelty on any animal, as such terms are defined in Section 599(b) of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.160 - Bloodless bullfights. 
Bloodless bullfights are prohibited. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.170 - Animal control officers present at rodeos and similar events. 
Animal control officers shall be present at all rodeos and similar events to ensure that animals participating in or being utilized in those types of events are not tortured, tormented or treated with cruelty as such terms are defined in Section 599(b) of the California Penal Code or as defined by local ordinance. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.180 - Use of steel-jawed, leg-hold traps. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set, triggered, activated or used, any steel-jawed, leg-hold trap to be used for the capture of any animal, except as provided in California Health and Safety Code, Section 1803. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.16.190 - Lack of proper care. 
It is unlawful for any owner, driver or keeper of any animal to permit the animal to be in any building, enclosure, lane, street, square or lot within the City of Scotts Valley without proper care or attention. 
(Ord. 86.3[a], § 21, 10-21-09)  
Chapter 6.18 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT—ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS 
 
6.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a clear and explicit process for the administrative enforcement of animal control regulations as set forth in Title 8 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. The administrative enforcement procedures are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other applicable enforcement procedures set forth in this Code or in state law, including those set forth in this title and Title 4. As used herein the term "animal shelter general manager" shall refer to the animal shelter general manager employed by the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority, and the term "animal shelter control officer" shall refer to any animal shelter control officer employed by the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.020 - Scope. 
This chapter sets forth procedures for the administrative enforcement of animal control regulations in the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.030 - Administrative citation. 
The animal shelter general manager or any animal shelter control officer may issue an administrative citation assessing a civil penalty to any person violating any provision of this title. 
A.  Administrative penalties established pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed and collected as set forth herein. 
B.  Each provision of this title that is violated constitutes a separate offense. Each and every day a violation of any provision of this title exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  A civil penalty assessed by an administrative citation shall be payable directly to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter. 
D.  Civil penalties assessed by an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.040 - Procedure for administrative citations. 
A.  The animal shelter general manager or any animal shelter control officer may issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for a violation of this title. 
B.  When a violation of any of the provisions of this title is identified, the animal shelter general manager or an animal shelter control officer shall identify the owner or responsible party and issue an administrative citation. A responsible party shall be deemed to be the person who is in immediate control of the animal or activity that constitutes a violation. 
C.  The administrative citation shall be issued on a form prescribed by the animal shelter general manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The form shall be titled "Administrative Citation." 
2.  The date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed. 
3.  The provisions of this title violated and a description of the violation. 
4.  A description of the action required to correct the violation. 
5.  An order to the owner or responsible party to correct the violation(s) within a time specified and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s). 
6.  The amount of monetary penalty for each violation. 
7.  An explanation of how the penalty shall be paid and directing that it be made payable to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter, the time period within which it shall be paid, and the address at which the penalty payment shall be remitted or mailed. 
8.  A statement regarding the right to appeal the administrative citation, including the time within which the appeal must be filed, the place to obtain a notice of appeal and request for administrative citation appeal hearing form. 
9.  The name and signature of the officer issuing the administrative citation and, if possible, the signature of the owner or responsible party acknowledging receipt of the citation. 
10.  A single administrative citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for the violation of one or more provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.050 - Service of administrative citations. 
The animal shelter general manager or his/her designee shall issue any required notice to the owner or responsible party of the violation in the following manner: 
A.  Personal Service. The animal shelter general manager, or his/her designee, shall attempt to locate and personally serve the owner or responsible party and, if possible, obtain the signature of the owner or responsible party on the administrative citation. If the owner or responsible party served refuses or fails to sign the citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation or subsequent proceedings and the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee shall make service of the citation as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Mail. If for any reason the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee is unable to personally serve the citation on the owner or responsible party, the citation shall be mailed to the owner or responsible party by first class mail, postage prepaid, with a declaration of service under penalty of perjury. The declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. The failure of any owner, responsible party, or person with an interest in the animal, where applicable, to receive a properly addressed citation shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter. Service of the citation in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
C.  Posting of Citation. As an alternative to service by mail, and if the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee is unable for any reason to personally serve the owner or responsible party, the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee may post the citation by affixing the citation to a surface in a conspicuous location on any real property in which the owner or responsible party has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. Failure of a posted citation to remain in place after posting shall in no way affect the validity of the citation or the proceeding. Service shall be deemed effective pursuant to posting on the date that the citation is actually posted. 
D.  The failure of any owner or responsible party to receive any notice served in accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter when the owner or responsible party has actual notice of these proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.060 - Opportunity to correct violation. 
Upon the issuance of an administrative citation that has been served upon an owner or responsible party, the owner or responsible party shall be allowed seven days to correct or remedy the violation(s), except thirty days are allowed to correct a spay/neuter violation. If the owner or responsible party properly corrects the violation(s), he or she shall not be assessed an administrative penalty. If the owner or responsible party fails to correct or remedy the violation(s), administrative penalties shall be assessed from the date written upon the citation. This section shall not be construed to waive any fee or payment that would ordinarily be required pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.070 - Satisfaction of an administrative citation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the owner or responsible party must do the following: 
1.  Pay the administrative penalty to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter; and 
2.  Demonstrate to the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee that the violation has been corrected or remedied, if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. The animal shelter general manager or his/her designee may not accept payment of an administrative penalty unless the owner or responsible party has demonstrated that the violation(s) has been corrected or remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected or remedied within the time set forth in Section 6.18.060, no administrative penalty shall be imposed. 
B.  If an owner or responsible party fails to properly correct or remedy a continuing violation in accordance with Section 6.18.060 or otherwise, the owner or responsible party shall pay the accrued administrative penalty amount to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter. Penalty amounts shall continue to accrue as specified until the date the owner or responsible party satisfies the administrative citation or files a notice of appeal. Payment of an accrued penalty shall not excuse or discharge the owner's responsibility to correct or remedy the cited violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the animal shelter general manager. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.080 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  An owner or responsible party receiving an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this title or that he or she is the responsible party by completing a notice of appeal and request for appeal hearing form and filing it with the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter within ten calendar days from the date of issuance of the citation. Any appeal of the administrative citation must include a detailed written explanation of the grounds for appeal. 
B.  The filing of a notice of appeal does not stay, postpone or excuse the owner or responsible party's duty to correct or remedy a violation. If the administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative citation, the applicable penalty shall accrue as of the date on the administrative citation. 
C.  The failure to submit a timely and complete notice of appeal shall terminate a person's right to contest the administrative citation, result in a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and the administrative citation shall then serve as a final determination and conclusive evidence of the named owner or responsible party's liability. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.090 - Administrative hearing officers. 
Duties. The Board of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority shall provide independent contractor hearing officers to conduct administrative appeal hearings, to issue subpoenas, to receive evidence, to administer oaths, to rule on questions of law and the admissibility of evidence, to prepare a record of the proceedings, to issue enforcement orders with regard to violations of this title, and to provide for the recovery of enforcement costs, any civil penalties and any other costs of abatement as a personal obligation of the owner or responsible party violating, causing, permitting or continuing the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.100 - Notice of administrative appeal hearing. 
Upon receipt of a timely and complete notice of appeal, the animal shelter general manager or his/her designee shall provide written notice of the time, date and location of a hearing before the administrative hearing officer by personal service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, including a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing to the owner or responsible party alleged to have violated this chapter, and to any other person known to own or possess the animal(s) which are the subject of the citation, at least ten days prior to the date of the administrative hearing. The hearing officer shall be designated by the animal shelter general manager. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.110 - Administrative hearing officer disqualification. 
Administrative hearing officers shall be licensed attorneys of the State Bar of California in good standing. An administrative hearing officer shall disqualify himself/herself from serving as hearing officer in a particular matter where he/she has a conflict of interest within the meaning of the Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 87100 et seq.), and shall otherwise comply with the disqualification provisions of Canon 3.E. of the Code of Judicial Ethics. The notice of hearing shall also identify the administrative hearing officer designated to conduct the hearing and advise the recipient(s) of their right to submit within ten business days of the date of the notice of hearing a written objection to the designated hearing officer. In the event of such a disqualification, a new administrative hearing officer shall be randomly selected from the panel of alternate hearing officers established by the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority. Each party shall only have the right to disqualify one administrative hearing officer for a particular matter. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.120 - Hearing procedures. 
A.  Requirements for Taking Testimony. In any appeal hearing before an administrative hearing officer, oral testimony offered as evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation, and the hearing officer, his/her clerk, or other designee shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. Oaths of witnesses may be given individually or en masse. Witnesses shall be asked to raise their right hands and to swear or affirm that the testimony they shall give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. 
B.  The owner, agent, persons responsible for the violation and appealing the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the alleged violation(s). 
C.  The administrative hearing officer may impose conditions and deadlines for correction of violations or payment of outstanding penalties. 
D.  The failure of the owner or responsible party who receives an administrative citation to appear at the administrative appeal hearing or, in the alternative, to present written or demonstrative evidence shall constitute an admission of the violation by that owner or responsible party and an admission that the amount of the civil penalty is appropriate and shall also constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies that may bar judicial review. 
E.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the animal shelter general manager, or his/her designee, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
F.  The administrative hearing officer shall only consider evidence relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the owner or responsible party has caused, maintained, or allowed the violation(s) of this title that was subject to the citation. 
G.  The administrative hearing officer shall not be required to provide transcripts of hearings, but shall be required to tape record the hearings and make the recordings of the hearings available for a fee. 
H.  Continuances. The administrative hearing officer may continue the administrative hearing for good cause as determined by the administrative hearing officer. 
I.  Administrative Interpretations. In conducting the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall consider as controlling the previously established interpretation of any provision of this title by the officials charged with its enforcement unless that interpretation is shown to be clearly erroneous or unauthorized. 
J.  Administrative Hearing Officer Decisions. At the conclusion of the administrative hearing held on the alleged violation(s), the administrative hearing officer shall have the authority, subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, to render a decision, supported by written findings, which: 
1.  Determines whether the owner or responsible party has committed, maintained or permitted the alleged violation(s) of this chapter. 
2.  Orders the payment of the total verified amount of the enforcement costs and other abatement costs by any such owner or responsible party found to have committed or permitted the violation(s). 
3.  Orders the payment of civil penalties to be paid by any such owner or responsible party found to have committed or permitted the violation(s). 
4.  Orders action to be taken to correct any violation(s) by any such owner or responsible party found to have committed or permitted the violation(s). 
5.  Determines whether any enforcement costs, other abatement costs, and civil penalties are to be the personal obligation of the owner or responsible party committing or permitting the violation(s). 
6.  In determining the amount of civil penalties to be assessed against any owner or responsible party violating a provision of this chapter, which would otherwise be an infraction or a misdemeanor, the administrative hearing officer shall take into consideration the following: 
a.  The extent to which the owner or responsible party knowingly and willingly committed the violation(s); 
b.  The magnitude of the violation(s); 
c.  Any prior history of related violation(s) by the same owner or responsible party; 
d.  The financial ability of the owner or responsible party to pay based on submitted documentation; 
e.  Any corrective action voluntarily undertaken by the owner or responsible party prior to the hearing to eliminate the violation(s) and any other mitigating circumstances justifying a reduction of the amount of the penalties. 
7.  The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final when issued in writing and shall be thereafter immediately enforceable. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall include a statement of the judicial appeal rights of any party to the proceeding as set forth in subsection J.8. of this section. 
8.  The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. Pursuant to Section 53069.4 a notice of appeal must be filed with the Santa Cruz County Superior Court Clerk, together with the applicable appeal fee, within twenty days after service of the administrative hearing officer's decision by first class mail, postage prepaid, including a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing. Any person filing a Superior Court appeal shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal in person or by first class mail on the administrative hearing officer with a copy to the animal shelter general manager. Within fifteen days of the Superior Court's request, the administrative hearing officer shall forward to the court the file of the hearing together with the subject notice of violation, the notice of administrative appeal hearing before an administrative hearing officer, and the decision of the administrative hearing officer. If a Superior Court appeal is not timely filed in accordance with this subsection, all persons shall thereafter be barred from commencing or prosecuting any such action or proceeding concerning the underlying violation or asserting any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of the administrative hearing officer's decision, proceedings, determinations or actions taken in connection therewith. 
9.  The administrative hearing officer shall submit the decision to the animal shelter general manager. 
10.  The Santa Cruz County Counsel upon receipt of a final decision of an administrative hearing officer which orders payment of civil penalties or payment of enforcement costs or other abatement costs, or upon obtaining authorization from the Board of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority, may, in addition to any other collection procedures provided by this chapter, prepare and file a civil action on behalf of the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority and Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain compliance with the administrative decision or Title 8 regulations, to recover the civil penalties and costs of enforcement provided by this chapter and for injunctive relief or any other available legal remedy. In addition, the animal shelter general manager, or his or her designee, may prepare and file small claims actions in this regard or pursue collection by any available legal remedy. 
11.  In the event a civil action is initiated to obtain enforcement of the decision of the administrative hearing officer, and judgment is entered to enforce the decision, the person against whom the order of enforcement has been entered shall be liable to pay the County's total costs of enforcement, including reasonable attorney fees. 
12.  The remedies and civil penalties provided for in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies and penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.130 - Penalties and costs assessed. 
A.  The Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority may establish a civil penalty schedule setting forth the penalty to be assessed by an administrative citation for violation of a particular provision of this title in accordance with California Government Code Section 53069.4(a)(1) and may, in connection therewith, also authorize the reductions specified therein for timely payment. 
B.  If the animal owner or responsible party fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same continuing violation(s). The amount of the penalty shall increase at a rate specified in subsection C. of this section or the civil penalty schedule provided for in subsection A. of this section. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by subsection D. of this section, the civil penalty assessed by administrative citation for violation of a provision of this title shall be as follows: 
1.  First administrative citation: $100.00; 
2.  Second administrative citation within one year for violation of the same code section: $200.00; 
3.  Third or subsequent administrative citation within one year for violation of the same code section: $500.00. 
D.  The civil penalty assessed by the administrative citation for the following violations shall be as set forth below: 
1.  Failure to display license (each dog): $50.00. 
2.  Dog off leash, first offense: $50.00. 
3.  Dog off leash, second offense within one year: $100.00. 
4.  Dog off leash, third offense within one year: $150.00. 
5.  Failure of owner to pick up after dog or cat defecation: $100.00. 
6.  Noisy animals (SCMC Section 8.14.390): $100.00. 
7.  Permitting livestock to trespass, per offense: $200.00. 
E.  Payment of the civil penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority or the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter. All assessed penalties and enforcement costs assessed shall be payable to the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter. 
F.  Penalties collected in the manner described in this section may be deposited in an animal shelter fund or other appropriate designated account. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.140 - Failure to pay civil penalties. 
A.  Any person who fails to pay a civil penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall owe a debt to the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority. To enforce the debt, the animal shelter general manager may file a claim with the small claims court, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect the amount owed. 
B.  Any person who fails to pay any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter on or before the penalty payment due date shall also be liable in any action brought by the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority and/or the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter for all costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and attorney fees. Such collection costs are in addition to any required costs, penalties, interest and late charges. 
C.  In addition to all of the procedures set forth in this section, the animal shelter general manager shall have the ability and discretion to impose necessary conditions, to forgive portions of a debt or penalty owed to the Santa Cruz County Animal Services Authority under this chapter, and to otherwise coordinate collection and enforcement efforts. A written finding explaining the basis for each action taken pursuant to this subsection shall be prepared and maintained by the animal shelter general manager, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
6.18.150 - Civil or criminal actions not affected. 
Any administrative citation pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other action, civil or criminal, that may be brought to abate a public nuisance or violation or prevent the city from seeking compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same public nuisance or violation. 
(Ord. No. 16.134, § 1, 7-2-2014)  
Chapter 6.20 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
6.20.010 - Enforcement powers. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code, the poundmaster and his designated deputies are hereby authorized to arrest a person without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence which is a violation of this title or state law relative to animal control. Upon making such an arrest, the poundmaster or his designated deputy shall release the person arrested pursuant to Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the provisions of which are hereby adopted by reference as part of this section. The poundmaster and his designated deputies are further authorized to issue citations for any violation of this title or state law relative to animal control. 
B.  The poundmaster, or his designated deputies, are hereby expressly authorized, when acting in the course and scope of their official duties, to capture or, if no other reasonably effective means of control is available, to dispatch any dog found at large in the act of violating Section 6.16.060. 
C.  Any person who finds any dog upon his or her property without permission in violation of this title may use any reasonable means to capture such dog for the purpose of delivering it to the poundmaster for impoundment. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.20.020 - Badges. 
The poundmaster and his deputies while engaged in the execution of their duties shall wear in plain view a badge having, in the case of the poundmaster, the word "Poundmaster," and in the case of the deputy pound-master, the words "Deputy Poundmaster" engraved thereon. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.20.030 - Interference with poundmaster. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with the poundmaster or deputy poundmaster in the discharge of their official duties. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.20.040 - Statement of name, exhibition of license and evidence of vaccination. 
No person owning or having charge, care, or control of any dog shall fail or refuse to state his true name and residence address, or to exhibit evidence of rabies vaccination or the license certificate required by this title when requested to do so by the poundmaster or any peace officer of this city or the county health officer. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
6.20.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 86.3[a], § 22, adopted Oct. 21, 2009, repealed § 6.20.050, which pertained to detention and destruction of animals declared to be vicious or habitual offenders and derived from Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987.  
6.20.060 - Penalties. 
A.  Violation of any of the provisions of this title, except for violations of Sections 6.04.090, 6.04.100, 6.04.110, 6.08.010(f), 6.16.055, 6.16.080, 6.16.140, 6.16.150, 6.16.160, 6.16.180, 6.16.190, 6.20.030 and 6.02.040, an infraction punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars for the first offense, a fine of fifty dollars for the second offense and a fine of one hundred dollars for the third or subsequent offense. 
B.  Violation of any of the provisions of Sections 6.04.090, 6.04.100, 6.04.110, 6.08.010(f), 6.16.055, 6.16.080, 6.16.140, 6.16.150, 6.16.160, 6.16.180, 6.16.190, 6.20.030 and 6.02.040 is a misdemeanor and punishable as such by fine and/or imprisonment. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 86.3[a], § 23, 10-21-09)  
6.20.070 - Inspection authority. 
The poundmaster and his designees are hereby empowered to inspect and take necessary actions to stop all practices that cause animal torment or torture, or involve cruelty to any animal, as such terms are defined in Section 599(b) of the California Penal Code. To ensure that minimum standards for animal housing and care are being provided, pet shops and kennels shall also be inspected and licensed; provided, however, that no such inspection and/or licensing shall occur until the poundmaster has first promulgated rules and regulations regarding minimum standards of animal housing and care, including provisions for the enforcement thereof, and such rules and regulations have been approved by the city council. Fees for licensing and inspection shall be as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 86.2 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Title 7 - CITY PARKS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 7.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
7.04.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the "City Park Ordinance." 
(Ord. 147 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  "City" means the city of Scotts Valley. 
B.  "Recreation Division Manager" means the public works director or his/her designee. 
C.  "Park" means and includes all grounds, buildings, improvements, and areas dedicated to use by the public for park, recreation or open space purposes, and any part, portion or area thereof, whether developed or undeveloped, or property over which the city has acquired right of use for such purposes. 
D.  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, business trust, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
E.  "Vehicle" means and includes any wheeled device of conveyance whether propelled by motor, animal or human power. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any kind, size or description. Exception is made for vehicles in the service of the city and for baby carriages, strollers and wheelchairs. 
(Ord. 147 § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 147.1 § 1, 1994)  
7.04.040 - Statement of principles. 
All parks within the city are held in trust for the use of the public. Included within such use are public assembly, communication of thoughts between citizens and discussion of public questions. These uses of the city's parks are recognized as privileges, immunities, rights and liberties belonging to all citizens, regardless of sex, race, religion, color, national origin, or political or philosophical persuasion. It is also recognized that the right to use the parks is not absolute, but relative, and must be exercised in subordination to the general comfort and convenience and in consonance with peace and good order. 
(Ord. 147 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7.04.060 - Rules and regulations—Administration—Scope. 
A.  The public works department shall administer and protect the city parks for use and enjoyment by the public. The recreation division manager shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to be observed by the public in the use of city parks or portions thereof, and shall maintain in the recreation division manager's office and in the office of the city clerk a file of all such rules and regulations which shall be open to public inspection during normal business hours. 
B.  Said rules and regulations shall promote the preservation of public property and its maintenance in a clean and safe condition, the protection of health and safety of the public in general, and the enjoyment of parks by the public as places of recreation and repose. Said rules and regulations shall be adopted only after a public hearing at which time the recreation division manager shall afford any interested person the opportunity to present statements in writing, with or without opportunity to present the same orally. The recreation division manager shall consider all relevant matters presented to him/her before adopting or amending any regulation. Notice of said hearing shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to such hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
C.  It is unlawful to violate any rule or regulation promulgated and adopted as provided in subsection A above. Any person who violates a park and recreation rule or regulation shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalties provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 147.2 § 1, 2001).  
Chapter 7.08 - PARK PERMITS FOR SPECIAL USES AND EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
7.08.010 - Special uses and areas. 
A.  The recreation division manager may select and designate specific areas and facilities in any park which may be limited to special uses, at all times or at certain times, for which a permit in writing or a reservation shall be necessary. 
B.  Such uses may include, but are not limited to, sports, games, or other recreational activities, picnics, assemblies, entertainments, performances, concerts, exhibitions and weddings. 
C.  Such uses may be restricted at specific times to specified classes of persons, so long as such classification is reasonably necessary therefor, such as, but not limited to, young children and persons attending them, persons of specified ages or any other reasonable classification. Use of the park shall be open to all regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, ancestry, language, political beliefs or affiliations, financial means or education, to facilitate and enhance the widest possible use of parks and park facilities by the public. 
(Ord. 147 § 2 (part), 1991)  
7.08.020 - Permit procedures and conditions. 
A.  No permit or reservation for the use of any park or any picnic area, assembly area, activity area, sports area or other facility in a park shall be refused or limited, nor shall any conditions be attached to the grant or exercise thereof, for any reason not related to the safe, reasonable and orderly use of park facilities. 
B.  Each application for a permit or reservation must be received at a designated office in the city recreation division not less than twenty days nor more than ninety days in advance of the date for which such permit or reservation is requested. The recreation division manager may waive such minimum or maximum time requirements if it is determined that such waiver is in the best interests of the city. Upon granting any permit or reservation, the recreation division manager may attach reasonable conditions thereto respecting the time, place, manner, frequency, duration and maximum number of persons who may attend any meeting, assembly, activity or event to be held in any city park or park facility pursuant to said permit or reservation. 
C.  The recreation division manager shall grant or deny each application for a permit or reservation within ten calendar days after the date of receipt of the application, unless the time for such action has been waived by the applicant. The decision granting or denying said application shall be mailed the applicant at the address listed on the application. The applicant shall not consider the permit to have been granted until the permit is received. 
D.  The recreation division manager may grant, deny or limit any permit or reservation after considering the suitability of the area or facility for the number of persons expected at such function, whether or not the activity pro- posed is a legal use thereof, the impact of the proposed use upon public property, the effect of the proposed use upon the peaceful enjoyment of the park by members of the public attending and those not attending said event or activity, the effect of the proposed use upon the peace and convenience of members of the public using private or public property or the public streets in the vicinity of said area or facility, the public health and safety, any traffic or parking problems which may be caused by attendance at such activity or event and the equitable sharing of the use of such facility. The recreation division manager or the public works department is specifically authorized to attach reasonable restrictions and conditions to activities to occur at the event, including but not limited to, restrictions on fires, amplified sound, consumption of alcoholic beverages, dancing, sports, the use or presence of animals, the use of equipment or vehicles, the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage within a specific park area, or the creation of any sounds, smoke, light, smell or any other thing which appears likely to create any unreasonable risk of harm or substantial annoyance to any person using said park or to the public, or damage to any public or private property. Violation of any of the terms and conditions of any permit issued under this chapter by the permittee, or any agent, servant or employee of permittee, shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of said permit by designated city employee. 
E.  The recreation division manager may require in connection with any use permit or reservation that adequate police protection be furnished by the permittee and that the permittee provide additional sanitary facilities, refuse receptacles, or make any other reasonable arrangements, based on the type of activity for which the permit or reservation is requested. 
F.  The recreation division manager shall refuse to grant a permit where conditions cannot be met or are not accepted. The applicant must agree to provide a means of informing all of the persons participating in the proposed activity of the terms and conditions of the use permit, if any. 
G.  No permit or reservation for use of any facility in a city park shall be transferable without the consent in writing of the recreation division manager. 
H.  Upon the granting of a permit under this chapter, any fees or deposits established by the city council or conditions related thereto shall be paid or complied with by the applicant before the effective date of said permit. If said fees or deposits are not paid before the effective date of said permit, then, in that event, the permit issued shall be null and void. 
I.  Each person to whom a permit has been granted shall agree in writing, to indemnify and hold the city, its officers, agents and employees, harmless from and against any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the permitted activity of the permittee and said person shall be liable to the city for any and all damage to parks, facilities and buildings owned or controlled by the city, which results from any act or omission of the permittee or is caused by any participant in said activity. Additionally, each person to whom a permit or a reservation is granted shall agree in writing, to waive all claims or causes of action against the city, its officers, employees or agents which such person may have at any time for damage to or loss of property of any type or form or for injury to persons in, about or upon the permitted or reserved facilities, from any cause or causes arising at any time, except for the sole negligence or wilful act(s) of the city, its officers, employees or agents, and to which the person to whom a permit or reservation is granted in no way contributed, either actively or passively, to causing such damage, loss or injury, either directly or through any other person, agent, partner, contractor or associate. 
J.  The recreation division manager may, if the proposed use of park facilities involves risk of damage or injury to persons or to property of others, require the permittee to obtain a policy of public liability insurance with terms and limits of liability as determined by the city to be appropriate for the activity for which the permit is requested. Said policy shall name the city, its officers, agents and employees, as insureds, be primary coverage and shall insure said insureds against all claims, suits and demands of any and all persons for injury, including death or damage sustained by any person or persons arising out of any act or omission of the permittee related to such use of any city park or recreation facility. Any such policy must be approved by the city. 
(Ord. 147 § 2 (part), 1991)  
7.08.040 - Amplified music. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies acting within the scope of their official employment, to install, use or operate within a city park, a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purpose of transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons within a city park without filing a registration statement with and obtaining a permit from the chief of police or his designee. 
B.  The chief of police or his designee shall grant the permit required under this section unless he finds that the loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment will disturb the public peace or the quiet, peace and comfort of the community or any neighborhood therein or is otherwise creating a public nuisance. 
C.  The chief of police or his designee shall be empowered at any time to revoke the permit required under this section if it is found that the loudspeaker or sound- amplifying equipment disturbs the public peace or the quiet, peace and comfort of the community or any neighborhood therein, or is otherwise creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 147 § 2 (part), 1991)  
7.08.060 - General sound regulation. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound which disturbs the peace or quiet within any area of a city park or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness utilizing any facility in a city park. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) the level of the sound; (2) the intensity of the sound; (3) whether the nature of the sound is usual or unusual; (4) the level and intensity of the background sound, if any; (5) the type of area within which the sound emanates; (6) the intensity of human use of the area during the time at which the sound emanates; (7) the time of the day or night the sound occurs; (8) the duration of the sound and; (9) whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(Ord. 147 § 2 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 7.10 - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SKATEBOARD PARKS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
7.10.010 - Definitions. 
"Scooter" is defined as a nonmotorized vehicle that has two wheels with a low footboard between them, is steered by a handlebar, and is propelled by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other on the footboard. 
"Skateboard park" is a public facility designed specifically for use by persons riding skateboards, skates or scooters and which is designated a "skateboard park" by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 1, 7-7-2004; Ord. No. 175.4, § 1, 2-15-2012)  
7.10.020 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person in a skateboard park shall: 
(1)  Be in the skateboard park without wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads at all times, unless that person is the parent or adult guardian of a child under the age of ten using the skateboard park; 
(2)  If under the age of ten, enter or use the skateboard park unless accompanied by a parent or adult guardian; 
(3)  Ride, operate, or utilize any device other than skateboard, skates or a scooter; 
(4)  Use, consume, or possess food, beverages, glass bottles, or any breakable item in the skateboard park; 
(5)  Place or utilize additional obstacles or other materials; 
(6)  Engage in reckless behavior or any other activity that could endanger the safety of persons using the skate facility or spectators. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 1, 7-7-2004; Ord. No. 175.1, § 1, 1-19-2005; Ord. No. 175.3, § 1, 6-7-2006; Ord. No. 175.4, § 2, 2-15-2012)  
7.01.030 - Required signage. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works shall erect and maintain visible signs at all skateboard parks which shall afford notice that any person failing to abide by the following conditions will be subject to citation under Section 1.08.010 of this Code: 
(1)  Any person in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads at all times. 
(2)  Any person under the age of ten (10) shall be accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 1, 7-7-2004; Ord. No. 175.3, § 2, 6-7-2006)  
7.10.040 - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to comply with an provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable in accordance with Title 4 of the Municipal Code, except as provided in section (b) below. 
(b)  Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Chapter 7.10 shall be punishable by fine only as follows: (i) upon a first conviction, by a fine of not exceeding thirty dollars ($30.00); (ii) for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00); (iii) for each additional violation of the same section of this Chapter 7.10 within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Ord. No. 175.1, § 2, 1-19-2005)  
7.10.050 - Skateboard park closure. 
In the event of an incident of vandalism or graffiti to the skateboard park, failure to comply with park rules or in order to protect or maintain the public health, safety and welfare, in its sole discretion, the City Council, the Recreation Division Manager, the City Manager or the Chief of Police, or their authorized representatives, may close the skateboard park for 72 hours or for such amount of time as necessary to remove or repair the vandalism or graffiti or to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The closure and the reason for such closure shall be posted at the entrance of the Park. 
(Ord. No. 175.2, § 1, 4-6-2005; Ord. No. 175.5, § 1, 10-4-2017)  
Chapter 7.12 - PROHIBITED AND REGULATED ACTIVITIES 
Sections: 
 
7.12.010 - Intoxicating beverages—Prohibitions and conditions. 
A.  The recreation division manager may designate certain city parks or certain areas or facilities in certain city parks, wherein the possession of intoxicating beverages is prohibited or limited. Notice of the prohibition or limitation shall be posted in each park area or facility in which such prohibitions or limitations apply. 
B.  No person shall possess any intoxicating beverages in any area of any city park or park facility where prohibited. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.020 - Powered models—Operation restrictions. 
No person shall operate in any park, any model airplane, boat, car, rocket or other device that is powered by a rocket motor, an internal combustion engine, or other power source, except in an area and at such times as are designated for such use by the recreation division manager. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.030 - Golf. 
No person shall hit any golf ball or use any golfing equipment in any city park except in an area designated for such use by the recreation division manager. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.040 - Water pollution prohibited. 
No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise deposit or cause or permit to be placed into the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay pool or any body of water in or adjacent to any city park, or any tributary stream, storm sewer, sanitary sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid, solid or gas, which materially impairs the usefulness of such water for persons or the habitability of such water for any animal, bird, fish or reptile which drinks, swims in or otherwise uses said water. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.050 - Guns, dangerous instruments and fireworks prohibited—Exceptions. 
A.  No person, except an authorized city employee or a peace officer, shall bring into a city park or possess, use or discharge therein any of the following articles or instruments: any firearm or ammunition, any explosive, dynamite cap, fireworks, air gun, pellet gun, spring gun, slingshot, crossbow, bow and arrow, any weapon or instrument by means of which any missile can be propelled, any instrument which can be loaded with blank cartridges, any kind of trapping device, any poisonous substance, any incendiary bomb, any tear gas or other disabling chemical or agent, any inflammable liquid except motor vehicle fuel contained in the fuel tank of a vehicle, lantern or camp stove, and not more than one gallon of liquid fuel in a closed metal container, or any acid or caustic substance; except for uses authorized by permit or contract. 
B.  No person shall discharge any of the above-described weapons or instruments into the park limits from outside the limits of a park. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.060 - Damaging park property—Prohibited acts designated. 
Unless authorized in writing by the recreation division manager to do so, no person shall: 
A.  Pick, saw, chop, carve, cut, remove or damage any flowers, seeds, bark, branches, twigs, leaves or blossoms of any tree, plant, shrub, vine, bush or other vegetation in any park of the city; 
B.  Drive any nail, screw, bolt or staple into, or attach any wire, rope or other fastening device to any tree or plant in any park of the city; 
C.  Mark, deface, damage, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, chair, bench, fireplace, barrier, fence, railing, paving or paving material, water pipe or light, or any sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, or any cultural, natural or historic artifact, or monument stake, post or other boundary marker, or any other structure, equipment, facility or property, or part or appurtenance thereof whatsoever, in or from any park of the city; 
D.  Cut or remove any sand, wood, turf, grass, gravel, stone or timber in or from any park of the city, or make any excavation by any tool, equipment, blasting or by any other means in any park of the city; 
E.  Paint, erect, mark, post or fasten on or to any tree, shrub, fence, wall, building, monument or other property in any park any poster, bill, advertisement, inscription, sign or display. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any such thing that is authorized or required to be so placed by the recreation division manager; 
F.  Take or operate a vehicle upon or over any lawn or landscaping in any park of the city. The city will determine repair or replacement costs in event of damage. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.070 - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall deposit, drop or scatter any garbage, trash or rubbish, including, but not limited to, any glass, paper, cans, ashes, leaves and cuttings, furniture, appliances or concrete in any city park except in a receptacle designed and placed to receive the same; nor shall any person import into or deposit in any city park from any other place any such garbage, trash or rubbish. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.080 - Fires—Permission required when—Other restrictions. 
A.  No person shall kindle or maintain in any city park any outdoor fire, except a cooking fire or fire in a portable lantern, without first having obtained permission in writing from the recreation division manager to do so and then only as authorized in subsection B of this section. 
B.  No person shall kindle or maintain in any city park any outdoor cooking fire in any place other than in a stove, fireplace or barbecue pit maintained by the public works department or in a portable barbecue or camp stove used safely in a designated picnic or cooking area in such park, or in such other location as may be authorized in writing by the recreation division manager. 
C.  In kindling or maintaining an outdoor cooking fire in any city park, no person shall use any fuel except paper, wood; charcoal or chemical fire starter; standard camp stove fuel, liquefied petroleum gas in a camp stove; or permit the same to produce any noxious fumes or smoke. 
D.  Camp stoves, portable barbecues or hibachis shall not be placed in such a manner in any city park so as to: 
1.  Scorch, burn or otherwise damage lawns or table tops; 
2.  Be within thirty feet of any flammable material such as dried grass or weeds, brush or buildings. 
E.  No person who kindles or maintains any outdoor fire in a city park shall leave the area where the fire is located without completely extinguishing the fire so that it is cold to the touch. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991).  
7.12.090 - Smoking prohibited where. 
No person shall ignite or smoke any tobacco or tobacco product, or any other material, on any park trail, bridle path, park rest room or in any fire risk area, nor in any other area designated by the recreation division manager. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.100 - Vehicles—Operation and parking procedures and restrictions. 
A.  No person shall stop, park, or leave standing or unattended any vehicle, trailer or boat in any park or recreation area of the city, except in an area or space designated for parking of such objects by the recreation division manager or upon any portion of any street or highway upon which the parking of such objects is permitted, or in excess of the time prescribed therefor by any city ordinance, resolution of the city council, or permit issued by the recreation division manager. No person shall stop, park or leave standing or unattended any vehicle, trailer or boat in any area or space designated for parking of such objects by the recreation division manager so that any part of such object is within the right-of-way of any street or highway within the limits of any park or recreation area of the city. The public works department shall post signs giving notice of the vehicular restriction in those portions of city parks and recreation areas as may be affected thereby. 
B.  No person shall stop, park or leave standing or unattended any motor vehicle, trailer or boat in any portion of any city park or recreation area during any time for which the council has determined by resolution that a parking fee shall be charged for parking in said park or recreation area, unless that person shall have paid for and displayed a parking permit issued by the recreation division manager which authorizes such object to be so parked, stopped or left standing. Such permit shall be displayed in a prominent and conspicuous place in or upon the object so that it may be easily seen through the windshield thereof. 
C.  No person shall operate a vehicle, except as authorized by the recreation division manager, in any public park or recreation area within the city except upon a publicly owned street or highway which is open for public vehicular traffic within such park or recreation area. No person shall operate any vehicle on any road, street, trail or highway in any city park or recreation area at a speed greater than the speed limit established by ordinance or resolution of the city council and posted on such road, street, trail or highway, or if no speed is posted, at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour. 
D.  The city may designate areas, paths, roads or trails in any city park or recreation area where the riding of bicycles, motorcycles, minibikes, mountain bikes or other like vehicles may be permitted. No person shall ride or take any bicycle, motorcycle, minibike, mountain bike or like vehicle upon or in any area, path, road or trail in any city park or recreation area unless such activity is permitted by notices posted by the public works department. 
E.  No person shall wash, wax, dismantle or repair any vehicle, trailer, boat or other equipment, or remove any lubricant from any vehicle, trailer, boat or other equipment, or otherwise service any vehicle, trailer, boat or other equipment, in any city park or recreation area, except for emergency purposes or as authorized by the recreation division manager. 
F.  No person shall take into or operate or park or leave standing within any city park or recreation area any mechanically defective vehicle, trailer or boat, or any type vehicle that is in violation of any provision of the California Vehicle Code relating to mechanical requirements or safety of vehicles. 
G.  No person shall leave standing any vehicle, trailer or boat in any city park or recreation area, or portion thereof, at any time when such park or portion thereof is closed to the public, unless authorized in writing by the recreation division manager to do so. 
H.  Any regularly employed and salaried police, security or peace officer of the city may remove from a city park or recreation area, or portion thereof, in the manner provided and subject to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code, any vehicle, trailer or boat left therein, or on any portion thereof, in violation of this section. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.110 - Nudity. 
No person shall appear, swim, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any of the parks, lands, waters or any place owned, managed, controlled or otherwise under the jurisdiction of the city, in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, and cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering. This section shall not apply to children under the age of five years of age not using a city pool facility. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.120 - Closing time—Conditions and exceptions—Emergency closing. 
A.  Entering or Remaining After Closing Time. 
1.  No person shall enter or remain in any city park or portion thereon at any time when the same is closed to the public unless such person is authorized to do so by the city council, the recreation division manager or the authorized deputy of any of the above. 
2.  The public works department shall, by appropriate signs or other means, give notice of closing times, and may designate certain areas which will be closed to the public at a regular closing time, regardless of whether or not any outdoor or indoor activity is being or is scheduled to be conducted elsewhere in the park. 
B.  Activities After Closing Time. Any portion of a city park or any enclosed building in a city park in which an activity is being conducted or is scheduled to be conducted, with the written permission of the recreation division manager, shall not be considered closed after the regular closing time to members of the public who are authorized participants in said activity, and who are within the permitted portion of the park, the said building, any paths leading thereto from any street, or any other facility, outdoor area or off-street parking area intended for use in connection therewith, until thirty minutes after the conclusion of the permitted activity. As to other members of the public who are not participants in an activity being conducted or scheduled to be conducted in any portion of a city park, or in any enclosed building therein, the park and all buildings therein shall be considered closed at the regular closing time. 
C.  Emergency Closing. The city council, the recreation division manager, the chief of police or the fire chief, or their authorized representatives, may direct any park or designated portion thereof to be closed, or at certain times or from time to time when said closing is reasonably necessary to protect public property or natural resources within said city park or any private or public property or natural resources in the vicinity of the park from damage, or to preserve the public peace or safety in said park or portion of a park or in the vicinity thereof. Such emergency closing or limitation on hours of opening by any of the aforementioned authorities, other than the city council shall not continue in effect after the close of the next regular meeting of the city council unless said council, by resolution, shall affirm closing or limitation on hours with or without modification. 
(Ord. 147 § 3(part), 1991)  
7.12.130 - Entry after closure of city park—Prohibited. 
A.  When a city park or portion thereof is closed to the public by the council, the recreation division manager, the fire chief or the chief of police, or their authorized representatives, pursuant to the above authority or any other proper authority, no person shall enter said park or closed portion thereof after notice of such closing or fail or refuse to promptly leave the same when requested to do so by any guard, watchman, custodian, special officer, police officer or other person authorized by the council, the recreation division manager, the fire chief or the chief of police, or their authorized representatives. 
B.  No person shall unlock, open, remove, move or tamper with any gate, door, window, ventilator, skylight, screen grate, fence, lock or barrier, or any other thing maintained by the recreation division manager to exclude the public from a city park or portion thereof, or tamper with, remove or deface any sign, legend or other notice designating the same as dangerous or prohibiting entry therein. 
(Ord. 147 § 3 (part), 1991)  
7.12.140 - Overnight camping is prohibited. 
No person shall camp overnight in any city park or on any city owned property. No person shall arrange bedding or shelter in any city park or on any city owned property for the purpose of camping overnight. 
(Ord. 147.1 § 2, 1994; Ord. 147.4, § 1, 2006)  
Chapter 7.16 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
7.16.010 - Conduct—Certain persons to leave parks when—Re-entry restrictions. 
Persons who wilfully harass or interfere with any city employee(s) in the performance of their duties in a city park, or who by their conduct unreasonably interfere with the use of a city park by any other person, or who has committed a public offense in a city park or conduct themselves in an unsafe manner, shall leave the park upon request made by the ranger, park facility supervisor, park attendant, guard, or special officer authorized by the city. No person who has left the park premises after such a request shall re-enter said park until after eight a.m. of the next day. 
(Ord. 147 § 4 (part), 1991)  
7.16.020 - Exclusion or removal of certain activities, animals or materials—Conditions. 
A.  The public works department or police department may exclude, remove or require to be removed from any city park any animal, vehicle, equipment, activity, thing or material, the use or presence of which therein is likely to: 
1.  Cause an unreasonable risk of harm or danger to any person or damage to any real or personal property; 
2.  Cause any unreasonable burden of maintenance or cleanup; 
3.  Cause any unreasonable annoyance to any person on account of the emission of sound, fumes, smoke, light, vibration, smell, sight or attractiveness to birds, animals or insects. 
B.  No person shall fail to observe any rules or regulations made or lawful directions given by the recreation division manager in the exercise of the above authority. 
(Ord. 147 § 4 (part), 1991)  
7.16.030 - Nonpublic areas—Posting required—Entering or damaging property prohibited. 
By posting appropriate notices, the city may exclude the public from or limit use of any road, area, building, lands, trail, natural feature, water area or facility in a city park which is used for access, storage, parking office, residence or utility purposes, or other park or recreational use, or any combination thereof, whenever public access to the same will endanger the public health or safety, interfere with such use, or cause damage to such public property or natural resources. The recreation division manager may also by appropriate means exclude the public from the place of any construction, repair or demolition activity. No person shall enter or remain or permit any person in their control to enter or remain in any such part of a city park when the same is closed to the public, unless authorized to do so by the recreation division manager. 
(Ord. 147 § 4 (part), 1991)  
7.16.040 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 147 § 4 (part), 1991)  
7.16.050 - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 147 § 4 (part), 1991)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.01 - ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE FOOD PACKAGING 
Sections: 
 
8.01.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
(a)  "Affordable" means that a biodegradable, compostable or recyclable product may cost up to fifteen percent more than the purchase cost of the non-biodegradable, non-compostable or non-recyclable alternative(s). 
(b)  "ASTM Standard" means meeting the standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International Standards D6400 or D6868 for biodegradable and compostable plastics, as those standards may be amended. 
(c)  "Biodegradable" means the ability of organic matter to break down from a complex to a more simple form through the action of bacteria or to undergo this process. 
(d)  "City of Scotts Valley Facility" means any building, structure, property or vehicle owned and operated by the City of Scotts Valley, its agents, agencies, and departments. 
(e)  "City of Scotts Valley Contractor" means any person or entity that has a contract with the City of Scotts Valley for work or improvement to be performed, for a franchise, concession, for grant monies, goods and services, or supplies to be purchased at the expense of the City of Scotts Valley, or to be paid out of monies deposited in the Treasury or out of trust monies under the control or collected by the City of Scotts Valley. 
(f)  "Compostable" means all the materials in the product or package will break down, or otherwise become part of, usable compost (e.g. soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a safe and timely manner. Compostable disposable food service ware must meet ASTM-Standards for compostability and any bio-plastic or plastic-like product must be clearly labeled, preferably with a color symbol, to allow proper identification such that the collector and processor can easily distinguish the ASTM standard compostable plastic from non-ASTM standard compostable plastic. 
(g)  "Disposable food service ware" is interchangeable with "to go" packaging and "food packaging material" and includes: all containers, clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, lids, straws, stirrers, forks, spoons, knives, napkins and other items designed for one-time use for prepared foods, including without limitation, service ware for takeout foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by food providers. 
(h)  "Food provider" means any vendor, business, organization, entity, group or individual, including retail food establishments, located in the City of Scotts Valley that offers food or beverage to the public. 
(i)  "Person" means an individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, non-profit, including a government corporation, partnership, or association. 
(j)  "Polystyrene foam" means blown polystyrene, and expanded and extruded foams (sometimes called Styrofoam TM ) which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene foam is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays and egg cartons. 
(k)  "Prepared food" means food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared within the City of Scotts Valley. Prepared food does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or poultry sold from a butcher case or similar retail establishment. 
(l)  "Recyclable" means any material that is accepted by the City of Scotts Valley recycling program, including, but not limited to, paper, glass, aluminum, cardboard and plastic bottles, jars and tubs. 
(m)  "Retail food establishment" means all sales outlets, stores, shops, vehicles or other places of business located within the city which operate primarily to sell or convey foods or beverages directly to the ultimate consumer, which foods or beverages are predominantly contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. Retail food establishment shall include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored, manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including, but not limited to, any fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop, soda fountain, hotel, motel, movie house, theatre, bed and breakfast inn, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand, take-out prepared food place, industrial feeding establishment, catering kitchen, mobile food preparation unit, commissary, special event, grocery store, public food market, produce stand, food stand, or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale, or for service, on the premises or elsewhere, and any other establishment or operation where food is processed, prepared, stored, served or provided for the public and any organization, group or individual which provides food as part of its service. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.020 - Prohibited disposable food service ware. 
(a)  Food providers within the City of Scotts Valley may not provide prepared food in any disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene foam. 
(b)  The City shall not provide disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene foam for use in any City of Scotts Valley facility. 
(c)  City of Scotts Valley contractors in the performance of city contracts and anyone renting city facilities may not provide prepared food in disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene foam. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.030 - Required biodegradable/compostable or recyclable disposable food service ware. 
(a)  All food providers within the City of Scotts Valley utilizing disposable food service ware shall use biodegradable, compostable or recyclable products, unless there is no affordable alternative available as determined by the director of public works (see definition of "Affordable" and Section 8.01.050 Exemptions). Food providers may charge a "take-out fee" to cover the difference in cost. 
(b)  All City of Scotts Valley facilities utilizing disposable food service ware shall use products that are biodegradable, compostable or recyclable. 
(c)  City of Scotts Valley contractors in the performance of city contracts and anyone renting city facilities utilizing disposable food service ware shall use biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable products while performing under a City of Scotts Valley contract or using city facilities. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.040 - Implementation: City contracts and leases. 
(a)  The public works director/city engineer is authorized to promulgate regulations, guidelines and forms and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  All city contracts, rental agreements and leases, shall contain the following minimum language: 
"Contractor agrees to comply fully with and be bound by all of the provisions of the Food Packaging Ordinance as set forth in the City of Scotts Valley Municipal Code, Chapter 8.01 including the remedies provided, and implementing guidelines and rules. The provisions of Chapter 8.01 are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this agreement as though fully set forth. This provision is a material term of this agreement. By entering into this agreement, the contractor agrees that if it breaches this provision, the city will suffer actual damages that will be impractical or extremely difficult to determine; further, contractor agrees that the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) liquidated damages for the first breach, two hundred dollars ($200.00) liquidated damages for the second breach in the same year, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) liquidated damages for subsequent breaches in the same year is a reasonable estimate of the damage that the city will incur based on the violation, established in light of the circumstances existing at the time this agreement was made. Such amounts shall not be considered a penalty, but rather agreed monetary damages sustained by the city because of the contractor's failure to comply with these provisions." 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.050 - Exemptions. 
(a)  There are no exemptions that allow for the use of polystyrene foam disposable food service ware. 
(b)  The director of public works, or the director's designee, may exempt a food provider from the requirement set forth in Section 8.01.030(a) of this ordinance for a one-year period upon the food provider showing, in writing, that this ordinance would create an undue hardship or practical difficulty not generally applicable to other persons in similar circumstances. The director of public works or the director's designee shall put the decision to grant or deny a one-year exemption in writing, and the director's or director's designee decision shall be final. 
(c)  An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the director of public works or the director's designee to make a decision, including but not limited to documentation showing factual support for the claimed exemption. The director or the director's designee may require the applicant to provide additional information. 
(d)  The director public works or director's designee may approve the exemption application in whole or in part, with or without conditions. 
(e)  Foods prepared or packaged outside the City of Scotts Valley and sold inside the City of Scotts Valley are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Purveyors of food prepared or packaged outside the City of Scotts Valley are encouraged to follow the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Polystyrene foam coolers and ice chests that are intended for reuse are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.060 - Enforcement and notice of violation. 
(a)  Violations of this ordinance may be enforced in accordance with Title 4. 
(b)  The director of public works, or the director's designee, shall be responsible for enforcing this chapter and shall have authority to issue citations for violations. The director, or the director's designee, is authorized to establish regulations or administrative procedures to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(d)  The Scotts Valley City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive of one another. 
(f)  The City of Scotts Valley in accordance with applicable law, may inspect any vendor or food provider's premises to verify compliance. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
8.01.070 - Penalties and fines for violations. 
Violations of this ordinance shall be enforced as follows: 
1.  For the first violation, the director of public works or the director's designee shall issue a written warning to the food provider specifying that a violation of this chapter has occurred and which further notified the food provider of the appropriate penalties to be assessed in the event of future violations. The food provider will have thirty days to comply. 
2.  The following penalties will apply for subsequent violations of this chapter: 
a.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation within thirty days after the first warning. The director of public works or the director's designee may allow the violator in lieu of payment of the fine, to submit receipts demonstrating the purchase after the citation date, of at least one hundred dollars worth of biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable products appropriate as an alternative disposable food service ware for the items which led to the violation. 
b.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for the second violation within sixty days after the first warning. 
c.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the third violation within ninety days after the first warning and for each additional thirty-day period during which the food provider is not in compliance. 
(Ord. 182, § 1, 12-17-2008)  
Chapter 8.04 - ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Nuisance—Violations. 
In addition to penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of any chapter of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city in accordance with this chapter and state law. 
(Ord. 7.1 § 1, 1973)  
8.04.020 - Nuisance abatement procedure. 
A.  Whenever a city officer with the responsibility to enforce any of the provisions of any chapter of this code determines that a public nuisance exists as the result of a violation of a city ordinance, he may issue a written order requiring that the conditions constituting the nuisance be abated within a period of ten days thereafter and shall forthwith serve the order upon the person maintaining such nuisance. An order of abatement shall continue in full force and effect until modified or rescinded by the city officer issuing the same or until modified, vacated, or superseded by an order of the city council after hearing. The time specified in the order of abatement may for good cause be extended by a written order of the issuing city officer. The order of abatement shall advise the person served of his right to appeal to the city council and that the order of abatement will be stayed pending such appeal. 
B.  Any person ordered to abate a nuisance by a written order of a city officer issued pursuant to this section may, within ten days after receipt of said written order, file a written appeal to the city council with the clerk of said city specifying the grounds upon which it is made. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city council shall set the matter for hearing not less than ten nor more than sixty days following the date the appeal was filed. Such appeal shall stay the effect of the order of abatement until the city council hears the appeal and issues its order modifying, vacating, or affirming the order of abatement. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
C.  In the event that the public nuisance is not abated in accordance with the city officer's order of abatement, the city officer may, upon securing the approval of the city council, proceed to abate the nuisance by force account, contract, or any other method deemed most expedient by the council. 
D.  The city officer shall prepare and file with the clerk of the council a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the public nuisance is or was located, and the names and addresses of the record owner, the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust of record, and any other person known to have a legal interest in the property. 
E.  The council shall hold a hearing on said report and any protest of objections thereto, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the persons with a legal interest in the property at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The city council shall determine at the conclusion of the hearing the proper charge, if any, assessed for the work. If such costs are not paid by the owner of the property within thirty days of the determination by the council, they shall be assessed upon the property involved as a special assessment. The assessment shall then be collected at the same time and in the manner as county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. 
F.  Each notice or order to be given or made under this section shall be served upon the person occupying the premises upon which the public nuisance exists, or if no person occupies the premises, the notice or order shall be posted upon said premises in a conspicuous place, and in addition, a copy of the notice or order shall be served on the property owner of the premises. Service of each notice or order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice or order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the city officer. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the city officer, then a copy of the notice or order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person at the address of the premises. The failure of any such person to receive such notice or order shall not affect the validity of any proceeding taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of the mailing. 
(Ord. 7.1 § 2, 1973)  
Chapter 8.08 - PUBLIC FLY NUISANCE 
 
8.08.010 - Purpose. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(b), 1972)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(c), 1972)  
8.08.030 - Administration—Delegation of authority. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(d), 1972)  
8.08.040 - Investigation. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(e), 1972)  
8.08.050 - Abatement order. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(f), 1972)  
8.08.060 - Appeal to the council. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(g), 1972)  
8.08.070 - Service of notice or order. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(h), 1972)  
8.08.080 - Abatement. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(i), 1972)  
8.08.090 - Payment of cost by owner—Lien for costs. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(j), 1972)  
8.08.100 - Penalty. 
(Ord. 54 § 1(k), 1972)  
Chapter 8.12 - REFUSE 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.010, 1973; Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 1, 12-21-2011)  
8.12.020 - Accumulation of refuse prohibited. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.020, 1973)  
8.12.030 - General waste storage requirements. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.030, 1973)  
8.12.040 - Garbage and rubbish container required. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.040, 1973)  
8.12.050 - Garbage container requirements. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.050, 1973)  
8.12.060 - Bulk waste. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.060, 1973)  
8.12.070 - Rubbish storage. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.070, 1973)  
8.12.080 - Dumping at unauthorized disposal site prohibited. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.080, 1973)  
8.12.090 - Burning of waste. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.090, 1973)  
8.12.100 - Removal and disposal of garbage—Mandatory service—Exceptions. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.100, 1973; Ord. 57.1 § 1, 1990)  
8.12.110 - Removal and disposal of refuse. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.110, 1973)  
8.12.115 - Recycling of certain materials required—Exceptions. 
(Ord. 57.1 § 2, 1990; Ord. 57.2 § 1, 1994)  
8.12.120 - Investigation. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.120, 1973)  
8.12.130 - Abatement of refuse accumulation nuisance. 
(Ord. 57 § 1.130, 1973)  
8.12.140 - E-waste recycler certification required. 
(Ord. 121 § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 2, 12-21-2011)  
8.12.150 - E-waste event notification. 
(Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 3, 12-21-2011)  
8.12.160 - Exemptions from e-waste recycling requirements. 
(Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 4, 12-21-2011)  
8.12.170 - Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 5, 12-21-2011)  
8.12.180 - Violations. 
(Ord. No. 57.2[3], § 6, 12-21-2011)  
Chapter 8.20 - SMOKING AND TOBACCO REGULATIONS 
 
8.20.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The City Council of the City of Scotts Valley does hereby find that: 
1.  In January, 1993, the United States Environmental Protection [Agency] ("EPA") released its Report, "Respiratory Health Effects of Passive Smoking: Lung Cancer and Other Disorders." Simultaneously, the EPA designated passive smoking a "Class A" or known human carcinogen. The EPA has determined that Environmental Tobacco Smoke ("ETS") is a human lung carcinogen. 
2.  The Surgeon General labels smoking "the largest single preventable cause of death and disability for the U.S. population." The Surgeon General has determined that tobacco smoke is a carcinogen and an important risk factor for heart disease. 
3.  The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ("NIOSH") has determined that ETS is potentially carcinogenic to occupationally exposed workers. 
4.  While all members of the population are at increased risk due to exposure to ETS, it constitutes a special health hazard for children, the elderly, and people with chronic lung disorders and disease. 
5.  The health care costs produced by smoking-related ailments and diseases constitute a heavy and avoidable financial drain on our community. 
6.  ETS is an offensive annoyance and irritant to non-smokers, and can result in serious and significant physical discomfort, thus constituting a public nuisance in public places and places of employment. 
7.  There are numerous and credible health studies suggesting that electronic cigarettes pose significant public health and safety risks and there are minimal federal and state regulations or controls over the use of electronic cigarettes. 
B.  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are: 
1.  To protect public health, safety and general welfare by restricting tobacco and electronic cigarette smoking in public places and in places of employment; and 
2.  To recognize that the need to breathe tobacco smoke-free air has priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. No. 129.2, § 1, 4-16-2014)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar, Stand Alone. "Stand alone bar" means an area in which (1) the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises is its primary purpose; and (2) persons under the age of twenty-one are not permitted on the premises. A "stand alone bar" for the purpose of this chapter does not include any bar which is structurally part of a building also hosting other business operations, unless it is physically separate from other uses in the same building and has a separate ventilating system ventilating directly to the outside of the building. 
"Electronic cigarettes" mean any electronically or battery-operated device, often shaped like a cigarette, containing a nicotine or other substance based liquid, sometimes flavored, that is vaporized and inhaled and which is used to simulate the experience of smoking tobacco or other combustible substances. 
"Employee" means any natural person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits, including but not limited to temporary, permanent, part-time and full-time employees and independent contractors. 
"Employer" means any person, as defined in this section, who employs the services of one or more persons. 
"Enclosed" means closed in by a permanent roof and the exterior walls with appropriate openings for ingress, egress and ventilation. 
"Hotel" means a hotel, motel, motor inn, bed and breakfast, boarding house and other similar establishments in which the operator has the status of an "innkeeper." 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, municipal corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Place of employment" means any area under the control of a public or private employer which employs normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, offices, work areas, hallways, lobbies, employee lounges, conference rooms, employee cafeterias, locker rooms, dressing areas or eating places. A private residence is not a place of employment for purposes of this chapter, unless it is used as a child care facility, health care facility or community care facility. 
"Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or operating cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, weed, plant or other combustible or vaporized substance in any manner or in any form. 
"Sports arena" means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, pool halls and other similar places where members of the public assemble indoors to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. No. 129.2, § 2, 4-16-2014)  
8.20.030 - Application to city-owned facilities. 
All facilities owned or controlled by the city, including but not limited to jails, cafeterias, libraries, offices and any council, board, commission and/or agency meeting area shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.040 - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.20.060, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including but not limited to the following places. The use of the phrase "public place" in this chapter is intended to be expansive. The following examples are illustrative of places deemed public for purposes of this chapter. The prohibition of this chapter is not limited to the list of examples. 
1.  Elevators; 
2.  Restrooms; 
3.  Service lines; 
4.  Laundromats; 
5.  Retail stores and all areas in shopping malls inside and outside of retail stores, restaurants, bars, restrooms and offices; 
6.  Areas available to or open to and customarily used by the general public in all business and nonprofit entities, including but not limited to offices (such as the offices of attorneys, doctors, accountants, other professionals and service providers and banks; 
7.  Restaurants; 
8.  Hotels; 
9.  Aquariums, amusement parks, galleries, libraries, arcades or museums; 
10.  Facilities which are primarily used as theaters, auditoriums or halls; or which are used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, musical performances, ballets, lectures, debates or other similar performances; 
11.  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and rooms and offices of health facilities, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices; 
12.  Sports arenas, convention halls, banquet rooms and meeting rooms; 
13.  Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores, convenience stores, warehouse stores and supermarkets; 
14.  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including but not limited to, school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee including joint committee, or agencies of the city, or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city; 
15.  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, senior citizen residences, nursing homes and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
16.  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in multiple-unit commercial facilities; 
17.  Polling places; 
18.  Private clubs. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.20.060, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed places of employment within the city. 
C.  Smoking shall be prohibited in the following nonenclosed public places within the city: 
1.  Service lines for retail, service or entertainment venues; 
2.  City parks, except where posted "smoking permitted"; 
3.  Community pools or play areas (such as in multifamily developments), except where posted "smoking permitted"; 
4.  Within twenty-five feet of the main entrance used by employees or customers of any business, except for those places specifically exempted by Section 8.20.060; 
5.  Ticket, boarding and waiting areas for public transit, except for areas posted "smoking permitted." 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.050 - Smoking policy in places of employment. 
A.  Within ninety days of the effective date of this chapter, each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain the following requirements: 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, locker rooms, dressing areas, and all other enclosed facilities. 
B.  The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. 
C.  All employers shall comply with the provisions of this section and shall be responsible for implementation of its provisions in their place(s) of employment. 
D.  "No smoking" signs may be conspicuously posted at building entrances and in employee lounges, restrooms, locker rooms, dressing areas, cafeterias and lunchrooms. The minimum size of signs posted under this section shall be six inches by four inches. 
E.  All employers shall make available a written copy of the smoking policy to any employee who so requests. 
F.  Places of employment exempt from the prohibition on smoking in Section 8.20.060 of this chapter shall also be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.060 - Smoking optional areas. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter, unless smoking or the use of combustible materials is otherwise regulated by the city code or any other provision of law or regulation. 
1.  Private residences, except when used as a child care facility, health care facility or community care facility; 
2.  Smoking optional hotel rooms rented to guests, which shall not include meeting and banquet facilities. Hotels shall reserve and maintain no less than seventy-five percent of the guest rooms as smoke-free rooms; 
3.  An enclosed place of employment which employs only the owner and no other employee, provided that the enclosed place of employment does not share a ventilation system with any other enclosed place of employment or public place; 
4.  Any portion of a place of employment which is not enclosed, except within twenty-five feet of the main building entry/exit used by employees or customers, or in the direct and unavoidable path between a parking area and the main building entry/exit; 
5.  Private vehicles; 
6.  Stand alone bars; 
7.  Enclosed areas, while bingo games are being conducted pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5 and with a valid conditional use permit, provided that: (a) no person under the age of twenty-one years is present on the premises, (b) physically separate smoke-free room(s) are provided to patrons, and (c) a separate ventilation system is provided for room(s) where smoking is allowed. The operator of a bingo game shall comply with the requirements of this chapter within six months of the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any property may prohibit smoking within the entire property or a portion of the property. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.070 - Placement of signs. 
"No smoking" signs or the international "No smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building, as well as on entrances at eye level, or other places where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place, in order to satisfy the nonresponsibility clauses of Section 8.20.080 E through G. The minimum size of signs posted under this section shall be six inches by four inches. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Notice of these regulations shall be given to all applicants for a business license. 
B.  Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designee. 
C.  Any person who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the city manager or his/her designee. 
D.  The city manager or his/her designee shall require, while a premises or establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, certification from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment, that all requirements of this chapter have been complied with, including but not limited to the requirements of Sections 8.20.050 and 8.20.070. 
E.  Owners, operators, property managers and officers of homeowners' associations for residential properties shall not be responsible for violations of the requirements of this chapter by tenants or residents if they have posted signs in accordance with the provisions of this section and have given written notice to violator(s) of this chapter that the violator(s)' actions are in violation of the law prohibiting smoking. 
F.  Owners, operators and property managers of commercial rental properties shall not be responsible for violations of the requirements of this chapter by tenants or the guests of tenants, if they have posted signs in accordance with the provisions of this section and have given written notice to violator(s) of this chapter that the violator(s)' actions are in violation of the law prohibiting smoking. 
G.  Owners, operators or managers ("owners") of commercial establishments shall not be responsible for the violations of this chapter within an area under their control, by patrons or other members of the public ("patron"), provided that: (1) the owners have posted the area with signs in accordance with this chapter; (2) have verbally asked the patron not to smoke; and (3) have warned the patron that his/her actions may be a violation of the law prohibiting smoking. This limitation shall not limit the liability of an employer for the actions of employees in places of employment. 
H.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a private citizen may bring legal and/or equitable action to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.090 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises or establishment or property subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter. 
C.  Infractions. Any person, owner, operator, employer, employee or manager of any premise(s) or establishment, subject to this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation of this chapter; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a third violation of this chapter within one year. 
D.  Misdemeanor(s). Any person, owner, operator, employer or manager of any establishment, subject to this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, in excess of three violations within one year, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor violation of this chapter, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and shall be subject to incarceration in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months. (Government Code Section 36901.) 
E.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.100 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire on, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any right to a tobacco smoke-free work environment afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.110 - Public education. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall make information available to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter to persons affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, managers and employers in their compliance with it. Such a program may include publication of a brochure for affected persons explaining the provisions of this chapter or use of other organizations or agents who disseminate information regarding smoking. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
8.20.120 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 129.1 § 2 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 8.25 - REGULATION OF TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES ADVERTISING AND SALES [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Editorial Note: Ord. No. 129.2, § 3, adopted April 16, 2014, amended the title of Ch. 8.25 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter was entitled "Regulation of Tobacco Advertising and Sales." 
 
8.25.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the welfare of minors by discouraging the commercial exploitation of potential underage tobacco and electronic cigarette users and by discouraging actions that promote the unlawful sale of tobacco and electronic cigarette products to minors as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of tobacco and electronic cigarette products by minors. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. No. 129.2, § 4, 4-16-2014)  
8.25.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Advertising" means printed matter that calls the public's attention to things for sale. 
B.  "Advertising display" means any sign, billboard, signboard, poster, placard, pennant, banner, graphic display, mural, or similar device that is used to advertise or promote a product. 
C.  "Area which minors frequent" means any public kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; private school; licensed child-care facility or preschool; public library; public park; or bus stop. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
E.  "Promotion" means a display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic, artwork, colors, scenes, or designs that are a recognized image of a particular product brand that calls the public's attention to the product brand. 
F.  "Private school" means an elementary or high school that is listed in the California private school directory published by the California Department of Education pursuant to California Education Code Section 33190. 
G.  "Publicly visible location" means any outdoor location that is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, or any location inside a commercial establishment that is in or adjacent to a window or doorway and is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 
H.  "Retail tobacco store" means a retail store that sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia." 
I.  "Self-service display" means an open display of tobacco or electronic cigarette products which is accessible without the intervention of a vendor, including, but not limited to a rack, shelf, or counter-top display. 
J.  "Tobacco product" shall mean: 
1.  Any product containing, made or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and 
2.  Any electronic smoking device. Notwithstanding any provision of subsections 1. and 2. to the contrary, "tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
K.  "Vendor-assisted sale" means a purchase requiring a direct, face-to-face exchange between the vendor and the customer, in which the vendor does not transfer possession of the product to the customer until the purchase is completed. 
L.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. Any references to e-cigarettes in this chapter shall include and refer to electronic smoking device. 
M.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" shall mean any item designed for the consumption, use, or preparation of tobacco products. 
N.  "Tobacco retailer" shall mean any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
O.  "Significant tobacco retailer" means any tobacco retailer for which the principal or core business is selling tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both, as evidenced the fact that (1) twenty percent or more of floor or display area is devoted to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; (2) sixty-seven percent or more of gross sales receipts are derived from tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; or (3) fifty percent or more of completed sales transactions include tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. No. 129.2, § 5, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 188, §§ 2—5, 12-16-2015)  
8.25.030 - Restrictions on tobacco and electronic cigarette sales and advertising. 
A.  No significant tobacco retailer shall be located within one thousand feet of any existing public kindergarten, elementary, middle, or junior high or high school or any private school in the City of Scotts Valley. 
B.  No part of this chapter shall be construed to permit any advertising display that is otherwise restricted or prohibited by law. Nor shall it be construed to permit an otherwise restricted or prohibited advertising display because it is combined with a permitted public service message. 
C.  No part of this chapter shall be construed to regulate messages that do not propose a commercial transaction. 
D.  Positive Identification Required. No tobacco retailer shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
E.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
F.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited except in a tobacco retail store as defined above. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. No. 129.2, § 6, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 188, §§ 6, 7, 12-16-2015)  
8.25.040 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 8.25.030 of this chapter shall not apply to any advertising display: 
A.  That is located on a parcel with a nonresidential zoning designation, provided it is more than one thousand feet in any direction (measured in a straight line from parcel boundary to parcel boundary) from any area which minors frequent; or 
B.  That is located on the premises of a commercial establishment if the advertising display provides notice that the establishment sells tobacco products, as long as the display does not promote any brand of tobacco product or otherwise constitute a "promotion" as defined by this chapter, and provided that any such premises shall have no more than one such sign; or 
C.  That is located on a commercial vehicle used for transporting tobacco products; or 
D.  That is located on a taxicab; or 
E.  That is located on tobacco product packaging; or 
F.  That is worn as clothing as an individual. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999)  
8.25.050 - Enforcement—Penalties—Civil actions. 
A.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation. After notification, it shall be a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue. 
B.  Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted as infractions in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
C.  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the planning department. 
D.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
E.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999)  
8.25.060 - Hardship extension of compliance deadline. 
A.  Owners of advertising displays in place on the date the ordinance adopting this chapter was first introduced may, within sixty days after the date that the city council takes final action to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter, submit an application for an extension of time for compliance to the city manager. The application shall include written documentation that demonstrates that timely compliance would cause unreasonable financial hardship and that granting the extension of time would not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with other owners of such advertising who are required to comply. On timely receipt of a completed application, the city manager or the city manager's designee shall conduct a hearing to determine whether, and under what conditions, the extension of time shall be granted. 
B.  Whether or not an extension of time to remove a preexisting advertising display is granted pursuant to this section, advertising displays that are prohibited by this ordinance shall not be deemed to be legal nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999)  
8.25.070 - Restrictions on self-service sale of tobacco products. 
Except for retail tobacco stores, it is unlawful to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco or electronic cigarette product by means of self-service merchandising, or by any means other than a vendor-assisted sale. 
(Ord. 169 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. No. 129.2, § 7, 4-16-2014)  
Chapter 8.30 - CIGARETTE AND/OR TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 
 
8.30.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Cigarette and or Tobacco Vending Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. 148 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.30.020 - Intent and purpose. 
The city council finds that the availability of cigarettes and tobacco products marketed through vending machines which dispense such products promotes the use of tobacco products among minors, contrary to existing state laws which prohibit the sale or distribution of cigarettes and/or tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen. Therefore, the city council finds and declares it necessary to enact this chapter to recognize and promote such laws, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 148 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.30.030 - Prohibition of vending machine sales. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to place, install or maintain or control any vending machine or any other machine or device designed for the dispensing, distribution or sale of cigarettes or other tobacco products in any public place within the city limits. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, "public place" is defined as any area to which any members of the public are invited, or in which any members of the public are permitted, including, but not limited to, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, bars, restaurant/bar combinations, retail stores, retail service establishments, retail food production and marketing establishments, waiting rooms, service clubs, public or private cafeterias or any work place or work areas. 
(Ord. 148 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.30.040 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and punishable as provided by Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 148 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 8.34 - REMOVAL OF MONTEREY PINE TREES 
 
8.34.010 - Evidence of pitch canker disease. 
Evidence has been presented to the city that the pitch canker disease is infecting Monterey pine trees in the state of California to the extent it is considered a hazard to the health and continued existence of Monterey pines in Santa Cruz County. The evidence includes, but is not limited to, written reports and pamphlets from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, information from the Cooperative Extension, Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of California-Santa Cruz; the Resources Agency of the State of California; the California Department of Food and Agriculture; and the California Department of Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 1, 1994)  
8.34.020 - Action by city council. 
The evidence presented to the city council is compelling and demands immediate action by the city council to prevent or mitigate the loss of or damage to life, health, property by the continued transmission of the pitch canker disease. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 2, 1994)  
8.34.030 - State legislation. 
California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA") in Section 21060.3 and the California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines in Section 15359 define an emergency as an occurrence which involves a clear and eminent danger. The council finds that the existence and continued spread of the pitch canker disease constitutes an emergency. In addition, Section 15307 of the CEQA Guidelines provides a categorical exemption from CEQA for actions taken by regulatory agencies to assure the maintenance, restoration and enhancement of a natural resource. Further, Section 15308 provides a categorical exemption for actions taken by regulatory agencies to assure the maintenance, restoration and enhancement or protection of the environment where the regulatory process involves procedures for protection of the environment. Neither of these categorical exemptions includes construction activities and no construction activities are contemplated. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 3, 1994)  
8.34.040 - Removal of Monterey pine trees. 
In order to take action to counteract the spread of the pitch canker disease in Monterey pines in the city, the city council finds it necessary to allow the removal of Monterey pines with minimal regulation to encourage the removal of diseased trees. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 4, 1994)  
8.34.050 - Findings. 
The protection of the public health, safety and welfare requires the ordinance codified in this chapter be declared an urgency measure and constitute authorization to remove Monterey Pine trees within the city without the necessity of further permits. Pursuant to Section 36937b and 65962 of the Government Code, the city council of the city finds: 
A.  The pitch canker disease is a clear and imminent danger to Monterey pine trees, which are extremely susceptible to the disease, and other trees that may similarly be infected with the pitch canker disease; 
B.  Failure to provide simple and direct methods for removal of Monterey pine trees could enhance the spread of the pitch canker disease throughout the entire city; 
C.  Requiring tree owners to be burdened with the tree removal permit process could provide an opportunity for the continued spread of the pitch canker disease. The removal of Monterey pines at the discretion of a tree owner is necessary to assure the maintenance and restoration of Monterey pines, and other trees, within the city. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 5, 1994)  
8.34.060 - Conflict with other provisions. 
This chapter is intended to allow the removal of Monterey Pine trees without permits as required by Section 17.44.080 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code and to the extent this tree removal chapter conflicts with Section 17.44.080, this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. 16.86 § 6, 1994).  
Chapter 8.38 - SCOTTS VALLEY SAFE DRUG AND SHARPS DISPOSAL 
 
8.38.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and of the environment by providing for the safe and orderly collection and disposal of drug and sharps waste and by placing responsibility for end-of-life management of drug and sharps products on the manufacturers and/or producers of the products, while encouraging product design that minimizes negative impacts on human health and the environment at every stage of the product's lifecycle. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.020 - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Scotts Valley Safe Drug and Sharps Disposal Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given below. 
A.  "City council" refers to the City Council of the City of Scotts Valley. 
B.  "City" means the City of Scotts Valley, California. 
C.  "Consumer generators" means residents of single and multiple family residences or other locations who possess, dispose of and/or abandon household covered drugs or sharps. "Consumer generators" does not include airport security, drug seizures by law enforcement, pharmacy waste, business waste, or any other source identified by the department as a non-consumer source. 
D.  "Controlled substance" for purposes of this section shall mean any substance listed under California Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058 and/or Title 21 of the United States Code, Sections 812 and 813 or any successor legislation. 
E.  "Cosmetics" means (i) articles intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled, or sprayed on, introduced into, or otherwise applied to, the human body, or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and (ii) articles intended for use as a component of any such articles. 
F.  "Covered drug" means all brand name and generic prescription drugs. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, "covered drug" does not include: (i) vitamins or supplements; (ii) herbal-based remedies and homeopathic drugs, products, or remedies; (iii) cosmetics, soap (with or without germicidal agents), laundry detergent, bleach, household cleaning products, shampoos, sunscreens, toothpaste, lip balm, antiperspirants, or other personal care products that are regulated as cosmetics under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act ("FFDCA") (21 U.S.C. Section 301 et seq. (2002)); (iv) drugs for which producers provide a take-back program as part of a Federal Food and Drug Administration managed risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (21 U.S.C. Section 355-1); (v) drugs that are biological products as defined by 21 C.F.R. 600.3(h) as it exists on the effective date of this chapter if the producer already provides a take-back program; and (vi) pet pesticide products contained in pet collars, powders, shampoos, topical applications, or other delivery systems. 
G.  "County" means the County of Santa Cruz, California. 
H.  "Department" means the City of Scotts Valley City's Manager's Department. 
I.  "City manager" means the City of Scotts Valley City Manager or his or her designee. 
J.  "Drug wholesaler" means a person that sells or distributes covered drugs for resale to an entity other than a consumer. 
K.  "Drugs" means: (i) articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, the official National Formulary, the official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United States, or any supplement to any of them; (ii) articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other animals; (iii) articles, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of humans or other animals; and (iv) articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of this definition. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, "drugs" does not include or mean medical devices, their component parts or accessories. 
L.  "Entity" means a person other than an individual. 
M.  "Generic" means a drug that is chemically identical or bioequivalent to a brand name drug in dosage form, safety, strength, route of administration, quality, performance characteristics, and intended use, though inactive ingredients may vary. 
N.  "Hazardous waste" means a "hazardous waste" as defined in the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976, as amended (42 USCA § 6901 et seq.) and the implementing regulations (40 C.F.R. §§ 239 through 282), as amended. This waste includes, but is not limited to, bulk chemotherapy drugs, P-listed waste, U-listed waste and characteristic hazardous waste. 
O.  "Manufacture" means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of covered drugs or sharps but does not include the activities of a repackager, drug wholesaler or medical practitioner who distributes or dispenses such substances or devices in the ordinary course of his or her professional practice or prepares, compounds, packages or labels such substances or devices. 
P.  "Manufacturer" means a person engaged in the manufacture of covered drugs or sharps. 
Q.  "Mail-back program" means a system whereby consumer generators of unwanted products obtain prepaid and preaddressed mailing envelopes in which to place unwanted products for shipment to an entity that will dispose of them safely and legally. 
R.  "Medical waste" means "medical waste" as defined in Section 117690 of the California Health and Safety Code, as amended. 
S.  "Person" means an individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, association, cooperative, or other entity of any kind or nature, however organized. 
T.  "Pharmacy" means a place licensed by the State of California Board of Pharmacy where the practice of pharmacy is conducted. 
U.  "Plan" or "product stewardship plan" means a product stewardship plan required under this chapter that describes the manner in which a product stewardship program will be provided. 
V.  "Plan operator" means the person that develops, implements and operates a product stewardship plan, including, but not limited to, a producer or stewardship organization. 
W.  "Prescription drug" means any drug, including, but not limited to, any controlled substance, that is required by federal or state law, rule or regulation to be dispensed by prescription only or is restricted to use by practitioners only. 
X.  "Producer" shall be determined, with regard to covered drugs and sharps that are sold, offered for sale, or distributed in the city as meaning one of the following: 
1.  The person who manufactures covered drugs or sharps and who sells, offers for sale, or distributes covered drugs or sharps in the city under that person's own name or brand. 
2.  If there is no person who sells, offers for sale, or distributes covered drugs or sharps in the city under the person's own name or brand, the producer of covered drugs or sharps is the owner or licensee of a trademark or brand under which the covered drugs or sharps are sold or distributed in the city, whether or not the trademark is registered. 
3.  If there is no person who is a producer of covered drugs or sharps for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2), the producer of covered drugs or sharps is the person who brings the covered drug into the city for sale or distribution. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, "producer" does not include: (i) a retailer or repackager that only puts its label on a covered drug or sharps; (ii) a pharmacist who dispenses prescription drugs to, or repackages or compounds a prescribed individual drug product for a consumer; or (iii) a drug wholesaler who is not also a manufacturer; or (iv) a veterinarian who sells drugs or sharps for animals provided the veterinarian has a program in place for the disposal of drugs or sharps for their own customer base. 
Y.  "Product stewardship program" or "program" means a program financed, developed, implemented, and operated by producers to collect, transport, and dispose of unwanted products. 
Z.  "Provider" means any person that sells or otherwise furnishes covered drugs or sharps to consumers at a medical or veterinary office, clinic, hospital or approved needle-exchange program located in the city. 
AA.  "Public hearing" means any hearing held by the department or the city which is open to the public for the purposes of collecting public comment. It does not necessarily refer to meetings of the city council. 
BB.  "Repackager" means a person who owns or operates an establishment that repacks, repackages, and/or re-labels a product or package (including a covered drug and/or sharps) for further sale or for distribution without a further transaction. 
CC.  "Retailer" means any person that sells covered drugs or sharps directly to consumers at a business located in the city. 
DD.  "Santa Cruz County Safe Drug and Sharps Disposal Ordinance" refers to Chapter 7.95 of the Santa Cruz County Municipal Code, entitled " Santa Cruz County Safe Drug and Sharps Disposal", as such may be amended. 
EE.  "Sharps" means one or more hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles, lancets and other devices used to penetrate the skin for drawing blood, or for the delivery of medications or drugs. 
FF.  "Stewardship organization" means an organization designated by a group of producers to act as an agent on behalf of each producers to operate a product stewardship program. 
GG.  "Unwanted products" means covered drugs or sharps no longer wanted by the owner or that have been abandoned, discarded, or are intended to be discarded by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.040 - Product stewardship program. 
A.  Requirement for Sale. This chapter shall apply only to producers whose covered drugs and/or sharps are sold and/or distributed in the city and to retailers who sell covered drugs and/or sharps in the city. This chapter shall apply only to areas within the city limits. This chapter shall be administered and implemented by the City of Scotts Valley City Manager's Department. Each producer shall participate in a stewardship program. Each producer must: 
1.  Operate, individually or jointly with other producers, a product stewardship program approved by the department; or 
2.  Enter into an agreement with a stewardship organization to operate, on the producer's behalf, a product stewardship program approved by the department. 
B.  Product Stewardship Program Costs. 
1.  A producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization must pay all administrative and operational fees and costs associated with their product (who?) stewardship program and related product stewardship plan, including, but not limited to, the cost of collecting, transporting, and disposing of unwanted products collected from consumer generators and the recycling and/or disposal of packaging collected with the unwanted product. 
2.  No person or producer may charge a specific point-of-sale fee to consumers to recoup the costs of their product stewardship program, nor may they charge a specific point-of-collection fee at the time the unwanted products are collected from consumer generators or delivered for disposal. 
3.  A producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization must pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city, including but not limited to the department, in the administration and enforcement of their product stewardship program. Exclusive of fines and penalties, the city shall only recover its actual costs of administration and enforcement under this chapter and shall not charge any amounts under this chapter in excess of its actual administrative and enforcement costs. 
4.  A producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization must pay all collection and disposal costs and expenses as of the date that the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective. If the city incurs any costs or expenses due to delays in establishment of an approved stewardship plan, the producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization must reimburse the city in full for such costs. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.050 - Product stewardship plan. 
A.  Plan Content. Each product stewardship program shall have a product stewardship plan (which must be submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 8.38.050(B) below) that contains each of the following: 
1.  Certification that the product stewardship program will accept all unwanted products regardless of who produced them, unless excused from this requirement by the department as part of the approval of the plan; 
2.  Contact information (including the name, physical and mailing address, telephone number, and email address) for the individual and the entity submitting the plan, the plan operator, and each of the producers participating in the product stewardship program; 
3.  A description of the methods by which unwanted products from consumer generators will be collected and handled at all retail sale facilities of sharps and covered drugs in the city, including without limitation a description of bins to be used and collection methods; 
4.  A description of the methods by which unwanted products from consumer generators will be collected and handled at all public health facilities in the city, as well as at such other locations as designated by the department, including without limitation a description of bins to be used and collection methods; 
5.  The location of each collection site and locations where envelopes for a mail-back program are available (if applicable); 
6.  A list containing the name, location, permit status, and record of any penalties, violations, and/or regulatory orders received in the previous five years by each person that will be involved in collecting and/or transporting unwanted products and each medical waste or hazardous waste disposal facility proposed to participate in the product stewardship program; 
7.  A description of how the unwanted products will be safely and securely tracked and handled from collection through final disposal and the policies and procedures to be followed to ensure security; 
8.  A description of the public education and outreach activities required under this chapter and how their effectiveness will be evaluated; 
9.  A description of how the scope and extent of the product stewardship program are reasonably related to the amount of covered drugs and sharps that are sold in the city, by the producer or group of producers; 
10.  A starting date when collection of unwanted products will begin; 
11.  A description of how support will be provided to any law enforcement agencies within the city that have, or later agree to have, a collection program for controlled substances, including, without limitation: (i) the provision of a collection kiosk with appropriate accessories and signage, (ii) an ability to accept controlled substances and other covered drugs, and (iii) technical support up to and including an appropriate person to provide on-site assistance with the sorting and separation of controlled substances at no cost to a participating law enforcement agency; 
12.  If more than one producer will be involved in a proposed product stewardship program, then the product stewardship plan for that program must include a fair and reasonable manner for allocating the costs of the program among the participants in that program, such that the portion of costs paid by each producer is reasonably related to the amount of covered drugs and sharps that producer sells in the city. 
B.  Existing County-Approved Product Stewardship Plan. If a producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization is/are operating a product stewardship program within the county under an existing product stewardship plan that has been approved by the County of Santa Cruz in accordance with Chapter 7.95 of the Santa Cruz County Code ("County-Approved Plan"), such producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization may comply with Section 8.38.050(A) above, by supplementing such county-approved plan to cover the city and include all items listed in Section 8.38.050(A) above. The product stewardship plan, as supplemented, must be submitted to the department for review and approval of the provisions relating to and/or applicable to the city in accordance with Section 8.38.050(D) below. 
C.  Department Review and Approval; Updates. 
1.  No producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization within the city may begin collecting unwanted products to comply with this chapter until it has received written approval of its product stewardship plan from the department. The city may (at its discretion) continue collection on an interim basis if there is any delay in establishing a stewardship program as required under this chapter. Once approved by the department, each product stewardship plan must receive prior written approval from the department for any proposed changes to the plan. 
2.  All product stewardship plans must be submitted to the department for approval. Each producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization operating a product stewardship program shall submit its initial product stewardship plan (conforming to the above requirements) to the department for review within sixty days after the effective date of this chapter, or at a later date as approved in writing by the department. 
3.  Within sixty days after the department's receipt and review of a product stewardship plan, the department will determine whether the plan complies with the requirements of this chapter and of any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. The department may at its sole discretion conduct a noticed public hearing as part of this process. 
a.  As part of its approval, the department may set reasonable performance goals for the program. 
b.  If the department approves a plan, it shall notify the applicant of its approval in writing. 
c.  If the department rejects a plan, it shall notify the applicant in writing of its reasons for rejecting the plan. The department may reject a plan without conducting a public hearing. 
d.  An applicant whose plan has been rejected by the department must submit a revised plan to the department within thirty days after receiving notice of the rejection. The department may require the submission of a further revised plan or, at its sole discretion, the department may (without any obligation to do so) develop, approve and impose upon the applicant the department's own product stewardship plan or an approved plan submitted by other producer(s) pursuant to this chapter. The imposed plan will be presented at a public hearing. The department is not required, and nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring, the department to create or impose a product stewardship plan. 
e.  If the department rejects a revised product stewardship plan or any other subsequently revised plan, the city manager may deem the producer(s) at issue to be out of compliance with this chapter and subject to the enforcement provisions contained in this chapter. 
4.  At least every three years, a producer, group of producers or stewardship organization operating a product stewardship program shall update its product stewardship plan, explaining any substantive changes to components of the plan, and submit the updated plan to the department for review and approval. 
5.  A producer who begins to offer a covered drug or sharps for sale in the city after the effective date of this chapter, must submit a product stewardship plan to the department or provide evidence of having joined an existing approved product stewardship program within sixty days following the producer's initial offer for sale of a covered drug or sharp in the city. 
6.  Any proposed changes to a product stewardship plan must be submitted in writing to the department and approved by the department in writing prior to implementation of any change. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for county-approved plans, only those changes relating to and/or applicable to the city must be submitted in writing to the department for review and approval before implementation. 
7.  Required Plan Amendment. Within sixty days of the final promulgation of rules by the California Board of Pharmacy regarding collection of controlled substances by retail pharmacies in conformity with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency regulations implementing the Secure and Responsible Drug Disposal Act of 2010, each producer, group of producers or stewardship organization operating a product stewardship program shall submit to the department for review and approval an update to its product stewardship plan that describes how the plan will, within one hundred twenty days, comply with and conform to the requirements of such final rules of the California Board of Pharmacy. 
8.  The department may audit the records of a producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization related to a product stewardship plan and/or product stewardship program, or request that the producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization arrange for the department to inspect at reasonable times the facilities, vehicles, and equipment used in carrying out the product stewardship plan. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.060 - Disposal of unwanted products. 
A.  Compliance with Applicable Law. Each product stewardship program must comply with all local, state, and federal laws and regulations applicable to its operations, including, but not limited to, laws, rules, and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of unwanted products. 
B.  Treatment and Disposal. Each product stewardship program must treat sharp's waste by high heat sterilization and dispose of all unwanted covered drugs by incineration at a medical waste or hazardous waste facility authorized to accept such waste. Each treatment and/or disposal facility utilized must be in possession of all required regulatory permits and licenses. 
C.  New Technologies. Producers with product stewardship programs may petition the Department for approval to use treatment and final disposal technologies, where lawful, that provide superior environmental and human health protection than provided by current medical waste or hazardous waste disposal technologies for sharps and covered drugs if and when those technologies are proven and available. The proposed technology, at a minimum, must provide equivalent protection in each, and superior protection in one or more, of the following areas: 
1.  Monitoring of any emissions or waste; 
2.  Worker health and safety; 
3.  Reduction or elimination of air, water, or land emissions contributing to persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic pollution; and 
4.  Overall impact on the environment and human health. 
D.  Packaging Separation. Each product stewardship program shall encourage consumer generators to separate unwanted products from their original containers and packaging, when appropriate, prior to collection or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.070 - Product stewardship program promotion and outreach. 
A.  A product stewardship program must promote the program to consumer generators, pharmacists, retailers of covered drugs and/or sharps, and health care practitioners (including, but not limited to, doctors and other prescribers, veterinarians and veterinary hospitals) as to the proper and safe method to storage and dispose of unwanted products. 
B.  A product stewardship program shall include, but is not limited to, developing, and updating as necessary, educational and other outreach materials for use by retailers of covered drugs and/or sharps. These materials may include, but are not limited to, two or more of the following: 
1.  Signage that is prominently displayed and easily visible to the consumer. 
2.  Written materials and templates of materials for reproduction by retailers to be provided to the consumer at the time of purchase or delivery, or both. 
3.  Advertising and/or other promotional materials related to the product stewardship program. 
C.  A product stewardship program must prepare education and outreach materials that publicize the location and operation of collection locations in the city and disseminate the materials to health care facilities, pharmacies, and other interested parties. The program also must establish a website publicizing collection locations and program operations and a toll-free telephone number that consumer generators can call to find nearby collection locations and understand how the program works. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.080 - Retailer and provider participation. 
A.  Every retailer and every provider of covered drugs and sharps in the city shall establish a system consistent with the requirements of this chapter for the collection of consumer-generated covered drugs and sharps waste for proper disposal during the retailer's or provider's normal hours of operation, except that: 
1.  A retailer or provider who does not sell or provide sharps to consumers is not required to establish a collection system for sharps waste; and 
2.  A retailer or provider who does not sell or provide covered drugs to consumers is not required to establish a collection system for covered drugs waste. 
B.  Each system established by a retailer or provider for the collection and disposal of consumer generated covered drugs and sharps waste shall include, at a minimum, the following elements: 
1.  Subject to the limitations contained in subsection (A) of this section above and subsection (E) of this section below, each retailer or provider shall provide one of the following: 
a.  On-site collection system. Receptacles for the collection of consumer-generated covered drugs and sharps waste within the retailer or provider establishment. The receptacle shall meet applicable state and federal standards for safe disposal of covered drugs and/or sharps. The retailer or provider shall provide for the management and disposal of all consumer-generated covered drugs and/or sharps waste that is collected at the retailer or provider establishment in a safe manner consistent with all state and federal laws and regulations; or 
b.  Mail-back collection system. Prepaid and preaddressed mail-back envelopes in sufficient capacity for safe disposal of the covered drugs and/or sharps sold or provided to a consumer and meeting applicable state and federal standards for safe disposal of covered drugs and/or sharps. 
2.  Signage prominently displayed within five feet of every public entrance to the retailer or provider establishment and easily visible to the consumer, indicating that the retailer or provider establishment collects consumer-generated covered drugs and/or sharps waste from consumers. 
C.  A retailer or provider of sharps must provide at no additional cost to the consumer an approved sharps disposal container or containers sufficient to dispose of all sharps purchased. A retailer or provider of sharps may refuse to accept from a consumer sharps waste that is not properly contained in an approved container. In the event of a refusal to accept sharps waste, the retailer or provider shall provide the consumer with an appropriate container for proper disposal of said sharps waste. 
D.  Sharps disposal containers shall be either a rigid puncture-resistant container with a sealable lid approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the purpose of transporting sharps for disposal or a pre-paid mail-back container approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the purpose of transporting sharps for disposal. 
E.  All costs of participation by retailers and providers shall be paid or reimbursed by the producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization as part of its program as provided in this chapter. Retailers and providers shall not be expected to incur any costs for participation in a product stewardship program. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.090 - Lists of producers and manufacturers of covered drugs and sharps. 
A.  Within sixty days after the effective date of this chapter (or at a later date as approved in writing by the department), each drug wholesaler that sells any covered drugs and/or sharps in the city must provide a list of the producers of those covered drugs and/or sharps to the department in a form prescribed by the department. Drug wholesalers must update and submit to the department such list of producers of covered drugs and/or sharps by January 15th of each calendar year. 
B.  Within six months after the effective date of this chapter, or within six months after a retailer whose label appears on a covered drug or sharps or on the covered drug's or sharps' packaging starts selling the covered drug or sharps in the city (or at a later date as approved in writing by the department), and, thereafter, upon request from the department, a retailer whose label appears on a covered drug or sharps or on the covered drug's or sharps' packaging must provide the contact information of the manufacturer from whom the retailer obtains the covered drug or sharps, including the mailing address, physical address, telephone number, and email address of the retailer's point of contact at the manufacturer. 
C.  Within six months after the effective date of this chapter, or within six months after a covered drug or sharps repackaged by a repackager is first sold in the city (or at a later date as approved in writing by the department), and, thereafter, upon request from the department, a repackager whose label appears on a covered drug or sharps or on the covered drug's or sharps' packaging must provide the contact information of the manufacturer from whom the repackager obtains the covered drug or sharps, including the mailing address, physical address, telephone number, and email address of the repackager's point of contact at the manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.100 - Reporting. 
A.  On or before July 1, 2017 (or at a later date as approved in writing by the department) and in each subsequent year, every producer, group of producers, or stewardship organization operating a product stewardship program in the city must prepare and submit to the department an annual written report describing the program activities during the previous reporting period. The report must include, at minimum, the following: 
1.  A list of producers participating in the product stewardship program; 
2.  A list of retailers and/or providers participating in the collection of consumer-generated covered drugs and/or sharps waste; 
3.  The amount, by type and by weight, of unwanted products collected from consumer generators collected at each drop-off site and in the entire city and, if applicable, the total amount by type and by weight collected by a mail-back program; 
4.  A description of the collection system, including, without limitation, the location of each collection site and if applicable, locations where envelopes for a mail-back program are provided; 
5.  The name and location of disposal facilities at which unwanted products were disposed of and the weight by type of unwanted products collected from consumer generators disposed of at each facility; 
6.  Whether policies and procedures for collecting, handling, transporting, and disposing of unwanted products, as established in the plan, were followed during the reporting period and a description of any noncompliance; 
7.  Whether any safety or security problems occurred during collection, handling, transportation, or disposal of unwanted products during the reporting period and, if so, what changes have or will be made to policies, procedures, or tracking mechanisms to alleviate the problem and to improve safety and security; 
8.  A description of public education and outreach activities implemented during the reporting period and their effectiveness, including, without limitation, the methodology used to evaluate the outreach and program activities; 
9.  How the product stewardship program complied with all other elements in the product stewardship plan approved by the department, including, without limitation, its degree of success in meeting any performance goals set by the department as part of its approval of the program; and 
10.  Any other information that the department may reasonably require. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "reporting period" means the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.110 - Program assessment and collection of data. 
A.  At least once per year, at a time to be determined by the department, each product stewardship program will conduct a detailed characterization study of unwanted products collected at specified locations to help assess effectiveness of the product stewardship program 
B.  Assessments shall be conducted in a secure location with proper supervision, in full compliance with federal and state laws, rules, and regulations, and in accordance with guidelines issued by the department. 
C.  Data collected from program assessments shall be shared with the department and other relevant agencies in a timely manner. 
D.  The department may require additional assessments as needed to address problems or to help determine program needs. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.120 - List of producers. 
The department shall provide on its website a list of all producers participating in product stewardship programs approved by the department and a list of all producers the department has identified as noncompliant with this chapter or any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.130 - Regulations and fees. 
A.  The city manager may, after a noticed public hearing, adopt such rules and regulations as necessary to implement, administer, and enforce this chapter. 
B.  The city council authorizes the city manager to charge producers or a group of producers participating in a product stewardship program for any costs the city incurs in administering and enforcing this chapter. The amount charged shall not exceed actual costs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  The department shall administer the penalty provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Any person, producer, plan operator or product stewardship organization that violates or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties, remedies, and criminal, civil and/or administrative enforcement actions set forth in Title 4 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. Each and every day a violation of this chapter exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense for which enforcement action may be taken. 
D.  In determining the appropriate penalties, the department shall consider the extent of harm caused by the violation, the nature and persistence of the violation, the frequency of past violations, any action taken to mitigate the violation, and the financial burden to the violator. 
E.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a provision or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person pursuant to Title 4 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
F.  The department may establish appropriate administrative rules for implementing this chapter, conducting hearings, and rendering decisions pursuant to this section. 
G.  Upon the failure of any person to comply with any requirement of this chapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, the city attorney's office may petition any court having jurisdiction for injunctive relief, payment of civil penalties and any other appropriate remedy, including, without limitation, restraining such person or entity from continuing any prohibited activity and compelling compliance with lawful requirements. However, this subsection does not permit the city or any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain the sale of any covered drug or sharps in the city. 
H.  Any person who knowingly and willfully violates the requirements of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. A conviction for a misdemeanor violation under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars and not more than five hundred dollars for each day per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
I.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
8.38.150 - Additional provisions. 
A.  Disclaimer. In adopting and implementing this chapter, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. The city is not assuming or imposing on its officers and/or employees an obligation by which they could be liable in money damages to any person or entity who claims that a breach proximately caused injury. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter, or the product stewardship program in which producers of sharps and covered drug products who sell sharps and/or covered drugs in the are required to participate, is intended to protect anticompetitive or collusive conduct nor shall this chapter be construed to modify, impair, or supersede the operation of any of the antitrust laws or unfair competition laws of the State of California or of the United States. 
C.  This chapter shall be construed in accordance with California state law, including but not limited to the Medical Waste Management Act set forth at California Health and Safety Code Section 117600, et seq., and shall not be construed in a way that would result in conflict with, or preemption by, any such state law. 
D.  This chapter shall be in effect for a period of ten years following enactment. 
(Ord. No. 191, § I, 12-21-2016)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - YOUTH PROTECTION CURFEW ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Curfew hours" means the hours between eleven p.m. to five a.m. for minors under the age of eighteen years. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the resulting situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement, entertainment or recreation. 
"Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, pursuant to court order, is the legal guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court; or 
3.  A person who is at least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or legal guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
"Public place" means: 
1.  Any out-of-door area to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds; and 
2.  The out-of-door common areas of establishment, including but not limited to entry ways and parking lots. 
"Remain" means to: 
1.  Linger or stay; or 
2.  Fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by a police officer or the person in control of the public place. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
"Tarry," as used in this chapter, means remaining, wandering, strolling or playing without apparent purpose and while not under the control or supervision of a parent, guardian, or adult designated by the parent or guardian. (Ord. 59.3 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.04.020 - Prohibition—Tarry. 
It is unlawful for an unemancipated minor (under the age of eighteen years) to tarry in any public place between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. (Ord. 59.3 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.04.030 - Exemptions. 
A minor shall not be in violation of this chapter if, at the time the minor was stopped by a police officer, the minor was: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
B.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without detour or stop; 
C.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
D.  Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or returning home from a lawful employment activity, without detour or stop; 
E.  Acting in response to an emergency; 
F.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence; 
G.  Returning home, without detour or stop, from a school, cultural, sport, amusement, entertainment, movie, or recreation activity; or any organized rally, demonstration, meeting or similar activity; 
H.  Waiting at a train or bus station for transportation; 
I.  Emancipated in accordance with the California Family Code or other applicable state law. (Ord. 59.3 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.04.040 - Enforcement procedure. 
A.  Before taking any enforcement action under Section 9.04.020, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. 
B.  The officer shall not take enforcement action under this chapter unless the officer has probable cause to believe that no exemption under Section 9.04.030 applies. (Ord. 59.3 § 2 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.08 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Unlawful within city limits. 
It is unlawful to discharge or shoot a firearm within the city limits except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 65 § 1, 1975)  
9.08.020 - Permitted uses. 
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to the discharge or shooting of a firearm by: 
A.  A peace officer in the performance of his duties or in the course of his training; 
B.  Guards or messengers of common carriers, banks or other financial institutions while actually employed in and about the shipment, transportation or delivery of any money, treasure, bullion, bonds or other things of value; 
C.  Members of the military forces of this state or of the United States engaged in the performance of their duty; 
D.  Private investigators, private patrol operators and operators of a private patrol service who are licensed pursuant to the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, and while acting within the course and scope of their employment; 
E.  Uniform security guards, regularly employed and compensated as such by persons engaged in any lawful business, while actually engaged in protecting and preserving the property of their employers; 
F.  Building guards and night watchmen employed by any public agency while acting within the scope and in the course of their employment; 
G.  Animal control officers regularly compensated as such by a governmental agency when acting in the course and scope of their employment; 
H.  Humane officers authorized to carry weapons pursuant to Section 607F of the Civil Code of the state of California while actually engaged in the performance of their duty pursuant to such section. (Ord. 65.2 (part), 1994: Ord. 65.1 § 2, 1978; Ord. 65 § 1, 1975)  
9.08.030 - Nonapplicable uses. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The discharge or shooting of a firearm at a target range or practice range authorized and operated with written permission of the chief of police; 
B.  The discharge or shooting of a firearm at a demonstration or exhibition authorized and operated with written permission of the council; 
C.  The discharge or shooting of a firearm under circumstances prohibited by either state law or federal law. (Ord. 65.2 (part), 1994: Ord. 65 § 3, 1975)  
9.08.040 - Firearm. 
The term "firearm" as used in this chapter includes, but is not limited to, any rifle, pistol, revolver, shotgun, air gun, BB gun or other type of gun from which a shell, pellet, cartridge, bullet or other projectile is propelled by any force including, but not limited to, air, gas, explosion, spring, elasticity or leverage. (Ord. 65 § 4, 1975)  
9.08.050 - Violation—Impoundment. 
The chief of police of Scotts Valley or his authorized deputies may impound any firearm used in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any firearm impounded hereunder may be returned to the owner thereof, or, in the sole discretion of the chief of police or his deputies, be retained, disposed of, or destroyed in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.028 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 65 § 5, 1975)  
Chapter 9.12 - SALE AND DISPLAY OF NARCOTIC AND OTHER PARAPHERNALIA 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter that commercial activities in connection with the selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia used, designed, modified, altered or intended to be used for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance as defined in the Health and Safety Code of California (drug paraphernalia) occur in such a manner and be so restricted that the parents and guardians of persons under the age of eighteen years of age and responsible for the minor's welfare, shall have an opportunity to exercise meaningful parental guidance in the drug field where there has been a continuing problem of substance abuse among the young people of this community. (Ord. 87 § 1, 1980)  
9.12.020 - Legislative findings. 
The city council finds and declares that the open display of drug paraphernalia encourages youngsters to experiment with and use illegal drugs outside of the knowledge and consent of the responsible parent or legal guardian, prevents the exercise of parental responsibility, contributes to the breakdown of families, and constitutes a nuisance hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. (Ord. 87 § 2, 1980)  
9.12.030 - Responsibility of owner—Minors to be accompanied by parent. 
No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of California, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 87 Ch. 2 § 1, 1980)  
9.12.040 - Minors excluded from certain rooms. 
A person under the age of eighteen years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 87 Ch. 2 § 2, 1980)  
9.12.050 - Sale and display rooms. 
A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure from which any minor not accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian is excluded. Each entrance to such a room or enclosure shall be sign-posted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that entrance is prohibited to any minor not accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 87 Ch. 2 § 3, 1980)  
9.12.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
The violation of Sections 9.12.030 through 9.12.050 shall be both a misdemeanor subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1.08 as from time to time amended, and a nuisance subject to abatement as provided in Section 9.12.020. (Ord. 87 Ch. 3 § 1, 1980)  
Chapter 9.16 - MOBILE HOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds, declares and determines that: 
A.  There exists within the city and the surrounding areas a serious shortage of mobile home rental spaces, which has resulted in low vacancy rates and the potential for rising space rents; 
B.  Because of the high cost of moving mobile homes, the potential for damage resulting therefrom, the requirements relating to the installation of mobile homes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation, the lack of alternative home sites for mobile home residences and the substantial investment of mobile home owners in such homes, there exists a shortage of mobile home park spaces; 
C.  It is necessary to protect the residents of mobile homes from unreasonable space rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the need for mobile home park owners to receive a just and reasonable income sufficient to cover the costs of repairs, maintenance, insurance, employee services, additional amenities and other operations, as well as a just and reasonable return on investment; and 
D.  It is the intent of this chapter to protect mobile home park residents from unreasonable space rent adjustments and mobile home park owners from infringement upon property rights. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter stated: 
A.  "Annual rent adjustment" means the rent adjustment made to the base rent not more frequently than once every three hundred sixty-five days. 
B.  "Base rent" means that rent charged by the mobile home park as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and recalculated thereafter each year according to any increase only for changes in the Consumer Price Index and shall not include any additional increases other than CPI except as provided in Sections 9.16.080 and 9.16.100 of this chapter. 
C.  "Capital project" means a project which includes the construction of (i) new improvements mandated by a public entity for health or safety purposes or (ii) the replacement of old improvements in a mobile home park including, but not limited to, construction, installation or replacement of a clubhouse or portions thereof, common area facilities, swimming pool, sauna or hot tub, or other recreational amenities, streets and driveways, security gates, outdoor or common area lighting, retaining walls, sewer, electrical plumbing, water, or television reception systems, sprinkler systems, or any similar improvement. Capital projects are improvements defined herein which have a life expectancy of five years or more, which are treated as capital improvements for federal and state income tax purposes, which may not be deducted for such tax purposes as expenses and which have a minimum value of at least ten thousand dollars for each project in a park with fifty mobile homes or more and at least five thousand dollars for each project in a park with less than fifty mobile homes. Capital projects do not include normal repairs or maintenance or insured repairs or replacements. Further, capital projects do not include improvements required due to owner's failure to provide reasonable and sound maintenance of a facility or facilities. 
D.  "Commission" means the mobile home rent review commission established by this chapter. 
E.  "Consumer Price Index (CPI)" means the Consumer Price Index for Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as published for the San Francisco-Oakland area by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
F.  "Mobile home" means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the California Vehicle Code. Mobile home includes a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code, and a mobile home, as defined in Section 18008 of the California Health and Safety Code, but does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 799.24 of the California Civil Code and Section 18010 of the California Health and Safety Code or a commercial coach as defined in Section 18001.8 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
G.  "Mobile home park" means any area of land within the city where two or more mobile home spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. 
H.  "Mobile home space" means the site within a mobile home park intended, designed or used for the location or accommodation of a mobile home and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith. 
I.  "Owner" means and includes the owner or operator of a mobile home park or an agent or representative authorized to act on such owner's or operator's behalf in connection with the maintenance or operation of such park. 
J.  "Rent" means the money paid in consideration of the use and occupancy of a mobile home space, including services, amenities and benefits in connection therewith. 
K.  "Resident" means any person entitled to occupy a mobile home pursuant to ownership thereof or rental or lease arrangement with the owner of the mobile home or as authorized pursuant to the Mobile Home Residency Law (California Civil Code Section 798 et seq.). However, "resident" shall not include any owner or employee of owner. 
L.  "Voluntary vacancy" means any one of the following: a sale or resale of a mobile home to a new resident(s); a removal of the mobile home from the space; or a termination of tenancy pursuant to the Mobile Home Residency Law. A sale, resale or transfer of interest between members of the same immediate family (defined as the homeowner's legal spouse, the homeowner's legal parents or the homeowner's legal children) or to a beneficiary of a valid will or trust of the tenant shall not constitute a voluntary vacancy under this provision. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.030 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all mobile home parks and all mobile home spaces owned by owner within the city, except as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to mobile home spaces covered by leases at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which provided for more than month-to-month tenancy, but only for the duration of any such lease. Upon the expiration or other termination of any such lease, all provisions of this chapter shall immediately be applicable to the mobile home space, unless and until such space is again leased for more than a month-to-month tenancy. 
C.  None of the provisions of this chapter shall preclude a resident from entering into a written lease with an owner. 
D.  Owner shall inform any prospective resident of the applicability of this chapter to the prospective mobile home space and shall supply a copy of this chapter to such prospective resident prior to executing a written lease with such prospective resident. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.040 - Rent review commission. 
A.  There is created within the city of Scotts Valley (hereinafter the "city") a mobile home rent review commission (hereinafter "the commission") which shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the city. Each city council member shall appoint one member of the commission. All appointments shall be confirmed by majority vote of the city council. Each commission member shall serve the same term as the council member making the appointment. The members of the commission at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall serve the remainder of their respective terms. 
B.  Commission members shall not be mobile home park tenants or have any financial interest in any mobile home park. 
C.  Commission members may not be removed from the commission except for reasons of incapacity, death, resignation, mobile home park tenancy, financial interest in any mobile home park, and/or conviction of a crime involving fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude. 
D.  Each member of the commission shall be entitled to such compensation as may be set by the city council. Such costs shall be borne by the city. If established, compensation shall be only for hearings attended by the commission members in the performance of their duties as set forth in Section 9.16.090. 
E.  The commission shall not have any authority to spend or authorize the expenditure of any public funds. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.050 - Duties of the commission. 
The duties of the commission include: 
A.  To meet upon the filing of a request for a rent adjustment pursuant to Section 9.16.070, 9.16.080 or 9.16.090; 
B.  To receive, investigate, hold hearings on and pass upon the subject request; 
C.  To continue the space rent charges as they exist or to adjust rents either upward or downward upon completion of their hearings or investigations of requests for rent adjustments pursuant to Section 9.16.070, 9.16.080 or 9.16.090; 
D.  To maintain and keep at City Hall rent review hearing files and documents listing the time, date and place of hearings, the parties involved, the addresses involved, and the final dispositions of the request; 
E.  To prepare rent registration statements for each mobile home space affected by this chapter as required by Section 9.16.060 and rent increase petition forms as required by Section 9.16.090; 
F.  To determine the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index no later than June 30th of each year which shall be used to calculate rent adjustments pursuant to Section 9.16.070; 
G.  To promulgate procedural regulations relating to the conduct of hearings. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.060 - Mobile home park registration. 
Within the month of January of each year, owner shall be required to file with the commission a rent registration statement for each mobile home space affected by this chapter. The commission shall devise such registration forms so as to call for information reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter, and shall mail such forms to owner in sufficient time as to allow owner to file the registration statements. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.070 - Rent adjustment. 
A.  At least ninety days prior to the effective date of a rental adjustment, owner shall serve all affected residents, either personally or by mail, with notice of the proposed adjustment in accordance with state law and justification for such increase. Within five days prior to any notice to residents of a rent adjustment, owner shall provide the commission with the following information: 
1.  The effective date of the noticed adjustment; 
2.  Identification of the mobile home spaces affected; 
3.  The amount of the rent prior to the effective date of the notice for each of those mobile home spaces; 
4.  The amount of the increase (in dollars) for each of those mobile home spaces and the basis for the increase with supporting data and calculations; 
5.  The identity of spaces under lease. 
B.  No adjustment to the base rent for a mobile home space shall be noticed or permitted or enforced more frequently than once every three hundred sixty-five days, except as provided in Sections 9.16.080, 9.16.090 and 9.16.100 of this chapter. 
C.  Maximum Allowable Adjustment to Rent. 
1.  Owner shall be permitted to increase the rent for a mobile home space in excess of that which was lawfully charged during the previous year based upon all or any of the following bases: 
a.  Once every three hundred sixty-five days, owner may adjust the base rent in an amount not to exceed that amount derived by multiplying the base rent by one hundred percent of the change of the CPI, as defined herein and as established by the commission. In no event shall the increase be less than three and one-half percent of the base rent nor greater than seven percent thereof. 
b.  Owner may be granted an increase in rent spread across all mobile home spaces in the mobile home park on a prorata basis in the event of an increase in the taxes (except any increase in property taxes due to a change in ownership), assessments, or levies imposed upon the mobile home park by local, state or federal government agencies, as permitted under the Mobile Home Residency Law (Civil Code Section 798 et seq.). Owner shall so decrease rent in such manner in the event of a decrease in such costs to owner. Any such increase may be made and any such decrease shall be made at the time when owner incurs the same, subject to the notice requirements of this chapter. 
c.  Owner may be granted an increase in rent spread across all mobile home spaces in the mobile home park on a prorata basis in the event a capital project, as defined in this chapter, is made within the mobile home park. The amount allowed as increased rent shall be equal to fifty percent of the costs of the capital project, including design, permits, construction and financing costs. The increase in rent may be made at the time when the capital project is completed as determined by final inspection of all governmental entities, if any, having jurisdiction over the capital project, subject to notice requirements applicable thereto. Such increase in rent shall be evenly spread over a period of time equivalent to either the Internal Revenue Service amortization period applicable to the capital improvement or a shorter period agreed to by owner and the resident committee in the subject mobile home park. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated in this chapter, prior to installing any new amenity in a mobile home park, a vote of all owners of mobile homes, excluding those mobile home owners who are the owner, must be taken to approve the installation of such new amenity. Each mobile home space, excluding those mobile home spaces which are owned by owner, shall be given one vote. The installation of any new amenity shall only be permitted if approved by a vote of fifty percent plus one vote of all votes cast. 
3.  Owner and the residents of a mobile home park shall in good faith negotiate the sharing of costs of repairing or replacing facilities incurred due to any acts of God for which damages are not covered by prudent insurance coverage. 
D.  In the event an owner attempts to increase rent without complying with the provisions of this chapter or the residents question the validity of a request to increase or decrease rent, the residents may challenge the proposed increase or decrease in rent by complying with the provisions of Section 9.16.090. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.080 - Other rent adjustments. 
A.  Purpose. Notwithstanding the general space rent adjustment contained in this chapter, an owner having exhausted his rent adjustment remedies under Section 9.16.070, shall be allowed to make an application and present a rent adjustment formula approach to the commission in the manner provided in Section 9.16.090, which will allow the owner a just and reasonable return on his/her investment, provided that the owner can prove by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she will not receive a just and reasonable return under Section 9.16.070. 
B.  Consideration of Relevant Factors. The commission shall approve such rent increases under this section as it determines to be just and reasonable by considering any factors the commission deems relevant in the manner provided in Section 9.16.090. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.090 - Dispute resolution. 
In the event (i) owner attempts to increase the rent without complying with the provisions of this chapter, (ii) the residents question the validity of a request to increase or decrease rent, or (iii) the owner believes he/she is not earning a just a reasonable return on his/her investment, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Meet and Confer. The owner and residents shall meet, confer and attempt to resolve any disputes set forth in (i), (ii) or (iii) above, as a condition precedent to filing a petition with the commission as outlined in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Petition to Commission. In the event the owner and residents are unable to resolve their disputes through the meet and confer process, either party may file a written request with the commission asking the commission to resolve the dispute (the "petition"). The petition shall include a summary of the attempts to meet and confer and the results of those attempts. 
1.  Hearing Process. 
a.  Prior to the hearing, the party bringing the petition shall submit, on a form prescribed by the commission, a written statement outlining the facts, circumstances and legal basis for filing the petition. The city clerk shall immediately send a copy of the petition and supporting evidence to the party opposing the petition. Thereafter, the opposing party shall have twenty days following receipt of notice of the petition to file with the city clerk a response in opposition to the petition. The clerk shall serve a copy of the response on the petitioner, who shall then have ten days to submit a written rebuttal. The city clerk shall then serve on the opposing party a copy of that rebuttal. 
b.  The petition shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in a sum equal to ten dollars for each space actually available for rental in the mobile home park affected by the petition. All or any part of the actual costs incurred by the city pursuant to rent review under this chapter, including, without limitation, expenses attributable to city staff time, city attorneys' fees, stenographic fees, city administrative overhead, and the like, shall be assessed against the party challenging the increase or decrease in rent. The balance, if any, shall be refunded to the person or persons who submitted the cash deposit upon the conclusion of the hearing. The petitioner shall, within thirty days of receipt of written notice from the city clerk, pay the difference in excess of the cash deposit and the actual costs of the hearing, if any. Failure to pay the actual costs within thirty days of written notice by the city shall be deemed a violation of this code and enforceable by the city either criminally or civilly as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. If the commission determines that a rent adjustment was imposed in bad faith or in violation of this chapter, the commission shall order the owner to reimburse the tenants for the costs incurred, if any, in bringing a petition. 
c.  The commission shall set a hearing, which shall be open to the public, on the petition at a place and time to be set by the commission, but no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days after receipt of the completed petition and the fee. The commission may continue the hearing from time to time. 
d.  At the hearing, the petitioner, opposing party, affected tenants or other interested persons may offer testimony, documents, written declarations, or other relevant evidence. The commission may refuse to accept any materials submitted in connection with any petition or response thereto which the commission considers irrelevant. The commission may reasonably limit the time allowed for oral testimony and cross-examination. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such proceedings. 
e.  No later than ten days before any hearing on a petition, the city clerk shall send notices of the date, place and time of the hearing to the owner and affected tenants. 
f.  All materials submitted in support of a petition shall be available to the public upon written request to the city clerk. Copies may be made at the cost of the requesting party for the usual copying costs of the city. 
2.  Decision of the Commission Final. 
a.  A written decision shall be prepared by or at the direction of the commission no later than forty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing on the petition and following adoption by a majority of the commission, the decision shall be final. All parties to a hearing shall receive a notice of the commission's decision and a copy of the written findings on which the decision is based. 
b.  Within thirty days after adopting the decision, the commission shall submit to the city council a written report regarding its findings and conclusions. 
c.  The commission may require the owner to (1) reduce the rental or service charges to a rate to be determined by the commission; (2) continue the rental or service charges as they existed under the former lease or rental arrangement; or (3) increase the rental or service charges to a rate set by the commission. 
d.  The decision of the commission shall be final and shall provide notice to all parties that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as now stated or later amended. The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure (Judicial Review) as now stated or later amended, shall apply to all final decisions of the commission, including, without limitation, the time in which judicial review must be sought. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.100 - Voluntary vacancies. 
In addition to any other adjustments to rent allowed under Sections 9.16.070, 9.16.080 and 9.16.090 of this chapter, and notwithstanding the limitation providing for only one rental adjustment per year to the base rent pursuant to Section 9.16.070(B), owner shall be permitted to increase the base rent applicable to a mobile home space upon a voluntary vacancy of the space by an amount of ten percent of the base rent for the mobile home space applicable at the time of the voluntary vacancy or thirty dollars, whichever shall be greater. The base rent on a particular mobile home space shall not be increased due to a voluntary vacancy more frequently than once in any thirty-six-month period. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.16.110 - Discretion for lower adjustments. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring an owner to adjust rents each year or as preventing an owner from adjusting rents to levels less than those allowed in this chapter. Further, owner shall give good faith consideration to a resident's request to be relieved from an increase in rent allowable under this chapter due to that resident's suffering substantial economic hardship. (Ord. 98.12 § 2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 9.18 - PUBLIC TRANSIT FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
9.18.010 - Trespass on public transit facilities. 
Every person who enters or remains on or in a public transit facility (including, without limitation, a metro center, transfer center, or other passenger boarding or deboarding facility, or bus owned or operated by Santa Cruz metropolitan transit district) after having been notified by the owner, operator or other person in charge thereof that consent for such person to enter or remain on or in such facility has been withdrawn is guilty of a trespass and may be prosecuted for the commission of a misdemeanor or infraction. Such notification that the owner, operator or other person in charge has issued a withdrawal of consent for a person to enter or remain on or in a public transit facility shall be given in writing. Such withdrawal of consent shall specify the period of time (not to exceed fourteen consecutive days) and the particular public transit facilities from which the person to whom the notice is given (recipient) shall keep away. Such notice shall also contain a statement informing the recipient that he or she may appeal the issuance of the withdrawal of consent to the issuing person's superior (hearing officer). The withdrawal of consent shall be stayed pending the conduct of an informal due process hearing on the appeal unless the hearing officer determines that the presence of the recipient will cause a substantial and material threat: (1) to the orderly operation of the public transit facility; or (2) of significant injury to person or property. A withdrawal of consent may be issued only to a person who has (within the issuing person's presence) violated duly adopted written rules or regulations applicable to a public transit facility or otherwise disrupted the operation of a public transit facility in a manner proscribed by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 136 § 1 (part), 1988)  
9.18.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction and shall be punished accordingly as provided in Chapter 1.08 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. (Ord. 136 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 9.20 - SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Chief" is the Chief of Police of the City of Scotts Valley, or his designee. 
B.  "Loud or unruly gathering" means a gathering of two or more persons on private property or a permitted gathering of two or more persons on public property whose loud or unruly conduct constitutes a threat to public health, safety or general welfare. This term excludes incidents of domestic violence. 
C.  "Responsible person(s)" means a person(s) with a right of possession in the property on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited to, an owner or tenant of the property if the gathering is on private property, or a permittee if the gathering is a permitted gathering on public property, or any person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering. "Responsible person(s)" shall additionally include the landlord of another responsible person and the parents and/or legal guardians of responsible persons under the age of twenty-one years. To include liability for special security service charges imposed by this chapter, the responsible person need not be present at the loud or unruly gathering resulting in the emergency response giving rise to the imposition of special security service charges. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon responsible persons. 
D.  "Special security services" means the provision of any police, fire or other emergency response to a loud or unruly gathering within twelve months of the initial response as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
9.20.020 - Response to loud or unruly gatherings. 
When a police officer responds to a first loud or unruly gathering at premises in the city with a given address, the officer shall inform any responsible person(s) at the scene that the officer has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists resulting in offensive noises in violation of this chapter and the responsible person(s) will be charged for the cost of any special security services required for subsequent responses to the scene within the next twelve months. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
9.20.030 - Cost recovery for special security services. 
Where the police department responds to a location where offensive noises are occurring more than once within a consecutive twelve month period the responsible person(s) shall be liable for the costs of providing special security service for the second and following responses. If the responsible person(s) is/are minors, the parents or guardians of that person(s) shall be liable for such costs. If there is more than one responsible person, they shall all be jointly and severally liable for the full cost of the special security service. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
9.20.040 - Billing and collection. 
Charges for special security service incurred in responding to a loud or unruly gathering involving offensive noises following the first response shall include a reasonable charge for the responding officer's time, actual costs of any equipment used or damaged, together with additional charge for administrative overhead as determined from time-to-time by resolution of the city council, all as determined by the city finance department. These charges shall be computed and a bill submitted to the responsible person(s). The chief shall promulgate notice and billing procedures for this purpose. The bill shall be a dept owed to the city and failure to pay that bill within thirty days is a violation of this code. If the city is obliged to initiate litigation to recover this debt, the responsible person shall be liable for: 
A.  Costs of suit; 
B.  Reasonable attorney's fees; and 
C.  Any other costs of collection incurred by the city. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
9.20.050 - Violations and fines. 
(a)  It shall be an infraction for a responsible person to conduct or allow a loud or unruly gathering on premises owned by the responsible person or on premises rented by or to the responsible person. A third or subsequent violation within a twelve month period shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Fines: 
(1)  A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars. 
(2)  A second violation of this section at a given address in the city within a given twelve month period shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars. 
(3)  A third or subsequent violation of this section at a given address in the city within a twelve month period shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars. 
(c)  The fines prescribed at subsection (b) are in addition to any special security service charges that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed at subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) are payable whether or not the responsible person at the time of the current loud or unruly gathering is the same person who was the responsible person for any prior loud or unruly gathering at those premises. 
(e)  The fine schedule prescribed at subsection (b) is a "rolling schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable the police department or city attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly gatherings have taken place at the premises in question during the statutory twelve month period. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
9.20.060 - Service of alcoholic beverages to minors. 
The city council hereby finds that the service of alcohol to minors at loud and unruly gatherings and the consumption of alcohol by minors at loud or unruly gatherings has in the past and continues to pose a threat to the health and safety of all persons who reside in the city and also causes significant disruption of city residents' quiet enjoyment of their households, especially in the city's residential neighborhoods. In addition, such conduct on behalf of persons who serve alcohol to minors and minors who consume alcohol at loud or unruly gatherings results in the expenditure of a disproportionate percentage of the city's police, fire and public safety resources which are underwritten primarily by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its taxpayers and residents. It is therefore the policy of the city council that in responding to loud or unruly gatherings, the city police department shall strictly enforce any and all applicable state laws pertaining to the service of alcohol to minors, and the consumption of alcohol by minors, and in respect to minors in possession of alcohol, the police department shall establish a "no tolerance" protocol by which the police department contacts, or causes the minor's school to contact, the minor's parents or legal guardians whenever the minor is found to be in possession of alcohol or narcotics or found to be intoxicated at a loud or unruly gathering. Where the minor's school has an internal student disciplinary office any such incident shall likewise be reported to that office. 
(Ord. 180, § 2, 11-19-08)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Twenty-five miles per hour. 
On the basis of a traffic survey, the city council determines and finds that a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour be established for the following named street: 
Bean Creek Road for the first four-tenths of a mile running from Scotts Valley Drive westbound to approximately the first entrance of Montevalle Trailer Park. 
Bethany Drive for approximately six-tenths of a mile, running from Scotts Valley Drive northbound to the Tabor Way intersection. 
Whispering Pines Drive from its intersection with Mt. Hermon Road southbound approximately five-tenths of a mile to its intersection with Estrella Drive. 
(Ord. 173, § 1, 2003: Ord. 10T-11 § 2, 1978)  
10.04.020 - Thirty miles per hour. 
On the basis of a traffic survey, the city council determines and finds that a prima facie speed limit of thirty miles per hour be established for the following named streets: 
A.  Granite Creek Road from Highway 17 on the west to the city limits on the east; 
B.  Hacienda Drive, all of which is located within the city limits, running west from the intersection of Glenwood Drive to where it dead ends approximately one block south of Cadillac Drive; 
C.  Glenwood Drive from its intersection with Scotts Valley Drive to the northbound city limits. 
D.  Green Hills Road from its intersection with Glen Canyon Road northbound approximately one and three-tenths to its most northern dead end. 
E.  Lockewood Lane, approximately one mile, one-half of a mile which is within the city limit and one-half of which is in the county; 
F.  Glen Canyon Road from its intersection with Mount Hermon Road to the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 173, §§ 2, 3, 2003: Ord. 166 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 165 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 10T-19 (part), 1989; Ord. 10T-11 (part), 1983, Ord. 101 § 2, 1981; Ord. 10T-11 § 3, 1978)  
10.04.030 - Thirty-five miles per hour. 
On the basis of a traffic survey, the city council determines and finds that a prima facie speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour be established for the following named streets: 
A.  Mount Hermon Road for its entire length, to the city limits on the east and to the city limits on the west; 
B.  Scotts Valley Drive from its intersection with Mount Hermon Road, north, to the end of Scotts Valley Drive. 
(Ord. 166 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 165 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 10T-11 (part), 1983; Ord. 10T-11 § 4, 1978)  
10.04.040 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. No. 173, § 4, repealed § 10.04.40 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to forty mile per hour speed limit as enacted by Ord. 10T-11 § 5, adopted 1978; as amended.  
10.04.050 - Speed limit where persons at work. 
The speed limit upon any portion of a highway, street, or roadway within the city, where officers or employees of the city, or any contractor of the city or his employees, are at work on the roadway or within the right-of-way so close thereto as to be endangered by passing traffic, is twenty-five miles per hour. This section applies only when appropriate signs, indicating the limits of the restricted zone, and the speed limit therein, are placed or caused to be placed by the city engineer within four hundred feet of each end of such zone. The signs shall display the figures indicating the applicable speed limit and shall indicate the purpose of the speed restriction. 
Within the authority herein granted, the city engineer shall determine, in the exercise of his sole discretion, when and under what circumstances such restricted speed zones shall be established, as well as the extent of such restricted zones, and the appropriate signage therefor. 
(Ord. 10T-17 § 1, 1988)  
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Storage of vehicles on streets prohibited. 
A.  No person or business who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park or leave standing, or cause to be left parked or left standing, such vehicle upon any public street, public highway, or any street designated in Section 10.18.020, in the city for a period of seventy-two or more consecutive hours. 
B.  No person or business which as part of its business operation maintains and operates a fleet of vehicles comprised or three or more vehicles shall use city streets or alleys, in lieu of private property, to store or park those vehicles when not in use by the business. Pursuant to this subsection, a vehicle shall not be considered to be in use by the business during those hours of the day when the business is not open to the public, including those hours when the business may only be contacted by a voice mail telephone answering system, a telephone answering service, email or facsimile. Pursuant to this subsection a vehicle shall not be considered in use by the business after ten p.m. This subsection shall not prohibit a person from parking a single business-owned vehicle on a city street or alley within one block of his or her residence when that person is an employee of the business and the business requires that person to drive a business-owned vehicle to and from that person's place of employment. 
(Ord. 33 § 1, 1969; Ord. 181, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 110.6, § 1, 11-2-2016)  
10.08.020 - Removal of vehicles. 
In the event that any vehicle is parked or left standing on any public street or highway in the city for a period of seventy-two or more consecutive hours, any member of the California Highway Patrol, or any regularly employed and salaried deputy of the sheriff's office of the county of Santa Cruz or any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Scotts Valley police department, or the chief of police of the city, may remove such vehicle from the highway in the manner and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 33 § 2, 1969)  
10.08.030 - Notice. 
In the event that any officer removes a vehicle from a highway or street pursuant to Section 10.08.020, such officer shall give the notices provided for in the Vehicle Code, and the keeper of the garage in which the vehicle is stored may have a lien thereon dependent upon possession for his compensation for towage and for caring for and keeping safe such vehicle subject to the requirements and conditions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 33 § 3, 1969)  
10.08.040 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park or leave standing or cause to be left parked or left standing such vehicle upon any public street or highway or within any public right-of-way in the city for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying such vehicle for sale; and/or 
B.  Servicing, repairing, assembling, disassembling, modifying or otherwise working on such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. 120 § 1(A), 1985; Ord. 33 § 4, 1969)  
10.08.045 - Removal of vehicles for limited purposes. 
A.  Whenever the use of a street or highway within the city is authorized by the city manager for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, including, but not limited to, street sweeping, paving, curb painting or repair, general maintenance, tree trimming or removal, and any vehicle, as that term is defined in the Vehicle Code of California, is parked in such a way as to interfere with the use of the street or highway for that purpose, then any of the following may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle parked on the street or highway at the expense of the owner thereof: 
1.  Any peace officer, as that term is defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code; and/or 
2.  The code enforcement officer of the city. 
B.  Signs giving notice that such a parked vehicle may be removed shall be erected or placed on the street or highway at least twenty-four hours prior to removal of a vehicle by the city pursuant to this section. 
C.  The ordinance codified in this section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of California. 
(Ord. 163 § 1, 1998)  
10.08.050 - Laws and regulations not affected. 
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to other parking regulations which are or may be imposed by the laws of this state and the provisions of other ordinances and/or resolutions of the city and shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the laws of this state or ordinances or regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 33 § 5, 1969)  
10.08.060 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person or business violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 120 § 1(B), 1985; Ord. 181, § 2, 11-19-2008)  
10.08.070 - Storage of vehicles on roadways within Scotts Village Shopping Center and Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center, and on a certain roadway adjacent to the Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center—Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park or leave standing or stopped, such vehicle upon any roadways located within the Scotts Village Shopping Center and the Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center, including, without limitation, all roadways traversing the westerly, northerly and easterly boundaries of said shopping center and within those certain parcels of real property identified as Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Numbers 22-231-15, 22-231-16 and 22-231-17, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device. 
(Ord. 10T-16 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 10T-13 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.08.080 - Vehicular parking at Scotts Village Shopping Center and Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center limited to designated parking stalls. 
A.  Within the Scotts Village Shopping Center, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park or leave standing, or cause to be left parked or left standing, such vehicle other than within the boundaries of a duly designated parking stall. 
B.  All parking stalls within the aforesaid shopping centers shall be designated by yellow or white stripes painted on the surface of the road. 
C.  All vehicles within the aforesaid shopping centers shall be parked or left standing within the boundaries of the designated parking stall. No vehicle shall be parked or left standing in such a fashion as to intrude into or utilize the space of more than one parking stall. 
(Ord. 10T-16 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 10T-13 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.08.090 - Violation of Sections 10.08.070 and 10.08.080 an infraction. 
The violation of any of the provisions of Sections 10.08.070 and 10.08.080 of this code shall constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. 10T-16 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 10T-13 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.08.100 - Vehicle parking in public parking off-street lots. 
Pursuant to authority granted in California Vehicle Code Section 22519, parking in off-street parking lots owned or operated by the city is subject to the following: 
A.  No person who owns, has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park, leave standing, or cause to be left parked or left standing, such vehicle other than within the boundaries of a duly designated parking stall. 
B.  All parking stalls within the off-street lots shall be designated by yellow or white stripes painted on the surface of the road. 
C.  All vehicles within the off-street lots shall be parked or left standing within the boundaries of the designated parking stall. No vehicle shall be parked or left standing in such a fashion as to intrude into, or utilize, the space of more than one parking stall. 
D.  The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute an infraction. 
E.  Enforcement may only occur after signs giving notice of the regulations have been erected in a conspicuous place, placed at the entrance of each public parking facility. 
(Ord. 10T-20 § 1, 1995)  
10.08.110 - Parking of commercial vehicles with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more in residential district prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more in any residential zoned district in the city. This section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located in a residential zoned district or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure in a residential zoned district for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. 33.1 § 1, 1998)  
10.08.120 - Parking of tall vehicles. 
No operator of any vehicle, which exceeds six feet in height, including any sideboards and including any items, which are loaded or contained in the vehicle's bed or trailer, shall park such vehicle within one hundred feet of an intersection. This section shall not apply where the vehicle and vehicle operator are on site for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure or where the vehicles and vehicle operator are on site for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has been previously obtained. 
(Ord. 181, § 3, 11-19-2008)  
Chapter 10.09 - VEHICLE ENFORCEMENT ON CITY AND PRIVATELY OWNED OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS 
Sections: 
 
10.09.010 - Findings. 
It is found and declared that there are public off-street parking facilities and privately held off-street parking facilities within the city that are held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. The privately held facilities are commonly referred to as: 
A.  Kings Village Shopping Center; 
B.  Scotts Village Shopping Center; 
C.  Graham Plaza Shopping Center; 
D.  Scotts Village Square Shopping Center; 
E.  Scotts Valley Junction Shopping Center. 
(Ord. 10T-21 § 1 (part), 1995)  
10.09.020 - Vehicle enforcement on public lots. 
Pursuant to the general police power of the city and California Vehicle Code Section 21107.8, Sections 22350 (speed), 23103 (reckless driving) and 23109 (speed contest and exhibition of speed) are hereby made applicable to all city owned or operated off-street parking facilities and may be enforced by the city, provided that each publicly owned facility shall have placed a notice of not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering of not less than one inch in height denoting that the off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulation and control is posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the facility. 
(Ord. 10T-21 § 1 (part), 1995)  
10.09.030 - Vehicle enforcement on private lots. 
Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107.8, Sections 22350 (speed), 23103 (reckless driving) and 23109 (speed contest and exhibition of speed) are hereby made applicable to the privately owned and maintained parking lots listed in Section 10.09.010 and may be enforced by the city, provided that each privately owned and maintained facility shall have placed a notice of not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering of not less than one inch in height denoting that the off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulation and control. 
(Ord. 10T-21 § 1 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 10.12 - MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT LIMIT 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Definitions. 
A.  A "vehicle" is a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, street or way, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
B.  A "person" is every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. 29 § 1, 1968)  
10.12.020 - Weight limitations. 
No person shall operate, drive or move any vehicle of a weight or with a load exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six tons on or upon Scotts Valley Drive, Lockewood Lane and, Bean Creek Road and Meadow Way within the city limits of the city, or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 29 § 2, 1968; Ord. 29.2 § 1, 1971; Ord. 161 § 1, 1995; Ord. 162 § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 162.1, § 1, 3-2-2011)  
10.12.030 - Inspection and weight of vehicles. 
A.  Any police officer, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to an inspection and weighing of the same. The weighing may be done either by means of portable or stationary scales, and any police officer is authorized to require that such vehicle be driven to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether Section 10.12.020 of this chapter has been complied with. 
B.  Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the vehicle and load to an inspection or weighing, or fails or refuses to comply with the directions of an officer, under the conditions set forth in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 29 § 3, 1968)  
10.12.040 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California; 
B.  Any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
C.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility; 
D.  Any vehicle owned or operated by the state of California, county of Santa Cruz, city, or other public agency, while engaged in a governmental function; 
E.  Any commercial vehicle that has its place of business within an area in the city which makes it necessary to travel on a restricted street to get to and from said place of business. 
(Ord. 29 § 4, 1968)  
10.12.050 - Signs. 
This chapter shall not be effective as to Scotts Valley Drive until appropriate signs are erected to give notice of this chapter and the chief of police of the city is hereby instructed to install appropriate signs giving notice to the public, restricting the use of said street by vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight limits specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 29 § 5, 1968)  
Chapter 10.16 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Findings and declarations—Definitions. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the council of the city makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  The term "highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
B.  The term "owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment. 
C.  The term "owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
D.  The term "public property" includes "highway." 
E.  The term "vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 2, 1971; Ord. 21.3 § 1, 1991)  
10.16.020 - Provisions not applicable. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 3, 1971)  
10.16.030 - Nonexclusive regulations. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 4, 1971)  
10.16.040 - Administration by chief of police. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police of the city or his duly authorized agent or representative. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 5, 1971)  
10.16.050 - Authority to remove—Contracted person. 
When the council of the city has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 6, 1971)  
10.16.060 - Administrative costs. 
The council of the city shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 7, 1971)  
10.16.070 - Authority to remove—Chief of police. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police of the city or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 8, 1971)  
10.16.080 - Notice of abatement. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
 A.  "NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"(Name and address of owner of the land) 
"As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Ordinance No. 21.1 of the City of Scotts Valley has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to _______, license number _______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 21.1. 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Scotts Valley and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
"As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council of the City of Scotts Valley within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police of the City of Scotts Valley or his authorized representative or agent shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
"Notice Mailed  _____
(date) 
_____
Chief of police or his duly authorized agent or representative" 
 B.  "NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different) 
"As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 21.1 has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 21.1. 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
"As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council of the City of Scotts Valley within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police of the city of Scotts Valley or his authorized representative or agent shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
"Notice Mailed  _____
(date) 
_____
Chief of police or his duly authorized agent or representative" 
(Ord. 21.1 § 9, 1971)  
10.16.090 - Hearing—Notice. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the council of the city within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the council of the city on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 10, 1971)  
10.16.100 - Hearing—Determinations. 
A.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the council of the city which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The council of the city shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
B.  The council of the city may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council of the city may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
C.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the council of the city shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
D.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the council of the city but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 11, 1971)  
10.16.110 - Disposal. 
Five days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.16.090, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After the vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, except as provided by Subsection E of Section 22.661 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 21.2 § 1, 1978: Ord. 21.1 § 12, 1971)  
10.16.120 - Vehicle identification after removal. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 13, 1971)  
10.16.130 - Assessment—Collection. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.16.090 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other (city or county) taxes. 
(Ord. 21.1 § 14, 1971)  
Chapter 10.18 - VEHICLE CODE ENFORCEMENT ON PRIVATELY OWNED AND MAINTAINED STREETS 
Sections: 
 
10.18.010 - Declaration—Private streets used by the public. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that there are privately owned and maintained streets, as set out in Section 10.18.020 of this chapter, within the city which are held open for use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
B.  The city council further finds and declares that it is in the public interest to provide Vehicle Code enforcement on private streets open to and regularly used by the public. 
(Ord. 110.2 § 2 (part), 1995)  
10.18.020 - Private streets subject to Vehicle Code enforcement. 
The following streets shall be subject to the Vehicle Code enforcement: 
Acorn Court, Appaloosa Court, Arabian Way, Ball Drive, Baymonte Christian School, Belair Court, Belair Drive, Blake Lane, Blossom Way, Cadillac Drive, Camp Evers Lane, Canham Road, Carriage Lane, Casa Way, Castle Ridge Way, Cathy Lane, Club Drive, Coopers Hawk Court, Country Lane, Crescent Court, Crescent Drive, Cubre Lane, Dana Court, Deer Trail Way, Dell Way, Dunn Lane, Dunslee Way, Elderberry Court, El Carlo Drive, Elzer Drive, Falcon Ridge Road, Flora Lane, Forest Hill, Fox Sparrow Court, Frapwell Court, Fred Court, Gaston Circle, Gold Court, Golden Eagle Court, Grace Way, Green Valley Road, Greenwood Court, Greenwood Street, Harvest Lane, Hidden Drive, Horseshoe Court, Johnston Way, Jolley Way, K Street, Kelly Way, Kelsey Court, Kent Court, Kings Drive, Kings Canyon Court, La Escuela, Lassen Park Court, Locke Way, Lockhart Gulch, Lucinda Street, MacLeod Way, Meadow Way, Milano Court, Mill Site Road, Morgan Court, Nashua Drive, Old Coach Road, Orchard Run, Pioneer Lane, Pippin Way, Quarter Horse Court, Quien Sabe Road, Ray Way, Ridgecrest Lane, Saddleback Ridge Road, San Augustine Way, Sandraya Heights, Sawbuck Court, Sawyer Circle, Sawyer Court, Scott Court, Scotts Valley High School, Scotts Valley Middle School, Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center, Scotts Village Shopping Center, Shadow Court, Shasta Park Court, Sherman Court, Sherman Drive, Sidesaddle Circle, Sidesaddle Court, Silverwood Drive, Silver Birch Lane, Single Spur Court, Siri Lane, Southwood Drive, Spring Lakes Drive, Sramek Lane, Sucinto Drive, Sunridge Drive, Sunridge Court, Sunset Terrace, Tankers Run, Terrace View Court, Terrace View Drive, Timber Ridge Court, Thompson Lane, Trammel Way, Tuscany Court, Twin Pines Drive, Venice Way, Viki Court, Vine Hill School, Wells Road, Willis Road, Windward Place, Woodhill Drive, Woodside Court, York Road. 
(Ord. 110.2 § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. 110.3 § 1, 1998; Ord. 110.4 § 1, 1999; Ord. 110.5, § 1, 6-17-2009; Ord. No. 110.6, § 2, 11-2-2016)  
10.18.021 - Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center. 
Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center includes all roads located within the Scotts Valley Square Shopping Center, as well as a certain roadway located immediately adjacent to the westerly, northerly and easterly boundaries of said shopping center within those certain parcels of real property identified as Santa Cruz County assessor's parcel numbers 22-231-14, 22-231-16 and 22-231-17. 
(Ord. 110.2 § 2 (part), 1995).  
10.18.022 - Scotts Village Shopping Center. 
Scotts Village Shopping Center includes all roads within the center. 
(Ord. 110.2 § 2 (part), 1995)  
10.18.023 - Scotts Valley High School. 
Scotts Valley High School, commonly referred to as 555 Glenwood Drive, includes all private roads, driveways, and parking facilities located within the Scotts Valley High School, within that certain parcel of real property identified as Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Number 23-241-02. 
(Ord. 110.4 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.18.024 - Scotts Valley Middle School. 
Scotts Valley Middle School, commonly referred to as 8 Bean Creek Road, includes all private roads, driveways, and parking facilities located within the Scotts Valley Middle School, within that certain parcel of real property identified as Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Number 23-561-01. 
(Ord. 110-4 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.18.025 - Vine Hill School. 
Vine Hill School, commonly referred to as 151 Vine Hill School Road, includes all private roads, driveways, and parking facilities located within the Vine Hill School, within that certain parcel of real property identified as Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Number 23-101-01. 
(Ord. 110-4 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.18.026 - Baymonte Christian School. 
Baymonte Christian School, commonly referred to as 5000B Granite Creek Road, includes all private roads, driveways, and parking facilities located within the Baymonte Christian School, within that certain parcel of real property identified as Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Number 24-041-22. 
(Ord. 110-4 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.18.030 - Exceptions. 
The city shall not be required to provide patrol or enforce any provision of the California Vehicle Code on any privately owned and maintained streets subject to the provisions of that code, by the ordinance codified in this chapter, except those provisions applicable to private property, other than by action under the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 110.2 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 10.20 - PARKING AND USE OF VEHICLES BY ITINERANT VENDORS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Parking and use of vehicles by itinerant vendors. 
It is unlawful for any person to stand or park any vehicle, motorized or nonmotorized, on any portion of any private property or public street within any commercial or industrial zone district of the city for the purpose of selling, displaying, soliciting, offering for sale, bartering or exchanging goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, foodstuffs or beverages therefrom. However, such vehicles may stand or park for such purposes on private property or public streets in any other zone district, but only at the request of a bona fide purchaser. 
(Ord. 124 § 1 (part), 1985)  
10.20.020 - Permission or consent prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any owner of real property or resident or occupant of real property to permit or consent to any person standing or parking a vehicle in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 124 § 1 (part), 1985)  
10.20.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the standing or parking of catering trucks (i.e., motorized vehicles from which fruits, vegetables, foodstuffs or beverages are sold, displayed, solicited, offered for sale, bartered or exchanged; to persons operating nonmotorized vehicles within a parade route during a parade; to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer located at and operating a store or other fixed place of business or distribution; or to persons engaged in a delivery or courier service with respect to documents or packages. 
(Ord. 124 § 1 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 10.22 - USE OF ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED 
Sections: 
 
10.22.010 - Use of roller skates, skateboards, coasters, and similar devices restricted. 
A.  No person riding in or on or by means of roller skates or any skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, excluding bicycles, shall go upon any private roadway or parking area, or upon any sidewalk located in any areas zoned C-S commercial service (Chapter 17.20 of this code); C-CS commercial shopping center (Chapter 17.22); C-P commercial professional (Chapter 17.24); and P public/quasi-public (Chapter 17.30), provided appropriate signs are posted at all entrances to said areas and along the sidewalks thereof at intervals of not more than three hundred feet, giving notice that such activity is prohibited. 
B.  No person riding in or on or by means of roller skates or any skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle, bicycle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway or sidewalk located in any city park, unless the area is specifically designated for said devices and appropriately posted for the use. 
C.  A violation of this section shall be treated as an infraction, punishable as provided in Subsections C and D of Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 134 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 134.1 § 1, 1989; Ord. 134.2 § 1, 1991)  
10.22.020 - Chief of police to approve signs. 
All signs referenced in Section 10.22.010 shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the owner of the shopping center. No signs shall be erected for purposes of this chapter without the prior approval of the chief of police as to size, content and lettering. 
(Ord. 134 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES  
Chapter 13.04 - SEWER USE REGULATIONS AND FEES  
Article I. - Purpose and Definitions 
 
13.04.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Provide for and regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the city in such a manner and to such extent as is reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of sanitary sewage; 
B.  Provide for and regulate the disposal of industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system of the city in such manner and to such extent as may be reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of industrial waste without decreasing the ability of the system to handle and dispose of all sanitary sewage; 
C.  Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater sludge; 
D.  Protect the physical structures of the sewer system and the efficient operation of its component parts; 
E.  Protect the city and its personnel, and preserve and protect the health, safety and comfort of the public; 
F.  Protect the health and the biological diversity of the environment; 
G.  Comply with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and orders of the state of California and of the United States; 
H.  Provide for the charging and collection of various fees and other charges reasonably necessary for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.010 - General. 
A.  Words, phrases, or terms not specifically defined in this chapter, and having technical or specialized meaning shall be defined as set forth in the Clean Water Act, as may be amended, or by the latest edition of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
B.  References to waste constituents and characteristics shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.015 - Specific definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Beneficial uses" means uses of the waters of the city or state which may, or do require protection against quality degradation thereof, including, but not necessarily limited to, waters used for domestic, municipal, agricultural, industrial, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment or navigation purposes, or for the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife or other aquatic resources or reserves, and such other uses, both tangible or intangible, as are or may be specified by federal and state law as beneficial uses. 
"BOD" means biochemical oxygen demand. 
"City" means the city of Scotts Valley, California. 
"COD" means chemical oxygen demand. 
"Commercial user" means any user discharging industrial waste, as defined in this chapter, for which a waste-water discharge permit is not required. 
"Developed parcel" means any parcel of land on which any building or structure is located in which plumbing fixtures are installed through which sewage and/or waste-water is disposed. 
"Fee" means a charge established pursuant to this chapter for services and facilities furnished by the city to any premises in connection with operation of the sanitary sewer system. 
"Holding tank waste" means any waste from sewage or waste disposal holding tanks such as are associated with vessels, chemical toilets, campers and trailers. 
"Industrial user" means any user discharging industrial waste, as defined in this section, for which a waste-water discharge permit is required. 
"Industrial waste" means wastewater from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including institutional, agricultural and commercial operations where water is used for the removal of waste other than from human habitation of premises connected to the sanitary sewer system and including, without limitation: medical offices; dental offices; hospitals; schools; research, educational and commercial laboratories; warehouses; shopping centers; car washes; print stores; residential, commercial and public uses of pesticides and fertilizers; gas stations; and septage collection and disposal. 
"Lateral" means that length of sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the sanitary sewer system. 
"Low-income" means eligible for and participating in the Pacific Gas and Electric Low Income Rate Assistance (LIRA) program. 
"Manager" means the wastewater and environmental program manager of the city or his duly appointed deputy, agent or representative. 
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water or groundwater. 
"Nuisance" means damage to the community resulting from prohibited practices in the disposal of sewage or industrial wastes. 
"Owner" means the person who is the legal owner of the premises as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, private corporation, public corporation, or governmental entity, authority, or agency, and the officers, agents or employees of such organizations. 
"Pollutant" means any substance which causes pollution. 
"Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the city or state which adversely affects such waters for any beneficial use, or affects facilities serving such beneficial use, or which constitutes a hazard to the public health or to the environment. 
"Premises" means a parcel of land, or portion thereof, including any improvements thereon, which is connected to the sanitary sewer system. Each separately owned unit of a duplex, apartment or any other multifamily residence shall be deemed a separate premises. 
"Pretreatment" means the application of physical, chemical or biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the publicly owned sanitary sewer system. 
"Pretreatment standards" means all applicable federal rules and regulations implementing Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, including but not limited to 40 CFR Chapter I, Parts 405—471, as well as any state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied. 
"POTW" means public-owned treatment works. 
"Reclaimed water" means water which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for direct beneficial use, or a restricted beneficial use, which would not otherwise occur but for such treatment. 
"Residential unit" means a single-family residential dwelling or each dwelling unit of a duplex, triplex, fourplex, apartment, condominium, townhouse or any other multifamily residence. 
"Restaurant" means any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment which prepares meals for sale that are served on the premises or taken out, including, specifically, fast food restaurants with drive-through facilities, and which is required by the manager to have an exterior grease interceptor. Users meeting this definition, except those that the manager has determined an interior grease trap is adequate, are specifically excluded. 
"Sanitary sewage" means water-carried wastes from human habitation and use of premises for residential business, institutional or industrial purposes. 
"Sanitary sewer main" means a sewer six inches or larger which carries sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastewater, and which is located within public easements or public streets. 
"Sanitary sewer system" means all sewers, treatment plants, and other facilities owned or operated by the city for carrying, collecting, pumping, treating and disposing or reclaiming of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes. 
"Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Significant Noncompliance. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5), "significant noncompliance" is a violation(s) which: 
1.  Occurs in sixty-six percent or more of the samples taken over a six-month period (any magnitude); 
2.  Exceeds the technical review criteria (TRC) for the same discharge limit in thirty-three percent or more of the samples taken over a six-month period: 
TRC = 1.4 (40% exceedance) for BOD, TSS, oils and grease 
TRC = 1.2 (20% exceedance) for all other pollutants; 
3.  Causes, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering POTW personnel or the public; 
4.  Endangers human health or the environment; or results in the POTW's exercise of its emergency powers; 
5.  Causes a delay in meeting a compliance schedule milestone (failure to begin or complete construction, attain final compliance) by ninety days or more; 
6.  Results in failure to submit any required report within thirty days of the due date; or 
7.  Results in failure to report noncompliance. 
"Significant user" means: 
1.  Any industrial user (categorical industry) subject to final regulations promulgated and adopted by EPA as referenced in the categorical standards of 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
2.  Any noncategorical industrial user having any one or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  A discharge flow of ten thousand gallons or more per average workday; 
b.  An average daily suspended solids concentration or biochemical oxygen demand concentration of three hundred parts per million; 
c.  A wastewater discharge which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic loading capacity of the sanitary sewer system; or 
d.  A reasonable potential (as determined by the manager), either individually or in combination with other industrial dischargers, to create an adverse significant impact upon the sanitary sewer system (by upsetting, interfering with the system, or causing pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of city workers). 
"Storm drain" means a pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater. 
"Total toxic organics (TTO)" means the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for the substances listed in 40 CFR Part 413.02, which is incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
"TSS" means total suspended solids. 
"Unpolluted water" means water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standards set forth in Section 13.04.020, or water whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards. 
"User" means any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. 
"User classification" means a classification of users established pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of setting sewer use fees. 
"Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes, whether treated or untreated, from any and all premises connected to the sanitary sewer system, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system. 
"Water of the city or state" means any water, whether surface, underground, and whether saline or nonsaline, within the boundaries of the city, or within the boundaries of the city and flowing into, touching or otherwise combined with waters outside the limits of the city but within the boundaries of the state. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. 79.19 § 1, 1993)  
Article II. - Prohibitions 
 
13.04.020 - General prohibitions. 
No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system, any materials which cause, threaten to cause, or are capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances: 
A.  A fire or explosion; 
B.  Obstruction of flow in, or damage to, the sanitary sewer system, or any portion thereof; 
C.  Threatens the life or safety of persons; 
D.  Conditions inhibiting or preventing the effective maintenance or operation of the sanitary sewer system; 
E.  Strong or offensive odors, air pollution, or any noxious, toxic, or malodorous gas or substance, or gas-producing substances; 
F.  Interference with, or overloading of, the sanitary sewer system, or a condition requiring unusual attention or expense for the collection and treatment of wastewater by the sanitary sewer system; 
G.  Interference with any wastewater reclamation, or sludge reuse process, which does or may operate in conjunction with the sanitary sewer system, or which renders such reclamation or sludge reuse process unpracticable or not feasible under normal operating conditions; 
H.  A detrimental environmental impact, or nuisance wherever located, or a condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over operation of the sanitary sewer system; 
I.  Discoloration, or any other adverse conditions in the quality of the effluent from the sanitary sewer system such that receiving water quality requirements established by any statute, rule, regulation, ordinance, or permit condition, cannot be met by the city; 
J.  Conditions at or near the sanitary sewer system which cause, or may cause, the city to be in violation of any laws, rules, regulations and orders of the state of California and of the United States. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.025 - Storm drainage and groundwater. 
No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage, or any water acceptable into the storm sewer system according to standards maintained by the state of California. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993).  
13.04.030 - Unpolluted water. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any unpolluted cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.035 - Garbage grinders. 
A.  No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any garbage or fruit, vegetable, animal or other solid kitchen waste material resulting from the preparation of any food or drinks, in any dwelling, restaurant, or eating establishment, unless the same shall have first been passed through a mechanical garbage grinder or waste grinder in conformance with the provisions of the plumbing and electrical code of the city. 
B.  No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any garbage, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or other solid material from any food-processing plant or other industrial plant or retail grocery store, irrespective of whether or not the same shall have been first passed through a mechanical grinder, and no person shall install, operate, use or maintain upon the premises of any food processing plant, or any other industrial plant or retail grocery store, any mechanical grinder or waste grinder that is connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.040 - Point of discharge. 
A.  No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any wastewater, or any object, material, or other substance directly into a manhole or other opening into the sanitary sewer system other than through an approved sewer lateral. 
B.  However, wastewater may be discharged into the sanitary sewer system by means other than through an approved sewer lateral provided a permit (direct discharge permit) therefor is issued by the manager. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.045 - Holding tank waste. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged any holding tank waste into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.050 - Radioactive wastes. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged any radioactive material into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.055 - Grease interceptors. 
A.  Any type of business or establishment where oil or grease of animal, vegetable, or mineral origin may be discharged into a public sewer shall have a grease interceptor or trap of a size and design approved by the manager or his authorized representative. Such businesses or establishments shall include but not be limited to: restaurants of all types, hospitals, school and business cafeterias, convalescent homes, car washes, and auto repair outlets. 
B.  Each grease interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted grease. 
C.  The grease interceptor should be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
D.  Waste discharged from fixtures and equipment which may contain oil or grease, including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashers, food waste disposals, soup kettles, and floor drains located in areas where such objectionable materials may exist, shall be drained into the sanitary sewer system through an approved interceptor; however, toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials shall not flow through the interceptor. 
E.  The interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated oil and grease. Outdoor interceptors shall be pumped by a licensed commercial grease pumper once every three months, unless a determination is made by the manager, on a case by case basis, that less frequent pumping is adequate. Interior grease traps shall be cleaned no less often than monthly. Whenever an interceptor or trap is cleaned, the full volume of water and grease present shall be removed. Under no circumstances shall the removed water or grease be reintroduced into any city sewer. Flushing a trap with hot water, or the use of chemicals or other agents to dissolve grease, is specifically prohibited. 
F.  Proof of pumping or cleaning shall be submitted to the manager upon request. In the case of interceptors pumped by a licensed grease pumper, such proof shall consist of a signed and dated invoice or manifest. For self-cleaned interior grease traps, a bound written log shall be kept, and a dated, signed notation shall be made each time the trap is cleaned. 
G.  Abandoned grease interceptors shall be emptied and filled as required for abandoned septic tanks (Section 1119 of the Uniform Plumbing Code). 
H.  Existing facilities for which a determination by the manager has been made that a grease trap or interceptor is required shall have one year from the date of notice by the manager to install an approved trap or interceptor. New facilities proposing to discharge into the sanitary sewer system must have an approved trap or interceptor installed prior to connecting to the sanitary sewer system. 
I.  Any premise which operates a steam cleaner or high pressure washer for the purpose of cleaning or degreasing any type of vehicle or equipment shall be subject to the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.060 - General discharge limitations. 
A.  Toxic Substances. 
1.  No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any toxic or poisonous substances or any other pollutant, including BOD and COD, in sufficient quantity to injure or cause an interference with the sewage treatment process, or in sufficient quantity to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or in sufficient quantity to create a hazard for humans, animals or fish in any waters receiving effluent from the sanitary sewer system, or which may create a hazard in the use or disposal of sewage sludge or reclaimed water. No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any industrial wastewater containing any of the following toxic substances exceeding the concentrations set forth, to wit: 
Toxic Substance 	Maximum 
Allowable 
Concentration 
Acrolein & acrylonitril 	 0.20 	mg/L 
Aldehyde 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Ammonia, as nitrogen 	60.0 	mg/L 
Antimony 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Arsenic 	 0.10 	mg/L 
Barium 	 5.0 	mg/L 
Beryllium 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Boron 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Cadmium 	 0.20 	mg/L 
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, including but not limited to, pesticides, herbicides, algaecides 		trace 
Chromium, Total 	 0.50 	mg/L 
Copper 	 2.0 	mg/L 
Cyanides 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Dinitro-o-cresol & 2,4-Dinitrophenol 	0.50 	mg/L 
Fluorides 	10.0 	mg/L 
Formaldehydes 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Lead 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Manganese 	 0.5 	mg/L 
Mercury 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Methyl Ethyl Ketone & other water insoluble ketones 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Nickel 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Phenol & derivatives 	 1.0 	mg/L 
Chlorinated phenolics 	 0.20 	mg/L 
Selenium 	 2.0 	mg/L 
Silver 	 0.50 	mg/L 
Sulfides 	 0.10 	mg/L 
Toluene 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Total Toxic Organics (TTO) 	 1.37 	mg/L 
Xylene 	 0.010 	mg/L 
Zinc 	 3.0 	mg/L 
 
2.  In no event shall any person discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any industrial waste having a ninety-six hour median lethal concentration (LC50), as determined in accordance with "Standard Methods," of less than one percent. 
3.  For the purpose of this section, discharge limitations as established in this section shall be deemed implemental of the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Pretreatment Regulations as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403. 
B.  Additional Limitations. No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system any wastewater: 
1.  The temperature of which is higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or which, alone or in combination with other discharges, creates a temperature greater than one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Centigrade) in the sanitary sewer system; 
2.  Containing more than three hundred mg/L of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; 
3.  Containing more than twenty-five mg/L of oil or grease of mineral or petroleum origin; 
4.  Having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 9.5 or having a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures or equipment of the sanitary sewer system or any portion thereof; 
5.  Any sand, grit, straw, metal, glass, rags, feathers, paper, tar, plastic, styrofoam, wood, leaves, garden clippings, manure, dead animals, offal, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewerage facilities; 
6.  Any toxic, or poisonous, substance not otherwise specifically prohibited in this chapter in sufficient quantities to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create a hazard in the sanitary sewer system, or to injure or interfere with the operation thereof; 
7.  Any waste containing suspended solids, not otherwise specifically prohibited under the provisions of this chapter, the characteristics or quantity of which require unusual attention, treatment, or expense in handling or treating such material in the sanitary sewer system, or any portion thereof; 
8.  Any medical or infectious wastes, excepts those normally produced by family medical or dental practices; 
9.  Any waste produced in the manufacture of genetically engineered products, or other biotechnology process, unless it can be demonstrated that no biologically active principles or organism deleterious to the sanitary sewer system, to human health, or to the environment, are present. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.065 - Protection from damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.070 - Vehicle radiator wastewater and sludges. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system, the drained wastewater from motor vehicle radiators, without having first pretreated the wastewater and obtained a permit therefor from the manager. Sludges from the pretreatment of radiator wastewater are specifically prohibited from discharge into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.075 - Discharge into storm drain prohibited. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any domestic or industrial wastewater, steam cleaner or high pressure washer runoff, petroleum products, vehicle radiator wastes, or other pollutants, or any objects capable of causing an obstruction, into any storm drain or natural channel flowing into any waters of the city or the state. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.080 - Water softening wastes. 
No person shall install, replace, or enlarge apparatus for softening all or any part of the water supply to any premises when such apparatus is an ion-exchange softener or demineralizer of the type that is regenerated on the site of use with the regeneration of wastes being discharged to the ground, storm drain or the sanitary sewer system. This section shall not apply to apparatus of the type which is regenerated off-site by a water conditioning company. A person installing or operating a water-softening apparatus of any kind shall make such apparatus accessible to the manager for inspection at all times and shall make such reports relative to such apparatus as the manager may request. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.085 - Evolving federal and/or state discharge standards. 
No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system, wastewater in violation of Categorical Pretreatment Standards as set forth in 40 CFR Chapter I, Parts 405—471 as may be amended, or any other federal or state law. In the event of conflict between or among any standards set forth in this chapter, the most restrictive standard shall apply. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article III. - Wastewater Volume Determination 
 
13.04.090 - Determination generally. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, wastewater volumes shall be determined upon the basis of volumes of freshwater, reclaimed water, and all sources of non-wastewater, used by, or furnished to, a user. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.095 - Determination for billing purposes. 
A.  Wastewater volumes for sewer billing purposes shall be determined from those volumes of fresh water provided by the public water utility serving the premises discharging to the sanitary sewer system. If a premises is not served by a public water supply, wastewater volumes shall be determined by an appropriate flow metering device installed, at the user's expense, at a location approved by the manager. 
B.  Where wastewater flow meters are not present, fees shall be computed on the average flow for January and February of each year, as determined by the monthly water utility meter readings. However, upon request of a responsible party (as defined in subsection D of this section) the fee shall be computed by the manager on the basis of the average annual flow for the preceding twelve-month period, provided data for such period is available. 
C.  If metered water is diverted to any other use, such as irrigation or cooling, and therefore is not discharged to the sanitary sewer system, the manager or his authorized representative shall determine the monthly wastewater service fee based upon the total volume of water used less the volume so diverted. If the diverted water volume is not metered, the manager shall determine the volume or require a meter. 
D.  If one water meter serves more than one user, building or use, there shall be only one statement sent to the property owner; the city shall not apportion the wastewater treatment service among different users of the same water. The responsible party shall be the person requesting water service to the premises. However, in the event the person requesting water service to the premises is other than the legal owner thereof, the legal owner of the premises shall also be a responsible party. In the case where a property owner has a restaurant and other unit(s) on a single water meter and does not want the city to charge the owner as though all water is used for restaurant purposes, the owner must have a separate water meter installed. If the property owner does not have a separate water meter installed for restaurant purposes, the entire account will be charged as a restaurant use. 
E.  Wastewater flow metering devices, where required, shall measure either the amount of wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or the amount of non-wastewater diverted from the sanitary sewer system. Once installed, such meters shall be maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendations, and shall be tested annually for accuracy. Such maintenance and testing shall be at the expense of the user. Test results shall be made available to the manager upon request. A service fee, at a rate to be set by the council, shall be charged by the city for reading water volume meters. Meters may be read by the user, subject to verification and a service fee by the city. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article IV. - Reports, Permits and Administration 
 
13.04.100 - Industrial wastewater monitoring and reporting. 
A.  Discharge Reports. Every industrial user shall file a periodic discharge report at such intervals as are designated by the manager. The manager may require any other users discharging or proposing to discharge into the sanitary sewer system to file such periodic reports. The discharge report shall include, but, at the discretion of the manager, shall not be limited to, nature of process, volume of wastewater, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, concentrations of regulated pollutants, or other information related to the generation of waste. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored on site. In addition to discharge reports, the manager may require information in the form of industrial wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports. 
B.  Wastewater Records and Monitoring. 
1.  All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system shall maintain such records of production, effluent flows, and pollutant amounts or concentrations that are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. Such records shall be made available upon request by the manager. Records of monitoring activities and results must be retained for a minimum of three years. 
2.  Pursuant to Section 13.04.145, the owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewer system shall install suitable sampling manholes and monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling, and flow measurement of wastewater. In the event that no such sampling facility is available, the point of sampling shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the sanitary sewer system. 
C.  Inspection, Sampling, and Analysis. 
1.  Compliance Determinations. Compliance determinations with respect to this chapter may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined by the manager to meet the needs of specific circumstances. Twenty-four-hour composite samples are required for all other pollutants not mentioned previously, using flow-proportional techniques where feasible. 
2.  Analysis of Industrial Wastewaters. Collection and preservation of industrial wastewater samples shall be in accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedure approved by the EPA administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods as prescribed in the most current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. All analytical measurements shall be performed by a laboratory certified or registered by the California Department of Health Services to perform the analytical measurements. 
3.  Sampling Frequency. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to this chapter will be done at such intervals as the manager may designate. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.105 - Wastewater discharge permit. 
A.  Purpose of Permit. The purpose of a wastewater discharge permit is: 
1.  To provide for and regulate the disposal of industrial wastewaters in the sanitary sewer system. 
2.  To provide for the charging and collecting of various fees and other charges necessary for the administration and issuance of wastewater discharge permits. 
B.  Wastewater Discharge Permits Required. All significant users of the sanitary sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit for each site or facility discharging wastewater. 
C.  Time of Application. 
1.  Existing Dischargers. All existing significant users connected to or discharging to any part of the sanitary sewer system must submit a wastewater discharge permit application within ninety days from the date of notification. All existing significant users for which a wastewater discharge permit has been issued by the manager must apply for a new permit if the user wishes to increase the quantity or strength of discharge. 
2.  Potential Dischargers. All potential significant users proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the sanitary sewer system must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit therefor. Potential significant users must submit a wastewater discharge permit application at the time an application for a building permit or sewer permit is made. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.110 - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
A.  Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the manager an application on the form prescribed by the manager, and accompanied by the applicable fees, which shall be established by the manager. The application must be signed by an executive officer of the business desiring to discharge industrial wastewater. Such executive officer shall be at least of the level of vice president, general partner, president, or an individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility applying for the permit. 
B.  In support of this application, the user shall submit the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number of applicant. 
2.  Volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
3.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in Sections 13.04.060 and 13.04.070 as determined by an analytical laboratory meeting the requirements of Section 13.04.100 (2). 
4.  Time and duration of discharge. 
5.  Average daily and fifteen minute peak wastewater flow rates. 
6.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
7.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises including all materials and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged. 
8.  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production. 
9.  Number and type of employees and hours of work. 
10.  Any other information as may be deemed by the manager to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.115 - Action on permit applications. 
A.  Issuance of Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
1.  If the manager is not satisfied that the permit application has sufficient information to determine whether the permit should be issued, the manager shall refuse to issue the permit and the application shall be returned to the applicant with an explanation of the required information within thirty days of the date of the date of filing. Thereafter, the applicant shall have thirty days to complete the application. If the returned application is not resubmitted within thirty days (or such longer period of time as specified by the manager), then a new application for a wastewater discharge permit must be submitted along with the appropriate permit application fee. 
2.  The manager shall either issue or refuse to issue a wastewater permit within ninety days of the date such an application is complete. An interim permit shall be granted if the manager finds that more than ninety days is necessary to review the permit application. 
3.  The manager shall issue a permit to all applicants who meet all wastewater discharge permit conditions, and who are in compliance with this chapter, or who have submitted an approved timetable of compliance. 
B.  Refusal to Issue Permit. 
1.  The manager may refuse to issue a wastewater discharge permit if any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The application is not accompanied by the appropriate permit application fee. 
b.  The application for a permit contains false or misleading information. 
c.  The issuance of the permit would result in the discharge of industrial wastes of such quantity or strength that violates regulations set forth in this chapter. 
d.  The issuance of the permit would cause the city's wastewater treatment plant to violate any NPDES permit conditions, laws, or regulations of the state and/or federal government. 
e.  The applicant has not provided plans for secondary containment protection from accidental discharges to the land, storm sewer system, and sanitary sewer system, in accordance with the requirement of the California Code of Regulation Chapter 30 of Division 4 of Title 22 and the city's hazardous materials ordinance and amendments thereto (for both documents). 
2.  If the manager refuses to issue a permit, a written notice explaining the grounds for refusal shall be sent to the permit applicant. The permit application fee shall not be returned to the applicant, unless the manager has ascertained that a permit is not required to discharge the wastewater for which the permit application is made. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.120 - Duration of permits. 
A.  Wastewater discharge permits may be issued for a period up to three years in length. At the discretion of the manager, a permit may be issued for a period less than three years, or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall notify the manager sixty days prior to the expiration of the permit of his/her intention to renew the permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the manager during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in her/her permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The city must approve any new or increased discharges, in volume or pollutant type or concentration, prior to an industrial user commencing such discharge. The city can deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the city's wastewater treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit. 
B.  Facilities for which a wastewater discharge permit has been issued are subject to an annual detailed site inspection and review of records to verify that no substantial change in quantity or strength of discharge has occurred, the holder shall have his/her permit revoked as provided by Section 13.04.140. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked by the manager for cause pursuant to Section 13.04.205. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.125 - Permit fees. 
A.  The permit fee shall be paid at the time the application for the permit is submitted to the manager. If the permit is approved, then no additional permit fees shall be required during the duration of the permit. Permit fees shall not be used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or operation of the city's sanitary sewer system, nor for any other purposes or expenses incurred by the city other than to defray the cost incurred in issuing said wastewater discharge permits and inspecting for accuracy and compliance with said permits. 
B.  Delinquent Fees. 
1.  Any person who does not file an application for a wastewater discharge permit within the time specified in Section 13.04.105 shall be assessed a penalty for delinquent filing as follows: 
a.  Up to and including thirty days delinquency, the penalty shall be fifty percent of the permit fee. 
b.  More than thirty days but less than one year delinquency, the penalty shall be one hundred percent of the permit fee. 
c.  More than one year delinquency, the penalty shall be one thousand percent of the permit fee. 
2.  Such penalties shall be in addition to any penalties or fines levied under Section 13.04.225 of the code. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.130 - Nonassignability of permit. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.135 - Permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations. Permit conditions will include the following whenever applicable: 
A.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
B.  The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
C.  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
D.  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities and specifications for monitoring programs. 
E.  Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and plant records relating to wastewater discharges. 
F.  Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge. 
G.  Compliance schedules. 
H.  Requirements for the installation of any pretreatment technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
I.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the manager to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.140 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  When required by the manager, the owner of any property served by a sewer lateral carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable sampling manhole in the sewer lateral to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. 
B.  The sampling manhole and monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the industrial user's premises outside the building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the manager may allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction over such street or sidewalk area, and located so that it will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping, or parked vehicles. 
C.  When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the manager may require installation of separate sampling manholes for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the manager may require that separate sampling manholes be installed for each separate discharge. 
D.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the manager's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. 
E.  All sampling manholes and monitoring equipment shall be installed at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
F.  Construction of any required sampling manholes and installation of monitoring equipment shall be completed within ninety days following written notification of the manager, unless a time extension is granted by the manager. 
G.  Existing industrial users connected to the sanitary sewer system at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall have up to one year to comply with this section. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.145 - Pretreatment. 
Pretreatment of wastewater shall be furnished by every user on the user's premises when such pretreatment is necessary to produce a discharge meeting the requirements of this chapter or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Such pretreatment facilities shall be constructed, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Plans and specifications therefor shall be submitted to the manager, together with such data and descriptive material necessary for the manager to evaluate any proposed pretreatment system or practice. Construction of pretreatment facilities pursuant to this section shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of meeting all other provisions of this chapter, or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.150 - Protection against accidental discharges. 
Every user shall provide protective measures against accidental or unauthorized discharges of prohibited substances into the sanitary sewer system as established by this chapter, or as set forth in any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Such measures shall consist of operational or other procedures and/or facilities as determined necessary or appropriate by the manager. Floor drains connected to the sanitary sewer system in any manufacturing, service, or production area are specifically prohibited. Any residue or byproduct of pretreatment, or any other wastes subject to control or regulation by any agency having jurisdiction, shall be disposed of in accordance with the applicable federal, state or local regulations. All costs of such measures shall be borne by the user. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.155 - Confidentiality. 
Any information submitted to the city may be claimed as confidential by the submitter, however, the claim must be asserted at the time of submission by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. Information and data provided to the city which is wastewater monitoring reporting required pursuant to this chapter shall be available to the public without restriction. Confidential information will be available to EPA and the State Water Resources Control Board, but these agencies will be advised of required confidential treatment of such information. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.160 - Interjurisdictional agreements. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing agreement or arrangement between the city and other public jurisdictions. In no case will the general discharge limitations of this chapter or federal pretreatment standards be waived in the event of such agreement. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.165 - Disposal of prohibited waste. 
The manager may require a user to submit proof of legal disposal of any waste materials generated by the user that are prohibited from discharge into the sanitary sewer system pursuant to this chapter. A "California Hazardous Waste Manifest" form must be completed for material disposed of at a Class I dump site and a copy furnished to the manager upon request. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article V. - Wastewater Revenue Accounts 
 
13.04.170 - Revenue accounts. 
Wastewater revenue accounts are hereby established in order to meet the following objectives: 
A.  To provide for the adequate financing of existing operations at levels that will ensure compliance with all state and federal requirements for effluent quality, wastewater reclamation, sludge disposal or reuse, and all other requirements of agencies having regulatory authority over the operations of the sanitary sewer system; 
B.  To provide reserve funds for emergency repairs and replacement of equipment; 
C.  To ensure the orderly expansion or upgrading of the wastewater treatment plant to meet the future growth needs, and goals, of the community; 
D.  To comply fully with the State Water Resources Control Board's Revenue Program Guidelines for Wastewater Agencies for the financing of grant-funded wastewater treatment projects. 
1.  Operations and Maintenance Fund. 
a.  There is established an operations and maintenance (O&M) fund, the purpose which is to pay the annual costs of operating and main the sanitary sewer system. These costs include the costs of labor, power, chemicals, supplies, laboratory control and monitoring, general administration, billing, and incidental items incurred during normal operation. Also included are those expenditures termed ordinary repairs necessary to keep the sanitary sewer system in proper operating condition. 
b.  The O&M fund shall be funded by wastewater service fees charged to the users of the sanitary sewer system, as such fees are established pursuant to this chapter. Moneys allocated to this account shall not be used for any other purpose than that described above, in accordance with State Water Resources Control Board regulations. 
2.  Operations Reserve Account. There is established an operations reserve account, within the O&M fund, the purpose of which is to defray the costs of emergencies. The operations reserve account shall be funded by that portion of the wastewater service fees necessary to bring the fund up to a constant ten percent of the amount in the O&M fund. Moneys allocated to this account shall not be used for any other purpose, in accordance with State Water Resources Control Board regulations. 
3.  Wastewater Treatment Facilities Fund. 
a.  There is established a wastewater treatment facilities fund, created pursuant to the ordinance establishing development impact mitigation fees, Ordinance No. 143, 7(B), the purpose of which is to provide for adding new process refinements, upgrading treatment units, replacing major structures, and to provide for the future expansion of facilities needed for additional treatment capacity. The wastewater treatment facilities fund shall be funded by sewer hook-up fees and standby fees, as such fees are established pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  Moneys allocated to this fund may be loaned to other uses, except operations and maintenance, provided that the following conditions are met: 
i.  It has been established that these funds will not be required for wastewater activities for the period of the loan. 
ii.  The loan is recorded in the appropriate account with the payback period specifically shown. 
iii.  The source borrowing the money pays at least as much interest as the wastewater fund would have earned if the money had not been loaned. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article VI. - Enforcement 
 
13.04.175 - Power to inspect. 
A.  Responsibility. The responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this regulation shall be vested in the manager; provided, however, that the manager shall be, and is hereby, authorized and empowered to delegate his authority hereunder to such officers, employees, or agents of the city as he shall designate. All actual prosecutions for violations of any of the provisions of this ordinance (including, without limitation, levying of fines, termination of service, revocation of permits, and civil and criminal court actions) shall be the exclusive responsibility of the city. 
B.  Inspection Authority. The manager and other duly authorized employees and agents of the city bearing credentials and identification shall in all cases affected by this section, be permitted to enter at all reasonable hours upon all parts of any premises connected to the sanitary sewer system for the purpose of: 
1.  Determining the size, depth, location, and condition of any sewer or storm drain connection; 
2.  Determining the location of discharge connections of root and surface drains and plumbing fixtures; 
3.  Inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, and testing the quality, consistency and characteristics of discharges into any sanitary sewer main, storm drain or natural outlet; 
4.  Inspecting and copying any records relating to quantity and quality of wastewater discharges, including but not limited to: 
a.  Water usage and wastewater discharged, 
b.  Chemical usage, and 
c.  Hazardous waste records. 
C.  Citation Authority. The manager, or his duly authorized appointee, is hereby designated code enforcement officer, as defined by Chapter 2.14 of this code, for the purposes of enforcing this chapter, or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.180 - Administrative enforcement procedures. 
A.  Notice of Violation. Upon a determination by the manager that a discharge has occurred in violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the manager shall issue a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
B.  Administrative Penalties. Any person violating, or causing the violation, of any provision of this chapter, or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to administrative penalties. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5), the city will annually publish a list of firms found to be in significant noncompliance with the pretreatment program. 
C.  Administrative Orders. 
1.  Cease and Desist Order. Upon a determination by the manager that a discharge is causing pass-through or interference with the treatment process, or is causing, or threatens to cause, imminent damage to any part of the sanitary sewer system or a health threat to city workers or to the public, the manager may issue an order to cease and desist such illegal discharges, or all discharges, by a time and date specified in writing. 
2.  Compliance Order. Upon a determination by the manager that a user is in recurrent violation of any provision of this chapter for which a notice of violation has previously been issued, the manager may issue an order requiring the user to: 
a.  Comply with the provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, in accordance with a time schedule established by the manager; 
b.  Take specific remedial or preventative actions; 
c.  Report the progress in achieving compliance with each specific action. 
3.  Show Cause Order. 
a.  If a violation for which a notice of violation and a compliance order have been issued is not corrected by timely compliance, the manager may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the Director of Public Works why an order should not be made directing the termination of service and imposing penalties for the noncompliance. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
b.  The Director of Public Works or his designee shall: 
i.  Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses in the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
ii.  Conduct the hearing. 
iii.  Take evidence. Testimony must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
iv.  After suitable deliberation not to exceed five working days, issue an order to the party responsible for the discharge directing one or more of the following: 
(A)  That a consent order be entered into; 
(B)  That the violator pay a penalty up to the maximum allowed for under Section 13.04.190(D); 
(C)  That service be terminated. 
4.  Consent Order. The manager may enter into an agreement with a user as a means of bringing discharges in violation of this chapter into compliance. The order shall have, at minimum, the following elements: 
a.  Findings of fact regarding the violation, 
b.  Compliance schedules, 
c.  Remedial actions, 
d.  Stipulated fines, 
e.  Signatures of the manager and of the user. 
D.  Emergency Corrections. In the event of imminent harm to the public, to city employees, or to any part of the sanitary sewer system, the manager may enter private property to perform emergency corrections, including disconnection of service. 
E.  Responsibility for Damages. 
1.  In the event damages are caused to the sanitary sewer system by reason of wastewater discharge from any premises, or in the event repairs, construction, disconnection, or other public work is performed upon any premises pursuant to subsection D of this section, the owner of the said premises shall be liable to the city for the full costs thereof. 
2.  If the owner shall fail to pay the full amount of such damages within thirty days of billing, the unpaid amount thereof and the administrative expenses incurred by the city incident to such damages shall constitute a lien upon the premises, and the amount shall be added to the next succeeding tax bill against such property, and shall be collectable in the same manner as general city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure in case of delinquency. 
3.  In the event damages are caused to the sanitary sewer system pursuant to Section 13.04.065, the person(s) responsible for the damages shall be liable to the city for the full costs of repair thereof. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.185 - Revocation of permits. 
A.  Any user who violates the following conditions of his/her permit or of this chapter, or of applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his/her permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user to possible revocation of permit include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his/her discharge. 
2.  Failure to report, in advance, increases in the volume of wastewater discharged or the concentration of any pollutant discharged. 
3.  Failure to report, in advance, the introduction of a new pollutant into the wastewater discharged. 
4.  Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
5.  Violations of conditions of the permit. 
6.  Nonpayment of fees and charges. 
7.  Failure to report accidental discharges. 
B.  If the manager finds that grounds for revocation of a wastewater discharge permit exist, the manager shall deliver to the permit holder, within ten days of revocation, a written notice ordering the permit holder to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. 
C.  The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the manager in writing within thirty days of the notice of revocation. The manager will give a minimum of ten days notice of a hearing, and state, in writing, the final decision. 
D.  If the holder of a revoked permit wishes a new permit, he/she must make a written application to the manager. The application must be accompanied by the appropriate permit application fee, and will be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.190 - Judicial remedies—Civil and criminal. 
A.  Misdemeanor. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate, or cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter, or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of one month or both for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue is deemed a separate offense. 
B.  Falsification of Information. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person knowingly to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the manager pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who knowingly tampers with or otherwise renders inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment installed and operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Public Nuisance. Any discharge or threatened discharge, or any condition which is in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or of any order or directive of the manager authorized by this chapter, shall be deemed unlawful and a public nuisance. 
D.  Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provisions of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who intentionally or negligently discharges industrial waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or violates any effluent limitation, national standard of performance, or national pretreatment or toxicity standard, shall be civilly liable to the city in a sum up to one thousand dollars for the first day in which such violation occurs, up to six thousand dollars for the second day in which such violation and twenty-five thousand dollars for each additional day. 
E.  Remedies Cumulative. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any or all other remedies available to the city. 
F.  Appeals. Any user, permittee, applicant, or other person aggrieved by any decision, action, finding, determination, order or directive of the manager, made or authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or interpreting or implementing the same, may file a written request with the director of public works for reconsideration thereof within ten days of such decision, action, finding, determination, or order, setting forth in detail the facts supporting such user's or person's request for reconsideration. The director of public works shall render a final decision within ten days of the receipt of such request for reconsideration. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article VII. - Wastewater Fees 
 
13.04.195 - Wastewater service user classification. 
A.  The following user classes are exclusively established for purposes of wastewater service billing: 
1.  Residential, consisting of: 
a.  Single family, 
b.  Multiple family, 
c.  Mobile homes; 
2.  Commercial and industrial, as defined by this chapter; 
3.  Restaurants, as defined by this chapter. 
B.  The manager shall be responsible for assigning all users to a user class. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.200 - Wastewater fees. 
Fees pertaining to wastewater service fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. All other fees permitted by this chapter shall be set by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. 79.23 § 1, 1998: Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. No. 79.24, § 1, 6-6-2012) 
_____ 
13.04.205 - Wastewater treatment surcharge fees. 
Commencing from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, there is levied and assessed upon the owner of each premises connected to the sanitary sewer system a wastewater treatment service fee for each user class set forth above, said rates to be established pursuant to this section. 
A.  Industrial and commercial users required by the manager to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to a surcharge for the following substances at loading rates in excess of the concentrations indicated from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section: 

BOD (300 mg/L) 	$0.088/kg 	$0.092/kg 	$0.097/kg 	$0.082/kg 
TSS (300 mg/L) 	0.066/kg 	0.068/kg 	0.073/kg 	0.062/kg 
COD (2000 mg/L) 	0.088/kg 	0.092/kg 	0.097/kg 	0.082/kg 
Oil and grease (300 mg/L) 	0.110/kg 	0.114/kg 	0.099/kg 	0.084/kg 
 
Kilograms shall be determined as milligrams per liter times flow in gallons times 0.00000379 (mg/L × flow × 0.00000379 = kilograms). The surcharge shall be kilograms multiplied by the applicable rate per kilogram (kilograms × rate per kilogram). The surcharge fee will be the total of the surcharges for each substance exceeding the concentration listed. The surcharge shall be computed based on the most recent data applicable to the discharger for the latest billing period. 
B.  Loading rates shall be determined from analytical data supplied by the city, provided that a proper sampling location exists for the premises being measured. A commercial or industrial user subject to a discharge may submit certified analytical data to establish the strength of his/her discharge. However, the data must come from analysis by a state-certified laboratory of a sample collected by professionally qualified personnel from a sample point recognized by the manager as being valid. Final determination of loading rates for a user rests with the manager. 
C.  Restaurant users not in compliance shall be charged an additional fee per one hundred gallons, or any fraction thereof, per month, as follows from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section: 
	1992/93 	1993/95 	1995/96 	1996/97 and 
subsequent years 
Restaurant class: 				
Not in compliance 	$0.78 	$0.81 	$0.85 	$0.72 
 
For the purposes of this chapter, any user required to have an exterior grease interceptor by the manager, who has his/her interceptor pumped quarterly by a licensed grease pumper, and who submits written proof thereof to the manager at least thirty days prior to the next billing cycle, shall be deemed "in compliance with the grease interceptor requirements of this chapter." 
Any user notified by the manager that he/she must install an exterior grease interceptor who has not done so within one year of said notification, or, subsequent to this one-year period, any user who has an interceptor installed but does not have it pumped quarterly shall be deemed "not in compliance with the grease interceptor requirements of this chapter," until proof of pumping is provided. 
Alternate interceptor pumping schedules, either more or less frequent than quarterly, may be established by the manager on a case-by-case basis, if conditions warrant. If an alternate schedule is established, the new schedule shall replace the quarterly requirement for compliance purposes per subsection C. of this section. 
Any user notified by the manager that he/she must install an exterior grease interceptor who has not done so within one year from the date of notification of noncompliance shall be assessed two times the noncompliance fee per month. 
D.  For transient occupancy trailer parks, a per-space monthly fee of three dollars and thirty-four cents will be charged as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
E.  All billings issued by the city for wastewater treatment service fees shall be paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month following the month in which the bill is sent. If the bill is not paid by this date, it shall become delinquent. 
F.  Subsequent to the annual audit for the city, beginning in the year ended June 30, 1994, treatment rates for all classes of customers shall be brought before the city council for review and adjustment, if appropriate. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. 79.19 § 2, 1993; Ord. 79.20 § 1, 1994; Ord. 79.22 § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 79.24, § 2, 6-6-2012)  
13.04.215 - Collection of service fees—Use of tax roll. 
Commencing July 1, 1992, all residential wastewater treatment service fees may be collected one or more times per year as the city determines to be appropriate, on the equalized tax assessment of the county. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. 79.23 § 3, 1998)  
13.04.220 - Wastewater hook-up fees. 
A.  No person shall hook up to the city's sanitary sewer system without paying a wastewater hook-up fee as established by resolution of the council pursuant to city ordinance 143. 
B.  All hook-up fees shall be paid upon release of gas/electric from the building department. If the residential development contains more than one single-family dwelling or unit, hook-up fees shall be paid on a pro rata basis for each dwelling when it receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, or on a lump-sum basis when the first dwelling in the development receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, all as determined by the manager. 
C.  "Final inspection" or "certificate of occupancy" as used in this chapter, have the same meaning as described in Sections 305 and 307 of the Uniform Building Code, International Conference of Building Officials, 1985 Edition. "Release of gas/electric," as used in this chapter, refers to release of a building by the city for the purpose of being authorized to receive utility service. 
D.  Additional hook-up fees shall be due in the event that the use of any commercial property is intensified to require greater sewer capacity than that originally paid for. The owner shall pay to the city the difference between the original fee and the fee for the new or increased use, such fee to be based upon the rates that are in effect at the tune of discovery. In no event shall the owner be entitled to a reimbursement of any fee or portion thereof previously paid to the city. The city shall make periodic review of users, and shall notify the owner of a premises in writing of any increased fee that is due. The amount of the fee increase shall become due and payable within thirty days of the date of the notice, and if it is not paid within that period it shall become delinquent. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.225 - Other fees. 
Fees to defray the costs of process and issuing the following permits or performing the following services are established as follows: 
A.  Direct discharge permit (Section 13.04.040 B)—One hundred dollars. 
B.  Wastewater discharge permit application (Section 13.04.105)—Two hundred dollars. 
C.  Industrial discharge monitoring (Section 13.04.105)—Eight hundred dollars per year. 
D.  Water meter reading service (Section 13.04.095)—Seventy-five dollars per reading. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.230 - Special assessment connection charge. 
The city shall collect in addition to all other charges of the city, prior to the connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city, special connection charges for any lot or parcel of property in the city that abuts on or can be served by the sanitary sewer main or facility of the city constructed pursuant to special assessment proceedings in the North Scotts Valley sewer and water assessment district, for which the property was not assessed. The charge shall be the sum equal to what said parcel would have been assessed if it had been included in the assessment district based upon the engineer's method of assessment spread. Such charge shall be payable in cash within ten days of the date of the application to the city and prior to connection to the sanitary sewer system or in such installments as may be provided in the event special assessment bond proceedings are conducted to finance the same. The special assessment connection charge collected by the city shall, from time to time, be credited to the bond interest and redemption fund for the North Scotts Valley sewer and water assessment district. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.231 - Special assessment connection charge—Pasatiempo Pines facilities project. 
A.  The city council shall collect, in addition to all other charges of the city, a special connection and/or use charge for any lot or parcel of property that abuts or fronts on or will be served by the wastewater facilities constructed pursuant to special assessment proceedings in the Pasatiempo Pines wastewater facilities project and for which the property was not assessed or was assessed for a lesser number of connections. A map of said district marked Exhibit A is attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part of this chapter. The charges for said special assessment connection and/or use shall be the sum of four thousand eight hundred eleven dollars. 
B.  Such charge shall be payable in cash to the city at the time that application and payment is made for a building permit and prior to connection and/or use of the facilities hereinabove set forth. The special assessment connection and/or use charge collected by the city shall, from time to time, be credited to the bond interest and redemption fund for the Pasatiempo Pines wastewater facilities project. 
(Ord. 131, 1986)  
Article VIII. - Connections and Owner Responsibility 
 
13.04.235 - Owner responsible for costs—Notices. 
The owner of the property or properties being served by the city's sanitary sewer system shall be responsible for all fees and costs as set forth in this chapter. All notices to the owner made pursuant to this chapter shall be sent to the owner by mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.240 - Owner responsible for hook-ups. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property desiring to hook up to the city's sanitary sewer system to construct and install at his/her own cost and expense, all lines, drains, pump stations and/or other facilities necessary for his/her property to be served by said sanitary sewer system. The construction and installation shall be done pursuant to the requirements of the city engineer with a complete set of engineered drawings and specifications, showing among other things, the exact site, capacity and location of lines, drains, pump stations, and/or other facilities and appurtenances. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.245 - Easement required for hook-ups. 
When a sanitary sewer main is to be constructed across private property to serve more than one parcel an easement shall be granted to the city and the easement line, size and installation shall be approved by the city. No person shall discharge any sewage into a sanitary sewer main until said main has been accepted by the city. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.250 - Oversized facilities—Owner responsibility—Reimbursement. 
A.  Whenever in the opinion of the city engineer it is necessary to install oversized drains, lines, pump stations, and/or other facilities which may be used for the benefit, immediate or future, of property other than the property in question, then the owner shall be required to pay for the installation of such oversized lines, drains, pump stations, and/or facilities. 
B.  Whenever the owner installs oversized drains, lines, pump stations, or other facilities and whenever an owner extends their line to his/her property which line bypasses other property not presently being serviced by the city's sanitary sewer system, then in such case, at the owner's request, the city will enter into a reimbursement agreement with the owner whereby future developers of property abutting the line extension and/or other facilities will be required to pay a pro rata share of the costs of the lines and/or facilities which benefit property. The establishment of the pro rata share will be solely within the discretion of the city. The form of the agreement to be executed between the owner and the city shall be approved by the city attorney. 
C.  Subsequent to the installation of oversized facilities, all properties abutting and capable of using the oversized facility ("abutting property") shall be obligated to share in the pro rata cost of the oversizing as established by the public works department. No building permit shall be issued for any abutting property unless and until the owner of the abutting property has paid its pro rata share. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. 79.21 § 1, 1996)  
13.04.255 - Ownership and maintenance of lines. 
Sewer laterals shall belong to the property owner. The city shall maintain all city sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances within public easements or on public property. The property owner shall maintain all sewer laterals and appurtenances for his/her premises, and be responsible for any blockages therein. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article IX. - Collection of Delinquent Fees; Penalties and Interest; Liens; Use of Tax Roll; Disconnection 
 
13.04.260 - Delinquent fees. 
All monthly wastewater service fees as set forth in Section 13.04.205, and increased wastewater hookup fees as set forth in Section 13.04.220D shall become delinquent if not paid within the periods therein specified. 
(Ord. 79.18 § IIA (part), 1993; Ord. 79.23 § 4, 1998)  
13.04.265 - Penalty and interest on wastewater fees. 
All wastewater treatment service fees which have become delinquent as set forth in Section 13.04.260 shall bear a one-time penalty of ten percent of the principal amount due. In addition, interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month from the date which the delinquency commenced may be charged on all due but unpaid delinquencies. The penalty and all interest shall be added to the principal amount due, which shall continue to bear interest at the said rate until paid. In the event a delinquency occurs, the owner of the premises shall immediately be notified in writing of the delinquency. The notice shall contain the amount due, the due date, information regarding the accrual of any penalty and interest, and a description of the premises. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993; Ord. 79.23 § 5, 1998)  
13.04.270 - Lien procedure—Use of tax roll. 
All fees which have become delinquent as set forth in Section 13.04.260, and which remain unpaid for a period of sixty days shall become a lien against the real property to which the delinquency relates, and shall be collected pursuant to proceedings conducted in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Chapter 6, Part 3, Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code (Sections 5470 et seq.), and for these purposes this chapter is hereby declared to be adopted pursuant to such provisions. In accordance with these provisions, at the conclusion of the requisite proceedings, which may be conducted one or more times per year as the city determines to be appropriate, the delinquent amounts shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, general taxes of the city. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.275. - Other remedies. 
The city may provide otherwise for the collection of delinquent charges. All remedies in this section provided for their enforcement and collection are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively or collectively as the city determines. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article X. - New Developments 
 
13.04.280 - Required connection. 
Parcels of land that are developed or will be developed within any sanitary sewer assessment district or within two hundred feet of an existing sewer main shall be required to connect to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article XI. - Land Outside Corporate Limits 
 
13.04.285 - Land outside corporate limits—Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply with equal force and effect to the owner(s) of any parcel(s) of land located outside the city's corporate limits which make use of the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article XII. - Private Disposal Systems 
 
13.04.290 - Prohibited private disposal systems—Exemptions. 
No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. The manager shall be empowered to grant exceptions to these provisions by making written findings that sanitary sewer mains or submains cannot reasonably be extended to the subject property and that the subject property meets all city, county and/or state regulations and recommendations for individual sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
13.04.295 - Prohibited private disposal systems—Appeal. 
If any person is dissatisfied with the decision of the manager, such person may within ten days appeal the decision in writing to the city manager. Thereafter, within thirty days of receipt of the appeal the city manager shall hear the appeal. Such appeals shall be accompanied by a filing fee, if any, as set by resolution of the council and shall set forth specifically the grounds of the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Article XIII. - Miscellaneous 
 
13.04.300 - Conflict with plumbing code. 
If any of the provisions of this chapter conflicts with any of the provisions of Chapter 11 of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city or with any of the provisions of any other section of the Uniform Plumbing Code, heretofore or hereafter enacted, the provisions of this chapter shall control unless expressly stated to the contrary. 
(Ord. 79.18 § II.A (part), 1993)  
Chapter 13.08 - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM REGULATION 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The city council finds that the continuing growth and development of the city has given rise to increasing problems in the field of sanitation. A safe and sanitary means of sewage disposal should be provided and an orderly means of preventing unsanitary conditions from occurring in wide areas of the city should also be provided. The council finds that unless more complete regulations are enacted for the control of individual sewage disposal facilities in the city there will be a constant and continuing hazard to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. This chapter and the regulations adopted pursuant hereto is intended as a temporary solution to the existing sewage problems within the city. It is the city's intention to require all residents of the city to hook up to the city's sewer system when the capacity to do so is available. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.020 - Building official—Regulation—Authorization—Amendments—Filing. 
A.  In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter, the building official, with the approval of the council, is authorized to make such regulations as are necessary to give effect to the terms and intent of this chapter. The substance of such regulations shall be in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and with any state and federal laws, regulations and standards concerning sewage disposal systems. 
B.  Such regulations shall become effective when prepared by the building official and approved by the council. Such regulations may be amended from time to time by the building official with the approval of the council. The building official shall maintain at all times on file in his office for public inspection a current copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this section. 
A.  "Abatement" means the installation, construction, alteration, enlargement, reconstruction, replacement, improvement, reconditioning of an individual sewage disposal system, or the filling in and abandonment of a sewage disposal system which cannot be repaired, so as to eliminate the sewage nuisance. 
B.  "Construction" means construction, major repair, alteration, enlargement, replacement, improvement or relocation of an individual sewage disposal system. 
C.  "Department" means the building department of the city of Scotts Valley. 
D.  "Health officer" means the county of Santa Cruz health officer or his authorized representative. 
E.  "Individual sewage disposal system" means a septic tank and drainfield, seepage pit, seepage bed, or any other means of sanitary disposal of sewage. 
F.  "Major repair" means any kind of alteration or replacement of a malfunctioning individual sewage disposal system except those defined as minor repairs. 
G.  "Minor repair" means replacement of septic tank baffles, tees, ells or tops. 
H.  "Order of abatement" means both mandatory and prohibitory orders requiring or prohibiting one or more acts; the term also includes those orders effective for a limited, as well as an indefinite period of time, and includes modifications or restatements of any order. 
I.  "Sewage" means waste substance, liquid or solid, which is associated with human habitation or which contains, or may be contaminated with human or animal excretion or excrement, offal or feculent matter or matters, or substances that may be injurious or dangerous to health. 
J.  "Sewage nuisance" means a condition caused by a failing individual sewage disposal system which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal; and which occurs during, or as a result of, the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.040 - Value—Value of building—Defined. 
"Value" or "value of building" means the estimated costs to replace the building in kind, based on current replacement costs, as determined by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.050 - Individual sewage disposal system—Permits required. 
No persons shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any kind of individual sewage disposal system or any portion thereof, on any property within the city without having first obtained a permit to do so from the building official of the city. Minor repairs may be made without such a permit. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.060 - Individual sewage disposal system—Where permitted. 
Lots may be served by septic tank systems only if the lots meet the following requirements: 
A.  Where the technical criteria for septic tank system installation can be met with respect to an existing parcel. Parcel area is not applicable prior to October 21, 1981. Parcels must be one acre in area, excluding roads, on or after October 21, 1981; 
B.  Lots must be located outside the boundaries of the Septic Ban Map as adopted by the city council on July 26, 1978, except existing lots prior to October 21, 1981, in the proposed Pasatiempo Pines sanitary sewer assessment district where an interim septic tank system may be installed, provided the criteria in subsections A or C of this section is met; 
C.  The parcel must not be within two hundred feet of an existing public sewer. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 58.3 § 1, 1981; Ord. 58.4 § 1, 1981)  
13.08.070 - Individual sewage disposal system—Requirements. 
Where permitted hereunder, an individual sewage disposal system shall be provided for each building designed for human habitation, except that where a group of detached buildings, designed for human habitation, occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having a yard or court in common may be serviced by a single individual sewage disposal system. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.080 - Individual sewage disposal system—Uses prohibited. 
Individual sewage disposal systems shall not serve any nonresidential use. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 58.3 § 2, 1981)  
13.08.090 - Existing systems—Building alterations—General. 
Sewage disposal systems for buildings or structures to which additions, alterations or repairs are made shall comply with all requirements for new buildings or structures except as specifically provided in this section through Section 13.08.120. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.100 - Additions, alterations and repair—Cost more than fifty percent of building value. 
When additions, alterations or repairs within any twelve month period exceed fifty percent of the value of an existing building or structure, the sewage disposal system therefor shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.110 - Additions, alterations and repairs—Cost less than fifty percent of building value. 
In the event of additions, alterations or repairs within any twelve month period costing less than fifty percent of the value of an existing building or structure, the capacity of the existing sewage disposal system shall be increased to accommodate any potential increased occupancy load, and said new capacity shall conform with this chapter and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.120 - Maintenance. 
All sewage disposal systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of such systems. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.130 - Individual system—Permit—Application—Fee—Granting—Construction. 
A.  An application for a permit to construct an individual sewage disposal system shall be made to the city building official on forms provided for that purpose. The procedure for filing an application shall conform to the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee set by resolution of the city council. No part of the fee shall be refundable. 
B.  Within ten days after receipt of the application, the city building official shall either grant, conditionally grant, or deny the permit. A permit shall not be issued if, in the judgment of the building official, the proposed disposal system will not function in a satisfactory manner. In the event an application is submitted for an area in the city for which the building official has inadequate information about soil topography, the property shall be inspected by the building official. The building official may require soil and/or percolation tests to be made. Where high water tables are known or suspected to exist, the building official may require these tests to be conducted during the rainy season. Soil and percolation tests shall be performed at the expense of the applicant. The tests shall be made under the supervision of the building official by any of the following: a registered civil engineer, a registered sanitary engineer, a registered sanitarian, a licensed septic tank contractor, or a general engineering contractor. 
C.  Final inspection of each installation shall be made by the city building official prior to the time the system is backfilled or covered. A request to the building department for final inspection must be made at least one business day in advance. In lieu of a final inspection and with the approval of the building official, the applicant may submit an affidavit by a licensed contractor who installed the system certifying that the same has been constructed according to the plans and specifications which were submitted. In the event the building department determines there has been an improper installation, it may post a stop work order on the job site. Before any further work is done on the site, clearance from the department must be obtained. 
D.  Except as provided, construction or major repair of an individual sewage disposal system shall be made by a contractor with a C-42 Contracting License, or an equivalent certificate issued by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards; provided, however, that a property owner may construct or repair a system on his own property which system serves or will serve the building on property that is neither being offered for sale nor intended to be so offered. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 58.3 § 3, 1981)  
13.08.140 - Individual system—Preliminary lot inspection—Report—Fee. 
A.  The building department may make inspection of a lot and review available department records to determine the probable suitability of the property for an individual sewage system. The building official shall issue a report on the inspection findings to the property owner or his authorized representative. A lot inspection report shall not constitute approval for the issuance of the sewage disposal permit or guarantee of such issuance. 
B.  Each application for inspection of a lot shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. When inspection of more than one lot is requested, the fee shall be charged for each lot. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.160 - Permits—Expiration. 
A.  Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized thereby has not been completed and the system placed in operation within one year following the issuance of the permit. 
B.  Upon the expiration of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the system may not be used or any further work done in connection with the installation or operation of the sewage disposal system until a new permit for such purpose is secured and all work done in conformance with all the regulations then applicable to sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.170 - Permits—Revocation. 
A.  A permit issued hereunder may be revoked, or suspended by the city building official as provided in Section 13.08.180 if he determines that a violation of this chapter exists, that written notice has been directed to permittee specifying the violation and that the permittee has failed or neglected to make the necessary adjustments within thirty days after receiving such notice. 
B.  A permit may be so revoked or suspended by the city building official if he determines at a hearing for such purpose that the person to whom any permit was issued pursuant to this chapter has obtained the same by fraud or misrepresentation, provided that notice of the time and place of such hearing is given to the permittee at least five days prior thereto. 
C.  The suspension or revocation of any permit shall not be effective until notice thereof in writing is mailed to the permittee. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.180 - Permits—Appeal from denial, revocation, suspension or abatement order. 
Any person whose application for a permit has been denied, or whose permit once issued has been revoked or suspended, or who has received an order of abatement, may, within ten days following the date on which the action was taken, file an appeal in writing to the city council. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The city council shall then proceed to set the matter for hearing not later than twenty days thereafter. The city council may upon the appeal either affirm, overrule or modify the action of the building official. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.190 - Sewage nuisance—Investigation—When. 
The city building official, or his representative may, upon reasonable cause to believe a sewage nuisance exists, investigate the situation to determine whether a sewage nuisance does in fact exist. He shall have the power, when in the performance of his duty and upon first presenting his credentials and identifying himself as an employee of the city to the person apparently in control of the premises, if available, to enter upon any such premises between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m., but not in the dwelling of any person without permission or a court order, to discover or to inspect any thing or condition which appears to be a sewage nuisance. He may examine such premises, things or conditions, take such samples and make such tests as needed and take any other steps reasonably necessary for the proper investigation and determination of whether a sewage nuisance exists. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.08.200 - Sewage nuisance—Determination—Abatement. 
The city building official shall determine whether or not any of the conditions investigated constitute a sewage nuisance. If he determines that any of such conditions do constitute a sewage nuisance, abatement proceedings may commence pursuant to Chapter 8.04 of this municipal code or any subsequent amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 58 § 2 (part), 1974)  
Chapter 13.12 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 107.2, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 13.12, §§ 13.12.005—13.12.425. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 13.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.12 pertained to hazardous materials storage permit and derived from Ord. No. 107, § 1, adopted 1983; Ord. No. 117, § 1, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 117.1, §§ 1—4, adopted 1996. 
 
13.12.010 - Regulations adopted. 
The City of Scotts Valley hereby adopts by reference, as though fully set forth herein, Chapter 7.100 (regarding Hazardous Materials) of the Santa Cruz County Code, as presently worded or hereafter modified. 
(Ord. No. 107.2, § 2, 10-5-2011)  
13.12.020 - Health officer. 
The Santa Cruz County Health Officer is hereby designated as the city health officer for purposes of enforcing the above referenced regulations. 
(Ord. No. 107.2, § 2, 10-5-2011)  
13.12.030 - Appeals. 
Any appeals allowed by the regulations referenced in Section 13.12.010 shall be made to the Scotts Valley City Council in writing, delivered to the office of the city clerk within ten working days from the time of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall set forth the appellant's name, the phone number for the appellant, an address to which notices may be sent to the appellant and the grounds upon which the appeal is made. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within thirty days of the date of the appeal and shall be de novo. 
(Ord. No. 107.2, § 2, 10-5-2011)  
13.12.040 - Fees. 
Fees may be established from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 107.2, § 2, 10-5-2011)  
Chapter 13.16 - AREAS FOR COLLECTING AND LOADING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 
 
13.16.010 - Purpose. 
Cities and counties must divert fifty percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling and composting activities. Diverting fifty percent of all solid waste requires the participation of the residential, commercial, industrial and public sectors. The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to diverting solid waste and constitutes an urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling and composting activities. This chapter has been developed to meet that need. 
(Ord. 156 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.16.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this chapter: 
"Development project" means any of the following: 
1.  A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial or institutional building, or residential building having five or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five or more living units; and 
2.  Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste. 
"Project for which a building permit is required" means a project for which a building permit is required, including: 
1.  All new projects; 
2.  Any single alteration of an existing project requiring a building permit; or 
3.  Any sum total of alterations to an existing project conducted within a twelve month period requiring a building permit. 
"Recycling area" (areas for recycling) means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 156 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.16.030 - General requirements. 
A.  Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after January 1, 1994, shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
B.  Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
C.  Any development project as defined in Section 13.16.020 A for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after January 1, 1994, for modifications that add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area, shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 156 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.16.040 - Design standards. 
A.  Recycling Area Capacity. Areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number and distribution to serve the development where the project occurs. 
B.  Recycling Area Dimensions. Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is to be located, as determined by the environmental program manager. 
C.  Number of Containers Located in Recycling Areas. An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development should be located within the recycling areas of development projects. 
D.  Design and Construction of Recycling Areas. The design and construction of recycling areas shall be compatible with surrounding land uses and approved by the design review board. 
E.  Security of Recycling Areas. Recycling areas shall be secured to prevent the theft of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal of materials. 
F.  Environmental Protection Within Recycling Areas. Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse weather or other environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. 
G.  Recycling Area Access for Collection Vehicles. Driveway or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the hauler in the area in which the development project exists. 
H.  Identification of Designation of Recycling Areas. A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling areas. 
I.  Recommended Recycling Areas Within the Residence. Residential developers and property owners are encouraged to include recycling areas or systems within the residence such as roll-out drawers below the sink for recycling receptacles; fireproof, cleanable, secure chutes from the living space to the space for collecting and loading recyclable materials, etc. Recommended internal storage space for individual living units of residential development projects is three cubic feet. 
(Ord. 156 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.16.050 - Location of recycling areas. 
Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required by this code to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to fire and other applicable building and/or public safety laws. Each recycling area within multifamily residential development shall be no greater than two hundred fifty feet from each living unit. 
(Ord. 156 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Title 14 - REDEVELOPMENT 
Chapter:  
Chapter 14.01 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY AFFORDABLE HOUSING PRODUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
14.01.010 - Findings. 
A.  City of Scotts Valley Goals and General Plan. 
1.  The city council finds that a decent home and a suitable living environment for all is a priority of the highest order; this priority conforms with state and federal policies and in particular the goals, policies and legal obligations of the agency reflected in the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code §§ 33000 et seq.). The goal of the city and the agency is to provide housing for persons of all economic levels, with priority given to those persons of moderate-, low- and very-low-income levels currently residing or working within the city. 
2.  The city council finds there is an inadequate supply of housing in the city which is affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. Federal and state housing finance and subsidy programs are not sufficient in themselves to meet that need. In addition, the adoption of the redevelopment plan by the agency now requires affordable housing units to be provided within the project area or provisions to be made for in-lieu funding depending on the size of the residential development project as a percentage of the number of new units built within the project area. 
3.  Land for residential development in the city is limited, and the amount of land which can be used for development of housing for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households is being depleted by development of high-cost housing. In order to further the goals of the agency and the city's housing element of the general plan, the city council finds that implementation of this process is necessary to reach agency goals of providing appropriate housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. 
4.  These findings and other sections of this chapter refer to and utilize certain terms which are defined in Section 14.01.030 of this chapter. The sections in this chapter shall refer to those definitions in conjunction with the use of those terms. 
B.  Provide for Workforce. 
1.  The city council finds that housing for persons of very-low-, low- and moderate income serves and enhances the public health, safety and welfare, and particularly finds that provision of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing is fundamental to maintenance of an adequate, growing workforce and marketplace for the local economy. 
2.  The city council acknowledges that if very-low, low- and moderate-income workers cannot find housing in the city, then employers will have difficulty in securing a labor force, and employees will be forced to commute. Employee commutes increase air pollution, unnecessarily create traffic congestion and develop a population which is separate and distinct from full-time residents establishing diverse and often contrasting demands on limited city resources. 
C.  Benefit to Property Participating. The city council finds that a program established in the ordinance codified in this chapter will meet the needs of the redevelopment plan and will directly benefit the project area. Each new residential housing project which contributes to very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing augments the housing mix, increases the supply of housing for all economic segments of the community, and thereby provides for a balanced community which is deemed to be in the public interest. 
D.  Smaller Subdivisions. The city council finds that a large portion of residential subdivisions are divisions of land into less than seven lots. If developments of this size are exempted from contributing to the very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing stock, then the cumulative effect will result in a large diminution of the potential to obtain the resources necessary to provide affordable housing. 
E.  Resale Restrictions. The city council finds that the benefits of an effective very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing program are severely diminished if the program benefits only the first occupants of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing who thereafter attempt to sell the assisted units at market prices. Therefore, the city council recognizes that resale control, to ensure the continuing availability of very-low-, low- and moderate-income households, is a necessary consideration in order to prevent undermining of the credibility of the whole program, not so much because of the windfall to those who sell an affordable housing unit, but because of the loss of the unit itself. 
F.  Public Purpose. The city council finds that public housing programs and housing subsidy programs can meet only a small portion of the need for very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing. The vast majority of housing units have been and will continue to be produced by the private housing industry. This industry has the knowledge and ability to produce housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income households given supportive government policies, including incentives and public investment as appropriate. Therefore, the city council finds it is a public purpose of the city to seek assistance and cooperation from the private sector and nonprofit agencies in making available an adequate supply of housing for persons of all economic segments of the community. 
G.  Economic Feasibility. The city council finds that the goal of increasing the supply of housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income families through the assistance and cooperation of the private development industry can be reached only if the provision of such housing becomes more feasible for the private development industry. The city council further finds that, in order to make the provision of such housing more feasible to the private development industry, it is necessary to provide flexibility in the manner and method of development which has a tendency to reduce the cost of development projects for the private development industry. 
H.  Benefits of Ordinance. 
1.  Benefits to the affordable housing developer may, at the discretion of the agency, include density bonuses, waiver of fees, application of planned development zoning, authorization of assessment district and improvement district bonds and use of publicly-generated funds to reduce development costs. 
2.  Benefits to the public include increased housing opportunities in all areas of the city, an increased supply of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing, an increased availability of funds for very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing projects, and an agency and city commitment to create low- to moderate-income housing opportunities in the city. 
I.  Collection of Fees. 
1.  The fees required or permitted as an option by the ordinance codified in this chapter are appropriate and permissible. The fees required or permitted as an option by the ordinance codified in this chapter will be effective in producing units because: 
a.  The fee will be reflective of values or projects built in the project area. The base for the in-lieu schedule will be the median price of a home sold in each specific development constructed in the project area; 
b.  Payment of in-lieu fees will be within a specific period of time, thereby allowing a predictable and stable flow of in-lieu fees; and 
c.  The fees collected will be used in a specific time frame for the provision of affordable housing units. 
2.  The change in requirements from a six-unit/lot project to a seven-unit/lot project is appropriate because: 
a.  At a basic contribution rate of fifteen percent (15%), an entire unit donation is not required until a project is of at least seven units/lots (i.e. fifteen percent (15%) contribution/lot multiplied by seven lots equals a 1.05 unit contribution). 
b.  In those cases where an on-site in-lieu fee option is allowed for projects of seven or more units/lots, the fee generated by a seven (or more) unit/lot project will be sufficient to reflect the difference between a market rate unit in the city and the price of an affordable housing unit. 
c.  The amount of the fee will be sufficient to induce developers to fully consider on-site contributions. 
d.  The lesser contribution of projects of one through six units/lots at a basic fifteen (15%) rate do not require contribution of one full unit. 
e.  The graduated fees for projects of one through six units/lots is appropriate and proportionate to the scale of the projects. 
J.  City Commitment. The city council finds that among the considerations which the city must undertake in order to make housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income families economically feasible for the private development industry, the following may be of importance: 
1.  Governmental land use planning and policies should not unnecessarily limit allowable densities; where higher densities can be supported they may be allowed. 
2.  Review of city's development process and exactions for the purpose of identifying those requirements and exactions which may increase the cost of housing and which might be reduced or eliminated without significantly affecting the public health and safety. 
3.  Examine and devise workable methods of relieving the private housing industry, when pursuing housing goals, of the burden of providing development infrastructure. 
4.  Review the governmental approval process and procedure for the purpose of instituting changes to reduce processing time and requirements. 
5.  Pursue all sources and programs for obtaining public funds which can be made available to the private housing industry and/or very-low-, low- and moderate-income families for the purpose of reducing the cost of developing housing and/or the cost of renting or owning housing. 
6.  Pursue alternatives for the use of in-lieu fees including land purchases, defraying infrastructure costs and construction of units. 
K.  Other Objectives. 
1.  The city council finds that the shortage of housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income persons is a regional problem and that cooperation and coordination with other governmental entities within and around the city in mutually solving the problem is an objective of this chapter. 
2.  The city council further finds that it is an objective of this chapter to meet the housing needs of all types of very-low-, low- and moderate-income groups in a manner that is economically feasible and consistent with their needs. 
3.  The city council further finds that it is an objective of this chapter that the purchase or rental price of housing for persons of income levels above the moderate income level shall not be increased as a result of the requirements of this chapter. 
4.  The city council further finds that it is an objective of this chapter to provide housing opportunities in the project area for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. 
5.  The city council further finds that it is an objective of this chapter to provide housing opportunities for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households living and working in the city, on a priority basis and that a preference criteria system has been implemented by the agency and may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
14.01.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter, pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the State Constitution, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code (Subdivision Map Act) and Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code, is to enhance the public welfare, benefit the property being developed, and assure compatibility between future housing development in the project area and housing units affordable to persons of very-low, low and moderate income. In order to ensure that remaining developable land in the city is utilized in a manner consistent with state and local housing policies and needs, the city declares that all new residential development in the project area shall contribute to the provision of housing units affordable to persons of very-low, low and moderate income. 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
14.01.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Affordable housing" means the units which are required to be occupied by very-low-income, low-income or by moderate-income households as defined in this section. 
"Affordable housing subcommittee" means a subcommittee consisting of two city council/agency members who negotiate the terms and requirements of this chapter with developers of new residential developments. Such negotiations are subject to confirmation by the city council and agency members. 
"Agency" means the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Scotts Valley. 
"Apartment" means a separate dwelling unit within a building for rental residence purposes containing three or more units. 
"Building permit" means a permit issued by the city's planning department authorizing the construction of new residences and apartment buildings. 
"Condominium" means, pursuant to Civil Code Section 783, an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. 
"Continuing availability" means the method of insuring that an affordable housing unit will remain in use for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. 
"Density bonus" means an increase in the number of residential units authorized for a particular parcel beyond that which is permitted under the existing general plan, area plan, master plan, coastal land use plan and/or zoning. 
"Development" means subdivision of land, use permits, special permits and building permits for residential purposes. 
"For sale unit" means a housing unit to be sold and not rented. Such units shall be owner occupied if a for sale unit is an affordable housing unit. 
"Housing" means any structure or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping quarters of one or more persons. 
"Housing authority" means the Housing Authority of the County of Santa Cruz. 
"Infrastructure" means improvements including, but not limited to, water and sewage systems, storm drains, curb and gutter, sidewalks, streets, grading and paving, etc. 
"Lot of record" means an existing subdivided lot created prior to March 16, 2005. 
"Low-income household" means a household with an adjusted income which is not less than fifty (50%) nor more than eighty percent (80%) of median income. 
"Market rate" means the sales price or rent for non-affordable housing units within the same new residential development. Where multiple market rate units are provided, the median sales price or rent shall be used to establish the market rate value. 
"Median income" means the median income adjusted by actual household size for households in the county of Santa Cruz, California, as published from time to time by the state of California. In the event that such income determinations are no longer published, or are not updated for a period of at least eighteen months, the agency shall provide the developer with other income determinations which are reasonably similar with respect to methods of calculation to those previously published by the state. 
"Moderate-income household" means a household with an adjusted income which is not less than eighty (80%) nor more than one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of median income. 
"New residential development" means that which is subject to the requirements of this chapter, and shall include the construction of any residential dwelling unit(s) in any residential area in the project area, including the building permit or tentative map received after the adoption of the redevelopment plan. 
"Owner occupied" means the owner of the property at time of development who has resided or who agrees to reside in the affordable housing unit. Violation of sections of this chapter pertaining to owner occupancy shall be, and is declared, an infraction of this chapter subject to the remedies provided in Section 14.01.060. 
"Project Area" means the redevelopment project area identified in the Redevelopment Plan for the City of Scotts Valley. 
"Redevelopment Plan" means the Scotts Valley Redevelopment Agency Redevelopment Plan. 
"Rental unit" means a housing unit to be rented or leased and not a for sale unit. 
"Second deed of trust" means an instrument that is evidence of the pledge of any affordable housing low/mod unit as security for the performance of those conditions as set forth in Section 14.01.040 F2 of this chapter. 
"Subdivision" means a division of land, pursuant to Government Code Section 66424. 
"Very-low-income household" means a household with less than fifty (50%) of median income. 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
14.01.040 - Regulations. 
A.  Development Requiring Affordable Housing Unit Contribution. All new residential developments in the project area comprised of one or more units including, but not limited to, condominiums, town homes, single-family dwellings, apartments, etc., and shall contribute to the provision of housing for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households in the city. The method of contribution shall be in accordance with this chapter and in a manner consistent with the city's policies providing for the health, safety and welfare of its residents, including protection of the environment. 
B.  Development Authorized Without Affordable Housing Unit Contributions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the following developments shall not be required to contribute to the affordable housing unit needs of the city: 
1.  The construction of for sale or rental units on lots which are part of a parcel or subdivision that has already made its required contribution; 
2.  Development in which an adequate showing of extreme economic hardship or detriment upon compliance with this chapter is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council and the agency by the project applicant; 
3.  The construction of an addition to a single-family home or the remodeling of other existing structures or facilities; 
4.  The construction of one single-family home on an existing lot of record; 
5.  Construction of non-residential projects; 
6.  Residential projects which, through state or federal government programs, will be deed restricted to be affordable to very-low-, low- or moderate-income house holds; and 
7.  Construction of a secondary dwelling unit on a residential lot in accordance with Chapter 17.41 of this Code. 
C.  New Residential Developments Which Shall Make the Affordable Housing Unit Contribution. 
1.  The provision of housing for households of very-low, low and moderate incomes shall be required of all new residential development as set forth below. The size, design and location of these affordable housing units within a development shall be consistent with the general plan, zoning and city building standards. 
2.  All new residential developments in the project area of seven or more units in the city shall provide housing for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households by one of the following: 
a.  Provision of affordable housing units within the development project in an amount equal to or greater than fifteen (15%) of the total number of units or lots approved for the development project in accordance with redevelopment law regarding residential projects in redevelopment project areas; 
b.  Projects containing lots in which the average lot size is larger than one acre may opt to pay an on-site in-lieu fee, subject to the approval of the city council and the agency. The amount of the on-site in-lieu fee for each unit required on-site is that which results from subtracting the price of an affordable housing unit, as determined by the city, from the median sales price of a home in the project. The price of the affordable housing unit will be based on the affordability of such a unit by a four-person household earning one hundred percent (120%) of the county of Santa Cruz median income; 
c.  Any combination of the above, the result of which is to fulfill the basic requirement of contribution of units in an amount equal to, or greater than, fifteen percent (15%) of the residential units and/or lots generated by the development project; and 
d.  Off-site contributions of lots or units which secures the purpose of this chapter, subject to the approval of the city council and the agency. Such alternate manner of contribution may be approved by the city council and the agency upon a showing by the developer with clear and convincing evidence that on-site contribution is not appropriate for the particular development. Evidence which is appropriate for such showing shall be related to (i) the physical characteristics of the project, or (ii) better achieving the goals and objectives of the general plan, or (iii) taking advantage of unique opportunities that exist to achieve a greater contribution off-site. 
Where units are allowed to be provided off-site, such off-site units shall be located in a manner to benefit the project area. Off-site contributions in the project area shall be allowed on a one-for-one basis when off-site units are priced to be suitable and affordable to a four-person household earning eighty percent (80%) of median income, or on a two-for-one basis when off-site units are priced to be suitable and affordable to a four-person household earning one hundred percent (100/%) of median income. Any off-site project built outside the project area, when allowed, will be based on a two-for-one basis in an assortment of affordable housing costs as determined by the agency. 
3.  Development which requires a fractional contribution pursuant to the requirements of this chapter may pay an in-lieu fee for that fraction, prorated on the value of one unit (i.e. a development generating a .9 affordable unit contribution may pay the in-lieu fee; a development generating a 1.5 affordable unit contribution may pay the in-lieu fee for a .5 affordable unit after contributing one affordable unit). 
4.  All new residential developments of less than seven units or lots in the project area shall contribute to the provision of housing for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households in the manner set forth in subsection G of this section. 
5.  The contribution of the developer may be accomplished by the developer alone or in combination with any number of other persons, or with the housing authority or other nonprofit housing corporation. 
6.  When a developer of a residential project agrees to provide over twenty-five percent (25%) of the total units or lots for affordable unit housing, the city may grant either a density bonus to the project of one unit, or lot per affordable housing unit, or lot provided over the twenty-five percent (25%) requirement, or other such means for reducing development costs as provided for in this chapter. Use of the density bonus or other such means for reducing development costs within a new residential development shall be subject to health and safety regulations, the general plan and zoning, as well as provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. The type of bonus unit(s) shall be subject to the approval of the appropriate authority considering the residential project generating the need for the affordable housing unit contribution. 
D.  Commercial and Industrial Development Projects. 
1.  New commercial and industrial development projects in the city may, at the election of the developer, contribute to the provision of housing for very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. 
2.  The contribution of the developer may be accomplished by the developer alone or in combination with any other number of persons, or with the housing authority or other nonprofit housing corporations. 
E.  Development Project Approval. 
1.  A new residential development application will not be deemed complete for consideration until the developer has submitted plans and proposals which demonstrate the manner in which the requirements of this chapter will be met, including any plans for use of a density bonus, construction of on-site units, or commitment of on-site lots. 
2.  The plans and proposals of the developer outlined in section 14.1.040.E.1 above, shall be reviewed by the affordable housing subcommittee which shall then make a recommendation on the method by which the proposed new residential development complies with this chapter. Such recommendation shall include the number of units, size of units (number of bedrooms), rate of affordability (to very-low-, lot- and moderate-income households) and any other relevant factors appropriate for consideration by the city council and agency. Such recommendation of the affordable housing subcommittee shall be brought forward to the city council and agency board with the development approvals or prior to issuance of a grading or building permit for the new residential development, whichever occurs first. 
3.  Recordation of final or parcel maps, or issuance of building permits for a new residential development shall not be accomplished until the terms of this chapter are satisfied by a simultaneous recordation of an affordable housing agreement with the Agency establishing how the affordable housing unit requirements have been met, recordation of appropriate instruments, payment of fees or designation for transfer of those units for the affordable housing unit contribution. 
F.  Continuing Availability. The continuing availability of affordable housing units shall be provided for in the following manner: 
1.  Affordable Housing Units (Rental). Affordable housing units built for purposes of rental shall be subject to covenants and restrictions as provided by the requirements of the agency, from time to time, in order to assure affordability as required by the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 33000 et seq.); and 
2.  Affordable Housing Units (For Sale/Owner Occupied). Affordable housing units constructed for purposes of sale and occupancy by the owner/purchaser shall be subject to covenants and restrictions as provided by the requirements of the agency, from time to time, in order to assure affordability as required by the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 33000 et seq.). 
G.  Calculation of In-Lieu Fees for Smaller Subdivisions. Projects of six units/lots or less shall be permitted to satisfy the requirements of this chapter by payment of in-lieu fees in accordance with the following formula: 
1.  Proposed number of dwelling units: _______. 
2.  Calculate number of required affordable units by multiplying (1) by 0.15:_______. 
3.  Calculate estimated household size based on the number of bedrooms in the affordable housing unit, plus one (i.e. a two bedroom unit has a household size of three persons). 
4.  Determine median income adjusted for household size: _______. 
5.  Calculate moderate-income limit by multiplying (4) by 1.2: _______. 
6.  Calculate very-low-income limit by multiplying (4) by 0.5: _______. 
7.  If for sale unit, calculate moderate-income subsidy requirement as follows: 
a.  Market rate sales price of unit(s): _______. 
b.  Calculate monthly income by dividing (5) by 12: _______. 
c.  Calculate monthly housing allowance by multiplying (7)(b) by 0.3: _______. 
d.  Calculate monthly taxes and insurance by multiplying (7)( c) by .8: _______. 
e.  Monthly homeowner's association dues: _______. 
f.  Calculate monthly principal and interest: (7)(d)—(e): _______. 
g.  Average interest rate for thirty-year fixed interest rate mortgage loan as determined by housing authority: _______. 
h.  Principal amount of fully amortized fixed interest rate thirty-year loan with monthly payments of (7)(f) and interest rate of (7)(g): _______. 
i.  Calculate affordable sales price by dividing (7)(h) by 0.9: _______. 
j.  Calculate moderate-income subsidy required by subtracting (7)(I) from (7)(a): _______. 
8.  If for sale unit, calculate very-low-income subsidy requirement as follows: 
a.  Sales price of market rate unit: _______. 
b.  Calculate monthly income by dividing (6) by 12: _______. 
c.  Calculate monthly housing allowance by multiplying (8)(b) by 0.3: _______. 
d.  Calculate monthly taxes and insurance by multiplying (8)(c) by .8: _______. 
e.  Monthly homeowners association dues: _______. 
f.  Calculate monthly principal and interest: (8)(d)—(e): _______. 
g.  Average interest rate for thirty-year fixed interest rate mortgage loan as determined by housing authority: _______. 
h.  Principal amount of fully amortized fixed interest rate thirty-year loan with monthly payments of (8)(f) and interest rate of (8)(g): _______. 
i.  Calculate affordable sales price by dividing (8)(h) by 0.9: _______. 
j.  Calculate very-low-income subsidy required by subtracting (8)(I) from (8)(a): _______. 
9.  If rental unit, calculate moderate-income subsidy requirement as follows: 
a.  Monthly rent of market rate unit: _______. 
b.  Calculate monthly income by dividing (5) by 12: _______. 
c.  Calculate monthly housing allowance by multiplying (9)(b) by 0.3: _______. 
d.  Utility allowance as determined by housing authority: _______. 
e.  Calculate affordable rent by subtracting (9)(d) from (9)( c): _______. 
f.  Calculate monthly subsidy requirement: (9)(a)—(9)(e): _______. 
g.  Calculate principal amount needed to generate (9)(f) at four and one-half percent (4.5%) simple interest: (9)(f) 12/0.045: _______. 
10.  If rental unit, calculate very-low-income subsidy requirement as follows: 
a.  Monthly rent of market rate unit: _______. 
b.  Calculate monthly income by dividing (6) by 12: _______. 
c.  Calculate monthly housing allowance by multiplying (10)(b) by 0.3: _______. 
d.  Utility allowance as determined by housing authority: _______. 
e.  Calculate affordable rent by subtracting (10)(d) from (10)( c): _______. 
f.  Calculate monthly subsidy requirement: (10)(a)—(10)(e): _______. 
g.  Calculate principal amount needed to generate (10)(f) at four and one-half percent (4.5%) simple interest: (10)(f) 12/0.045: _______. 
11.  Calculate per unit subsidy requirement: 
a.  If ownership unit, 0.6 (7)(k) + 0.4 (8)(k): _______. 
b.  If rental unit, 0.6 (9)(g) + 0.4 (10)(g): _______. 
12.  Multiply per unit subsidy requirement (11) by number of required affordable units (2): _______. 
H.  Collection and Use of In-Lieu Fees. 
1.  Any moneys contributed to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be payable to the agency for the purpose of providing very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing. Payment of the in-lieu fee shall be made in the following manner: 
a.  If the units being constructed are apartments or other rental property, payment shall be made in full prior to issuance of the building permits. 
b.  If the units being constructed are for resale to individual homeowners, at the option of the owner or developer, the fee shall either: 
i.  Be paid in full for the amount due for each unit at or before the time of issuance of the building permit for that unit; or 
ii.  Be deferred until each unit is sold, provided that, if this option (b)(ii) is chosen, owner or developer shall provide city with a duly executed promissory note secured by a deed of trust on the property in the full amount due for all units in the project at the time of issuance of the first building permit and said note shall become due and payable at the time of sale of each unit on a proration basis of the total. After the final unit is completed and the full amount of the fee is paid, city shall grant a full reconveyance to owner or developer on the deed of trust. 
Any commitment of land or moneys generated as a result of this chapter shall be used by the city to support agency affordable housing goals. 
2.  The agency may advertise by notice in newspapers of local circulation and other such written notice as deemed necessary of the availability of funds for the provision of affordable housing in the city. Included in such notice shall be an invitation to submit proposals and requests for funds to provide the required housing in the project area. The requests may be for grants, low interest loans, and other such requests deemed appropriate to secure the purpose of this chapter. The proposals may be for unit rehabilitation, land acquisition, unit purchase, development of infrastructure, or other such proposal deemed appropriate to secure the purpose of this chapter. 
If funding is approved, the agency and the grantee shall enter into a contract to assure to the greatest extent possible that the approved proposals and requests are satisfactorily completed. No warrant shall be issued until such contract is completed and signed by appropriate parties. 
I.  Administration of Affordable Housing Programs. 
1.  The agency may establish standards for eligibility of very-low-, low- and moderate-income households for affordable housing units and shall attend to all administrative details of qualifying very-low, low and moderate-income households in affordable housing units. 
a.  Basic eligibility criteria shall be determined by the agency in accordance with the community redevelopment law. 
b.  The housing authority shall be reimbursed for administrative costs incurred in cooperation with the agency in implementing the provisions of this section. Such costs shall be paid through the transaction costs of selling or reselling the affordable housing unit. 
2.  The agency shall collect and maintain information regarding land and money availability, and identified needs for the purpose of assisting developers in making choices under the provisions of this chapter, and shall advise developers in all aspects of fulfilling their obligations under the provisions of this chapter. The planning department shall encourage and expedite, when possible, the integration of private development efforts with those of the housing authority and other nonprofit housing development corporations in providing affordable housing. 
J.  Principles and Guidelines. The director of planning, in consultation with the agency, may, from time to time, formulate principles and guidelines for the purpose of implementing and applying the requirements of this chapter. Such principles and guidelines, when adopted, shall be used as a basis for interpreting the provisions of this chapter and the respective commitments of developers, the city, the agency, and the housing authority to the provision of housing affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. 16.115, § 2, 6-4-2003; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
14.01.050 - Name. 
This chapter shall be known as the "redevelopment agency affordable housing production requirements." 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
14.01.060 - Enforcement, legal procedures and penalties. 
All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and shall issue no such permits or licenses for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, and any such permits or licenses, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the planning director or his/her designee to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding one year, or by both fine and imprisonment. Such persons, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
C.  Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and/or any of the land, building or premises, established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal of enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction, to grant such relief as will abate and remove such buildings or structures, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or using any such building or structure or using any property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 142.2 § 1(part), 1995; Ord. No. 142.4, § 1, 4-6-05)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Title of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known as the building code of the city of Scotts Valley, and may be cited by such title. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.020 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings, structures, and building service equipment within the city. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.030 - Prohibition and scope of chapter. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any portable, temporary or permanent building, building service equipment, swimming pool, or other structure in the city, or to engage in any excavating or grading, or to cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the codes adopted in this chapter. 
B.  The city, or any department, board or office thereof acting on behalf of the city, the county, the state, the United States of America, and any public school district in the city shall not be required to pay any fees required by this chapter when work is being done on the official properties of such agencies and is to be used for a governmental or educational purpose and where such work is not inspected by the building official. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.040 - Voluntary compliance of exempted persons. 
Any owner of a building exempted from the provisions of this chapter may obtain the service of the building official by applying for a building permit and paying the customary fees. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.050 - Definitions. 
Whenever in any of the codes adopted in this chapter the following names or terms are used, such name or term shall have the meaning ascribed to it by this section as follows: 
A.  "Board of appeals" means the board of appeals provided for in Section 204 of the Uniform Administrative Code. 
B.  "Building official," "plumbing official," "administrative authority," and "chief electrical inspector" mean the chief building inspector of the city of Scotts Valley. 
C.  "Building service equipment" refers to the plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and elevator equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting and transportation facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use and occupancy. 
D.  "Fire chief" means the chief of the fire protection district wherein any proposed building site is located; or in any area not under the jurisdiction of any fire protection district, the same shall mean the chief ranger of the State Division of Forestry, Santa Cruz County, California. 
E.  "Health officer" means the health officer of the county of Santa Cruz or his authorized representative. 
F.  "Structure" means that which is built or structured, as edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.060 - Adoption of Codes. 
For the purpose of establishing proper regulations for building construction and for installation of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, the following codes or portions thereof hereinafter set forth are adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof as though fully set forth, without further publication or posting thereof: 
A.  California Code of Regulations (hereinafter referred to as "CCR") T 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, the 2016 California Building Code, including Appendix C, H, I and J except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CBC"). 
B.  CCR Title 24, Part 2.5, The 2016 California Residential Code, including Appendix H, J and V, except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CRC"). 
C.  CCR Title 24, Part 3, The 2016 California Electrical Code, except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CEC"). 
D.  CCR Title 24, Part 4, The 2016 California Mechanical Code, including Appendices B, C and D, except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CMC"). 
E.  CCR Title 24, Part 5, The 2015 California Plumbing Code, including Appendices A, B, D, I and K except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CPC"). 
F.  CCR Title 24, Part 10, The 2016 California Existing Building Code, Appendix Chapter A1, except as modified herein. 
G.  CCR Title 24, Part 11, The 2016 California Green Standards Code, except as modified herein (Refer to Scotts Valley Municipal Code Chapter 17.51, Green Building Regulations). 
H.  CCR Title 24, Part 1, The 2016 California Administrative Code except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CAC"). 
I.  CCR Title 24, Part 12, The 2016 California Referenced Standards Code except as modified herein (hereinafter referred to as "CRSC"). 
J.  CCR Title 24, Part 6, The 2016 California Energy Code except as modified herein. 
K.  The International Property Maintenance Code (hereinafter referred to as "IPMC"), 2015 edition , as published by the International Code Council. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981; Ord. 102.9, § 2, 3-5-2003; Ord. 102.10, § 2, 11-21-2007; Ord. 102.11, § 1, 12-15-2010; Ord. No. 102.12, § 1, 12-18-2013; Ord. No. 102.14, § 1, 11-16-2016)  
15.04.070 - Amendments to the 2016 California Code of Regulations Title 24. 
The following sections of the codes as adopted in Section 15.04.060 are hereby modified as follows: 
A.  CBC Section 105.2. Buildings 2—Work exempt from permit is modified as follows: Fences not over eight feet as specified in Title 17, Section 17.46.110 
B.  Add sentence to CBC Section 1.8.8.1, CRC Section 1.8.7.1 and CBC Section 113: Refer to Scotts Valley Municipal Code (hereinafter referred to as "SVMC") Chapter 15.04.120, Board of Appeals. 
C.  Add sentence to CBC Section 1804: Refer to SVMC Chapter 15.06, Excavation, Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations. 
D.  CBC Section 110.1, insert second paragraph to read as follows: A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans. 
E.  CRC Table R301.2(1) shall be populated with the following criteria as established by the City of Scotts Valley, using criteria published in the CRC where applicable: Ground Snow load = 0, Wind Design/Speed (mph) = 110, Wind Design/Topographic Effects = No, Seismic Design Category = D2, Subject To Damage From/Weathering = Negligible, Subject To Damage From/Frost line depth = 12 inches below undisturbed soil, Subject To Damage From/Termite = Very Heavy, Winter Design Temp = 40 degrees Fahrenheit, Ice Barrier Underlayment Required = No, Flood Hazards = FIRM 3/2/2006 (Panels 219D, 238D, 329D, 331D, 332D, 333D, 334D, 351D), Air Freezing Index = 0, Mean Annual Temp = 55 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. 102.11, § 3, 12-15-2010; Ord. No. 102.12, § 2, 12-18-2013; Ord. No. 102.14, § 2, 11-16-2016) 
Editorial Note: Ord. No. 102.11, § 2, adopted Dec. 15, 2010, repealed the former § 15.04.070, and § 3 enacted a new § 15.04.070 as set out herein. The former § 15.04.070 pertained to local amendments to uniform codes and derived from Ord. 102 § 1 (part), adopted 1981, as amended.  
15.04.080 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. 102.9, § 3, adopted March 5, 2003, repealed § 15.04.080 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Building Code as enacted by Ord. 16-112 § 2, 2000; as amended.  
15.04.085 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. 102.9, § 3, adopted March 5, 2003, repealed § 15.04.085 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Housing Code as enacted by Ord. 102.7 § 4, 1999; as amended.  
15.04.090 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. 102.9, § 3, adopted March 5, 2003, repealed § 15.04.090 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Mechanical Code as enacted by Ord. 102.7 § 5, 1999; as amended.  
15.04.100 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. 102.9, § 3, adopted March 5, 2003, repealed § 15.04.100 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Plumbing Code as enacted by Ord. 102.7 § 6, 1999; as amended.  
15.04.110 - Reserved. 
Editorial Note: Ord. 102.9, § 3, adopted March 5, 2003, repealed § 15.04.110 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the adoption of the National Electrical Code as enacted by Ord. 102.7 § 7, 1999; as amended.  
15.04.120 - Board of appeals. 
A.  [Creation.] A board of appeals is created consisting of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the city. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. 
B.  Powers. The board shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. The board shall have no authority to interpret the administrative provisions of, nor have authority to waive provisions of, the California Code of Regulations, Title 24. 
C.  Appointment of Members and Term of Office. All members of the board shall be appointed by the city council, shall serve at the council's pleasure and may be removed at any time by the council. The appointments shall be made for staggered four-year terms. When first appointing members to the board the council shall appoint one member for a two-year term and two members for four-year terms. Thereafter, all terms shall be for four years. 
D.  Appeal Procedure. Any person seeking to appeal a decision of the building official regarding the application and interpretation of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, may file a written appeal with the community development department not later than five working days following the decision or action of the building official that is being appealed. Appeals not filed within the five-day period shall be automatically rejected. Within thirty days of the notice of appeal a meeting of the board shall be convened and a hearing held to review the matter. The decisions of the board shall be final and shall provide notice to all parties that the time to seek judicial appeal shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, or as that section may be amended from time-to-time, which section is adopted. 
(Ord. 102.11, § 5, 12-15-2010) 
Editorial Note: Ord. No. 102.11, § 4, adopted Dec. 15, 2010, repealed the former § 15.04.120, and § 5 enacted a new § 15.04.120 as set out herein. The former § 15.04.120 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 102 § 1 (part), adopted 1981; Ord. 168, § 1, adopted 1998.  
15.04.130 - Enforcement. 
The building official of the city, and his duly authorized representatives, are authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and all the provisions of the codes adopted by reference. In the enforcement thereof, the building official and his duly authorized representatives shall have the powers of a police officer. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.140 - Penalties for violation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefore as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
15.04.150 - Fees. 
Fees for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be established by resolution of the council of the city. 
(Ord. 102 § 1(part), 1981)  
Chapter 15.06 - EXCAVATION, GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.06.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Excavation, Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations for the city of Scotts Valley and may be cited by such title. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2(part), 1997)  
15.06.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, health, property, water quality, safety and the public welfare and to the aesthetic quality of the hillside and valleys by regulating and controlling grading, clearing and erosion on private property. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2(part), 1997; Ord. 102.8 § 2, 2002)  
15.06.030 - Scope. 
This chapter sets forth rules, regulations and minimum standards to control excavation, grading, erosion and sediment; requires control of all existing and potential conditions of accelerated erosion; establishes administrative procedures for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspections during construction and maintenance. All activities subject to subdivision map requirements, building permits or other ministerial or discretionary applications shall meet these standards, unless the activity is considered exempt as provided in Section 15.06.050. 
( Ord. 102.6 § 2(part), 1997; Ord. 102.8 § 3, 2002)  
15.06.040 - Hazards. 
A.  General. 
1.  No person shall cause or allow the persistence of a condition on any site that could cause accelerated erosion. Accelerated erosion shall be controlled and/or prevented by the responsible person or the property owner by using practices outlined hereinafter as applicable. Additional measures may be necessary, and may be specifically required when work is on geological unstable areas, thirty percent or steeper slopes, and/or on soils with a severe erosion hazard rating by a USDA Soil Survey. 
2.  Soil sterilants that last longer than four weeks shall not be used on soils or slopes which may subsequently need vegetation for erosion and sediment control. 
3.  Erosion problems shall be controlled no later than the beginning of the rainy season. 
B.  Hazardous Conditions. 
1.  Whenever any existing excavation or embankment or cut or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way, drainage channel or causes significant impact on the natural resources of the area, the owner of the property upon which the excavation, cut or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official shall, within the period specified therein, repair or eliminate such hazard and conform with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  No permits of any kind shall be issued if the building official determines that proposed construction work is hazardous to the extent described above, or the work is subject to a major flood hazard dangerous to life or property, and which hazard cannot be eliminated, prevented or corrected. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2(part), 1997)  
15.06.050 - Permit exemptions. 
No person shall do any land disturbance work without first obtaining a permit from the building official except as follows: 
A.  Emergency Work. Work necessary to preserve life or property, provided, however, that when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the building official within fifteen days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a permit pursuant to Section 15.06.070 and correct any erosion or conditions with a potential to cause erosion as a result of the emergency work; 
B.  Excavations. An excavation which does not exceed fifty cubic yards and is less than two feet in depth and does not create a cut slope greater than five feet and steeper than three to one; 
C.  Fill. A fill, containing only permitted materials, less than one foot in depth, placed on natural terrain slope flatter than five to one, that does not exceed fifty cubic yards on any one site, including stockpiles, that does not alter or obstruct a drainage course, and will not be used for structural support or roadways and where the area graded does not exceed eleven thousand square feet (one-fourth acre). This exemption shall not apply to a fill within a riparian zone; 
D.  Basements and Footings. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structures; 
E.  Cemeteries. Cemetery graves; 
F.  Wells and Utilities. Excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities controlled pursuant to other regulations; 
G.  Exploratory Investigations. Excavations under the direction of a soils engineer or engineering geologist where such excavation is to be returned to the original condition within forty-five days after the start of work; 
H.  Clearing. Clearing an area of eleven thousand square feet (one-fourth acre) or less on five percent slopes or less. (Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.060 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the definitions listed shall have the meanings specified in this section: 
"Accelerated erosion" means rapid erosion caused by human-induced alteration of the vegetation, land surface topography or runoff patterns. Evidence of accelerated erosion is indicated by exposed soils, active gullies, rills, sediment deposits, or slope failures caused by human activities. 
"Access and building envelope" means a delineated area within which all land disturbances for construction of access and/or building will be confined. 
"Bedrock" means in-place, solid rock. 
"Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
"Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site or other on-site location for use in grading on a site. 
"Clearing" means the removal of vegetation and debris down to bare soil by any method. 
"Drainage course" means a well defined, natural or man-made channel which conveys stormwater runoff either year-round or intermittently. 
"Engineering grading" means grading consisting of five hundred cubic yards or more; a subdivision of more than four lots; a planned unit development; major planned developments; a major use permit; a project that is likely to cause major land disturbance. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface by the actions of water, wind, ice, gravity, or a combination thereof. 
"Erosion, sediment and runoff control practices" means methods, measures, devices, structures, vegetative planting and/or a combination thereof designed to control erosion and sediment; to safely contain and/or dispose of stormwater runoff; and to stabilize soils and slopes. 
"Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth materials. 
"Fill" means the deposit of earth materials by artificial means. 
"Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface or the degree of rise or descent of a slope. 
1.  Existing grade - The grade prior to any land disturbance or grading. 
2.  Rough grade - An approximate elevation of the ground surface conforming to the approved plan. 
3.  As graded or finished grade - The final grade or surface conditions of the site which conforms to the approved plan on completion of grading. 
"Grading" means any excavation, filling, leveling, or combination thereof (excludes stripping and/or clearing). 
"Hillside Residential Combining District regulations" means those regulations applicable to grading on residentially zoned parcel with an average slope over ten percent (10%), as provided in Chapter 17, Section 40 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
"Key" means a designed, compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope to develop shearing resistance (see Figure 1).   
Figure 1 
"Land disturbance" means clearing, stripping, excavating, grading, filling or other manipulation of the natural terrain by manual and/or mechanical means. 
"Permit area boundary" means the area within which all work shown on the approved regular or engineering plans and complying with Figure 5 in Section 15.06.110 is to take place. 
"Rainy season" means the period commencing October 15th of one year and terminating April 15th of the next year. 
"Sediment" means eroded earth material that is carried and/or deposited by water, wind, gravity or ice and is a major source of water pollution. 
"Slope" means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. Three to one (3:1) means that every three feet moved horizontally the ground surface will rise or drop one foot. Slope may also be expressed in percent and/or de-trees from horizontal (see Figure 2).   
Figure 2 
"Stream" means any watercourse as designated by a solid line or dash and three dots symbol shown on the largest scale of United States Geological Survey map most recently published. 
"Topsoil" means loose, friable, organic and fertile earth materials on top of a soil profile—usually the "A" horizons. (Ord. 102.8 § 4, 2002: Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.070 - Permit application, plans, specifications and reports required. 
A.  General. 
1.  Except as exempted in Section 15.06.050 of this chapter, no person shall do, cause, permit, aid, abet, suffer, or furnish equipment or labor for any clearing, excavation, filling, grading, erosion or sediment control work until a permit has been obtained from the building official by the owner(s) of the property (or agent). 
2.  All permits shall be obtained from the building official who shall have authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a permit in the exercise of reasonable discretion hereunder. 
3.  Applications for grading residential zones of parcels with an average slope over ten percent (10%) are subject to the Hillside Combining District regulations. 
B.  Application. The application for a permit shall include the following items: 
1.  Application form; 
2.  Two sets of the site map and grading plans; 
3.  Plan check fees; 
4.  Performance bond or other acceptable security, if required; and 
5.  Two sets of all supporting reports or documentation when required. 
C.  Application Form. The following information is required on the application form: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and date of application. When available at time of application, names, addresses and telephone numbers of any and all contractors, subcontractors or persons actually doing the land-disturbing and land-filling activities and their respective tasks; 
2.  Name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of the site map, grading, erosion and sediment control plans, and any soil engineering and engineering geology reports submitted; and 
3.  Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or of an authorized representative. 
D.  Permit Issuance. The provisions of the administrative section of the Uniform Building Code are applicable to grading permits. The building official may require that operations and project timing be modified if delays occur and adverse or rainy weather causes problems not considered at the time the permit was issued. 
1.  A separate permit shall be required for each site and cover excavations, fills, clearing, grading and erosion control work. 
2.  Approval of a permit shall require the abatement of any existing human-induced or accelerated erosion problems on the property. The building official may seek abatement recommendation from the Santa Cruz Resource Conservation District, other agencies, organizations and/or associations when expertise is available from these sources. 
3.  A permit shall authorize only that work which is described or illustrated on the approved plans and specifications. 
4.  Applications involving grading on slopes over thirty percent and where 2:1 slopes are proposed, design review by the planning commission is required prior to grading permit approval. Design of the grading plan shall be in conformance with the Hillside Combining District regulations if the site is zoned for residential use. 
E.  Site Map, Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Plan. Two sets of these plans shall be required and shall contain the following information when applicable: 
1.  Existing and proposed topography of the site at contour intervals sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site. Applications for residential grading permits shall include information on the average slope of the lot (see formula for determining average slope in Hillside Combining District regulations), topographic contours and shading of different rates of slopes on the parcels. The topographic contour intervals and shading shall be at the specifications required by the community development director; 
2.  Two contour intervals that extend a minimum of one hundred feet off-site, or sufficient to show on- and off-site drainage; 
3.  The site's property lines shown in location with respect to the plan's topographic information; 
4.  Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed natural and man-made drainage facilities; 
5.  When necessary, detail plans and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other runoff and erosion and sediment practices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work, together with the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drain; 
6.  Location and graphic representation of proposed excavations and fills, of on-site storage of soil and other earth material, and of on-site disposal; 
7.  Location of existing vegetation types and the location and type of vegetation to be left undisturbed; 
8.  Estimated quantity of soil or earth material in tons and cubic yards to be excavated, filled, stored or otherwise utilized on-site; 
9.  Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and in storing and disposing of the cleared vegetative matter; 
10.  Proposed sequence and schedule of excavation, filling and other land-disturbing and filling activities, and soil or earth material storage and disposal; 
11.  Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within one hundred feet of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations; 
12.  North arrow, written and graphic scales; 
13.  Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. 
F.  Grading Requirements. 
1.  Engineering Grading. Grading shall be designated engineering grading and a civil engineer (or other licensed professional) authorized by state law shall prepare and sign reports, plans and specifications required in Section 15.06.070 E and G when: 
a.  The grading is five hundred cubic yards or more. However, the permittee may have grading involving less than five hundred cubic yards, performed as engineering grading if the building official approves; or 
b.  It will result in a subdivision of more than four lots; or 
c.  It will be a planned development; or 
d.  It will be a project likely to cause major land disturbances; or 
e.  The building official has cause to believe that geologic hazards may be involved. 
2.  Regular Grading. Grading which is not designated engineering grading shall be designated regular grading. 
G.  Engineering grading applications for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets of supporting data such as a soil engineering report, engineering geology report, erosion and sediment control report, and/or any other reports necessary. All required reports and engineering shall be wet signed by the responsible engineer. During engineering grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, soil engineering, engineering geology and erosion and sediment control recommendations shall be submitted to both the civil engineer responsible for the project and the building official. The building official may require other plans, reports and documentation in addition to those indicated below as site conditions may indicate. 
1.  The civil engineering report shall include at least the following: 
a.  Hydrological calculations of runoff for ten-year and one hundred-year storm frequencies and comparison of runoff without and with the project; 
b.  Inspection and approval as to establishment of lines and grades, design criteria for corrective measures, including the existing and/or required safe storm drainage capacity outlet of channels both on- and off-site; 
c.  Opinions and recommendations addressing the adequacy of the site for its intended use; and 
d.  An as-graded plan and report upon completion of work showing all final surface elevations, drainage, and certifying that the work was done according to the approved plan. 
2.  The soil engineering report shall contain at least all the following information: 
a.  Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and potential for erosion and liquefaction of existing soils; 
b.  Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and potential for erosion and liquefaction of soil to be placed on the site, if any; 
c.  Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; 
d.  Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil stabilization devices and measures during grading and construction phases and for permanent soil stabilization after construction is completed; 
e.  Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary; 
f.  Opinions and recommendations addressing the adequacy of the site to be developed for its intended use; 
g.  Final written report including field density test locations, summaries of field and laboratory tests and certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use; 
3.  The engineering geology report shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  An adequate description of the geology of the site; 
b.  Identification and description of existing and potential geologic hazards at or affecting the site; 
c.  Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development; 
d.  Opinions and recommendations regarding the adequacy of site for its intended use; 
e.  Need for sub-drains or other underground drainage devices; 
f.  Final written report of the geology of the site, new information disclosed during work and certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. 
4.  The erosion and sediment control report shall contain at least all the following information: 
a.  A delineation and brief description of the practices to retain sediment on the site, including, sediment basins and traps, and a schedule for their maintenance; 
b.  A delineation and brief description of the surface runoff and erosion control practices to be implemented, including types and methods of applying mulches, and a schedule for their maintenance; 
c.  A delineation and brief description of the vegetative practices to be used, including types of seeds and fertilizer and their application rates, the type, location and extent of pre-existing and undisturbed vegetation types, and a schedule for maintenance; 
d.  The location of all the practices described or delineated above may be depicted on the site or grading plan; 
e.  A final written report of the erosion, sediment, and runoff control practices applied on the site, including any new information disclosed during the work and certification as to the adequacy of the erosion and sediment controls including maintenance provisions. 
5.  For engineering grading, it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology, and erosion and sediment control reports into the grading plan after approval by the building official. 
6.  Notification of Non-Compliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this chapter, the civil engineer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist, the erosion control specialist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the building official. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. 
7.  Transfer of Responsibility for Approval or Supervision. If the responsible agent, the civil engineer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist, the erosion control specialist, or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for approval upon the completion of the work or for supervision during the course of the work. The building official shall be notified in writing of such changes. Agreement to accept responsibility shall be in writing and signed by the person accepting responsibility and filed with the building official prior to resumption of work. 
8.  The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official a statement of compliance to said as-graded plan. 
9.  Final approval shall not be given until: 
a.  All work including installation of all drainage facilities and protective devices, all erosion and sediment control, and vegetative measures have been completed in accordance with the approved plans and the required reports have been submitted; 
b.  Executed contract(s) or deed restrictions requiring maintenance of final plan runoff and erosion control practices for as long as necessary and as approved in the plans have been submitted. (Ord. 102.8 § 5, 2002; Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.080 - Security, bonds, deposits. 
A.  For engineering grading, or at the option of the permittee and to assure satisfactory completion of the work, securities in the form of either bonds by duly authorized corporate sureties, or an instrument of credit from a financial institution, subject to state or federal regulations, pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the terms of this chapter are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, shall be required. The forms to be used will be those furnished by the responsible official upon request. 
B.  The securities to be furnished and the amount thereof are as follows: 
1.  For "faithful performance," an amount equal to one hundred percent of the cost of the work as determined by the project engineer and approved by the building official, to guarantee faithful completion of the work; and 
2.  For "materials and labor," an amount equal to fifty percent of the cost of improvements as determined by the project engineer and approved by the building official, to guarantee payment to material men and laborers furnishing materials, equipment or labor in connection with the project improvements; 
3.  As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount thereof, a covenant providing that the obligor(s) shall pay any reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the city in the event it undertakes litigation to the obligation secured and is the prevailing party. (Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.090 - Design standards for cuts and excavations. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering and/or engineering geology reports approved by the building official, cuts and excavations shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
B.  Slope. The slope of cut surface shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, and shall not exceed twenty feet in vertical height without a terrace break. Due to individual site soils and geology, flatter and shorter slope lengths may be required. Slopes as steep as two to one may be allowed upon approval of the planning commission if they find that the stability, safety and appearance of the completed project will be superior to the result that would be obtained by adhering to the three to one standard. Cut slopes shall be rounded off so as to blend in with natural terrain (see Figure 3). Cuts and/or fills in excess of forty-foot overall vertical height shall require approval by the city council. 
  
Figure 3 
C.  Stockpiles. Stockpile material for trenches and pits will be put up-slope of the excavation to be promptly backfilled and compacted into trenches and pits. Excavated material not needed at the site will be removed or disposed of as approved by the building official. 
D.  Vegetative Protection. All earth cuts shall be planted with temporary and permanent vegetation or otherwise protected from storm runoff erosion within thirty days of the completion of final erosion control and grading work. Planting shall be watered or irrigated to establish a root system before the rainy season. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997) 
_____ 
15.06.100 - Design standards for fill. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering geology reports approved by the building official, fill shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
B.  Fill Location. Fill shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two to one unless the civil engineer devises a method of placement which will ensure the fill will remain in place. The toe of the fill shall be no closer than twelve feet horizontally to the top of an existing or planned cut slope. The area beyond the toe of the fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a protected drain shall be provided (see Figure 4). 
Figure 4
  
C.  Residential Grading: For projects involving grading for residential projects where the average slope is over 10%, grading design, including placement of fill is subject to the Hillside Combining District Regulations. 
(Ord. 102.8 § 6, 2002; Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.110 - Design standards for cut and fill setbacks. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil engineering and/or engineering geology report and shown on the approved grading plan, setbacks shall conform to this section and be no less than as shown in Figure 5. 
B.  Minimum Property Setback. The tops and toes of cut and filled slopes shall be set back from property boundaries and structures as far as necessary for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage resulting from water runoff by flooding, erosion, or sediment disposition. 
Figure 5
  
C.  Stream and Riparian Setback. Tops and toes and/or filled slopes shall be set back far enough to prevent encroachment upon streams, floodplains or channels, or body of standing water to provide and maintain an undisturbed protective strip between the grading and the riparian corridor. This strip shall have sufficient filter capacity to prevent degradation of water quality, as determined by the erosion and sediment control specialist and approved by the building official. If it is determined that the filter capacity of the protective strip is insufficient, or development activity will encroach upon riparian zones, additional setback distance and/or erosion control practices may be required. 
D.  Retaining Walls. Retaining walls when keyed into stable foundations and capable of sustaining the design loads, may be used to reduce the required cut and fill setbacks when recommended by the civil or soils engineer, or engineering geologist and approved by the building official. 
E.  Other Restrictions and/or Minimums. Other requirements may also be increased or relaxed upon review by the building official if he finds the deviations consistent with safety and stability and to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.120 - Design standards for drainage and terraces. 
A.  General. Drainage facilities and terraces shall conform to the provisions of this section unless otherwise indicated on the approved permit and plans. Drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with "Part 3: Storm Drainage" of the City's Standard Details. 
B.  Runoff Calculations. A drainage report prepared in conformance with "Part 3: Storm Drainage" shall be provided along with the approved plans to show the project's stormwater management before and after development. To reduce runoff and sediment, a combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff may be required. 
C.  Drainage Facilities. 
1.  Disturbance of natural drainageways shall be kept to a minimum and existing drainage courses shall not be obstructed or obliterated without mitigating measures installed that have been approved by the building official. Grading equipment shall not disturb or cross flowing streams unless absolutely necessary and only with prior approval from the building official. 
2.  Whenever a grading operation obstructs or impairs the flow of runoff in an existing drainage course, a culvert, bridge or other suitable drainage facility designed and acceptable to the building official shall be installed to convey the flow past the point of impairment. No construction materials or construction byproducts shall be discarded in any drainageway or riparian zone. 
3.  Drainage facilities shall be culverts, pipe drains, paved, rock or vegetative channels designed to safely carry existing and potential off-site runoff from a fully developed area upstream as well as local on-site surface and subsurface waters to the nearest adequate drainage course designated for such purposes by the building official and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to discharge such waters. Properly designed energy dissipater may be required at the point of discharge. 
4.  Culvert size and materials shall be used in accordance with standard design criteria and as approved by the building official. Minimum diameter shall be twelve inches. 
5.  Cuts, fills and retaining walls shall have subsurface drainage facilities as necessary for stability. 
6.  Berms, ditches, interceptor drains or swales shall be constructed at the top of cut and filled slopes for protection against water runoff. Interceptor drains above cut slopes with a minimum drainage area of fourteen thousand five hundred square feet (one-third acre) or more shall be paved with reinforced concrete or an approved equal nonerodible material a minimum of three inches thick, twelve inches deep, and thirty inches wide and shall discharge into downdrains. Energy dissipaters may be required by the building official. 
7.  At least a five percent or greater grade will be required toward approved storm drainage facilities, either existing or planned, from all building pads, yards, roof drains, driveways, and etc. 
D.  Terraces. 
1.  Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than twenty-foot vertical intervals or seventy-five-foot slope intervals. Cuts or fills in excess of forty foot vertical height shall require approval by the city council. For cut or fill slopes greater than forty feet and up to one hundred twenty feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be twelve feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and subject to approval by the building official. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper grading and maintenance of these terraces. Where only one terrace is required it shall be at mid-height (see Figure 5 in Section 15.06.110). 
2.  Swales or interceptor pipes or drains, ditches, on terraces and on the top of cut slopes, shall be designed to carry water and sediment to safe disposal structures and areas and shall have a minimum gradient of five percent and must be paved with reinforced concrete or an approved equal non-erodible material no less than three inches thick, one foot deep and five feet wide (see Figure 5 in Section 15.06.110). A maintenance plan may be required by the building official. 
3.  A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding fourteen thousand five hundred square feet (one-third acre - projected) without discharging into a downdrain. 
(Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997; Ord. No. 102.13, § 1, 3-4-2015)  
15.06.130 - Design standards for erosion and sediment control. 
A.  General. 
1.  Access and building envelopes shall be delineated on the development plans so as to keep disturbance out of particularly erodible areas. 
2.  All streams, floodplains, channels, bodies of standing water, or other riparian areas shall be identified and delineated on the development plans and vegetative removal, land disturbances, or other development activities shall be conducted at a time, and in a manner that will provide and maintain an undisturbed vegetative filter strip. If it is determined that certain development activities in or near the riparian zones would be detrimental, those activities may be prohibited. 
3.  Exposed soil and slopes shall be protected from erosion by temporary and/or permanent measures. 
4.  As soon as possible and feasible following completion of each stage of grading and/or construction, all sites will be permanently stabilized by installing all required erosion and sediment control practices to insure protection before the normal beginning date of the rainy season. 
B.  Slope. Structures on existing slopes exceeding thirty percent shall utilize pole, step or other such foundation that does not require major land disturbances (see Figure 3 in Section 15.06.090). 
C.  Runoff Control. Where concentrated runoff will occur it will be carried in pipe or culvert conduits or over a nonerodible surface (paved, rocked or vegetated) to stable discharge points clearly shown on the development plans. All conduits must have proper energy dissipater at a point of discharge when necessary to prevent erosion. 
D.  Building Site Runoff. Runoff from buildings, roads, driveways, and the total site area shall be controlled by berms, swales, ditches, structures, vegetative filter strips and/or catch basins to prevent the escape of sediment from the site. 
E.  Vegetative Removal. Development plans shall indicate the areas where vegetation is to be removed and replaced within the building and access envelopes. Vegetation removal shall be limited to that amount necessary and as indicated on the approved development plan. The method and time shall be such that the erosive effects are minimized. 
F.  Vegetative Disposal. Vegetation removed during clearing operations shall be disposed of by chipping, used as mulch, compost, burned and/or hauled away and disposed off-site in a manner approved by the building official. Burning shall comply with local air quality standards and no long branches or charred pieces shall be permitted to remain. 
G.  Topsoil. To promote regrowth of vegetation, topsoil graded from cuts and fills and/or secured from other sources shall be stockpiled and/or reapplied upon completion of grading on slopes of less than 4:1 twenty-five percent. Soil stockpiles shall be protected from erosion at all times. 
H.  Vegetative Protection. When needed and planned, all bare slopes and/or disturbed areas will be planted to both temporary and permanent vegetation as each stage of grading is completed. Sufficient temporary, rapid growing vegetation to stabilize the soil will be used until permanent vegetative cover grows or matures enough to provide permanent stability. 
I.  Rainy Season Operations. 
1.  Existing ground cover shall not be cleared, destroyed, burned or disturbed more than fifteen days prior to grading or construction work unless approved in advance by the building official. 
2.  Plans for temporary and/or permanent erosion and sediment control shall be submitted to the building official by September 1st of each year and all approved erosion and sediment control practices shall be installed by October 15th of each year. 
3.  When land development work is allowed during the rainy season, adequate erosion and sediment control measures must be in place during any land disturbance, and temporary erosion control measures must be applied to all soils bared at the end of each working day. Sufficient erosion control materials shall be kept on the site at all times to be installed immediately by the permittee upon advent of any rainfall, winds, or other storm event that may be expected to cause accelerated erosion. 
4.  All cuts and fill slopes, except sand slopes or dunes, without satisfactory vegetative cover between growing seasons shall be mulched with a minimum of four thousand pounds of straw or equivalent per acre of slope surface. Mulch will be anchored to the slope by punching or tacking into the soil or with netting installed over the mulch. Additional mulching and/or other anchoring methods as recommended by the erosion control specialist may be required by the building official. 
5.  Within ten working days after seeding, fertilizing and/or mulching, if necessary due to climate or drought conditions, the permittee will commence irrigation or watering of the seeded areas or slopes and shall continue until the rains come and/or a vegetative ground cover is permanently established. All other erosion and sediment control practices shall be installed prior to seeding and mulching. 
6.  All erosion and sediment control practices shall be closely monitored throughout the rainy season and/or slippage of cut and fill banks shall be repaired by the permittee at his expense. 
J.  Dust. Dust from grading operations must be controlled. The permittee may be required to keep adequate equipment on the grading site to prevent dust problems. 
K.  Erosion Control Coordination with Project Installation. 
1.  All vegetative and/or structural measures required to safely discharge any accelerated runoff generated by the project shall be installed during the first or initial construction phase of the project. 
2.  Land shall be developed in units of workable size which can be completed in a single construction season. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be coordinated with a sequence of grading, development and construction operations and all necessary erosion control measures shall be put in effect prior to the commencement of the next work unit and/or rainy season. 
3.  Prior to the completion and final acceptance of the project, all erosion control measures must be in place and all exposed bare soil shall be mulched, fertilized and planted to a permanent vegetative cover. Native or naturalized vegetation should be used. Upon recommendation by the erosion control specialist, the building official may require watering of planted areas to initiate the assured growth. 
L.  Livestock. Where necessary to assure that water quality is not affected by the keeping of livestock, vegetative buffer and/or filter strips shall be established on all downhill sides of areas where livestock are kept. The width of the buffer strip shall be determined by the erosion control specialist. Also, additional erosion and sediment control practices may be required by the building official to control runoff and pollution from the areas where livestock have destroyed and torn up the protective vegetation. 
M.  Maintenance. All on-site erosion control facilities shall be properly maintained by the owners for the life of the project so that they do not become nuisances with stagnant water, heavy algae growth, insect breeding, odors, discarded debris and/or safety hazards. Vegetative maintenance required may include mowing, fertilization, irrigation and/or re-seeding. (Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
15.06.140 - Inspections and compliance. 
A.  General. Excavation, grading, filling, clearing and erosion control work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. For engineering grading, the building official may require supervision, regular inspection, and special testing be performed and certified by the civil engineer (or other professional) who prepared the approved plan; and the civil engineer shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of work within his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. 
B.  Inspections Required. The following inspections shall be required, but not limited to: 
1.  Pre-site inspection to determine the suitability of the proposed project and the existing and potential erosion and sediment hazards; 
2.  Periodic ongoing project operations progress, including compaction and special testing as may be required by the approved plan; 
3.  Final inspection determining compliance with terms and conditions of this chapter and the permit. Final approval shall not be given until all work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved plan and the required reports have been submitted. 
C.  Notification. The permittee shall notify the building official two working days prior to the beginning of the operation authorized by the permit, two working days before the project is ready for final inspection, and one complete working day prior to any other inspection or testing requested by the permittee. 
D.  Recording Notice of Violation. Whenever the building official determines that work has not been completed or is not progressing in accordance with a permit or the plans and specifications relating thereto, or whenever the building official determines that work has been done without the required permit, the building official may record a notice of violation. The owner(s) of the property, as revealed by the assessment roll, on which the violation is situated and any other person responsible for the violation shall be notified of the recording, if their address is available. 
E.  Stop Orders. A stop work order may be issued by the building official for any or all work within the permit area boundary as shown on the approved plans and described in the permit application including, but not limited to, building construction and site development work whenever any of the following occur: 
1.  Work is being done in violation of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Erosion control measures are not in place by the beginning of the rainy season; 
3.  Land development work has been allowed during the rainy season but adequate erosion and sediment control measures are not in place during any land disturbance; 
4.  Land development work has been allowed during the rainy season but temporary erosion control measures are not applied to all soils bared at the end of each working day; 
5.  Land development work has been allowed during the rainy season but sufficient erosion control materials are not kept on the site to be installed immediately by the permittee upon advent of any rainfall, winds, or other storm event that may be expected to cause accelerated erosion. (Ord. 102.6 § 2 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 15.10 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
15.10.010 - Adoption. 
The code and regulations known and designated as the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings," published by the International Conference of Building Officials and modified by them from time to time, is adopted and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, as the abatement code of the city of Scotts Valley. A current copy of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.020 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof in the city. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.030 - Appeals. 
A.  In order to hear and decide appeals or orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, there is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of members who are qualified by training and experience to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. 
B.  The building official is an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the board, but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. 
C.  The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the building official, who shall make them freely accessible to the public. 
D.  Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
E.  The board shall have no authority relative to interpretation to the administrative provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.040 - Hearing examiner. 
The board may from time to time appoint a hearing examiner to act in its stead. The hearing examiner will have all authority and power of the board. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.050 - Enforcement. 
The building official is given the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. "Building official" for purposes of this chapter shall mean the planning director or his designee. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.060 - Inspections. 
The building official, fire marshal and health officer or their designees are authorized to make inspections pursuant to this chapter, and may, if necessary, obtain inspection warrants to carry out their duties. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.070 - Procedural manual. 
The city council may, by resolution, adopt and publish rules, regulations and procedural manuals for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.10.080 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted under the authority granted in Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 10 of the Government Code commencing with Section 38660. (Ord. 149 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 15.12 - GRAYWATER USE SYSTEM REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Findings. 
The California Building Standards Commission approved graywater standards as part of the California Plumbing Code which have been set out in Title 24, Part 5, of the California Code of Regulations. The city council adopts these regulations as the regulations applicable to graywater systems designed and installed in the city. (Ord. 90.2 § 2 (part), 1994)  
15.12.020 - Adoption of state standards. 
All provisions of Title 24, Part 5, of the California Code of Regulations, as those sections may be amended from time to time, are adopted herein as the standards and regulations applicable to any graywater system designed, constructed, altered or repaired within the city. (Ord. 90.2 § 2 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 15.16 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION [] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 111.2, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2005, amended ch. 15.16 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 111.1, §§ 1.1—1.4, 2.0, 3.1—3.6, 4.1—4.3, 5.1—5.5, 6.1 and 6.2, 1998. 
 
15.16.010 - Statutory authorization. 
A.  The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.  
15.16.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of Scotts Valley are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.  
15.16.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly food-control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard, so as to minimize future flood blight areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.  
15.16.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.  
15.16.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
1.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
2.  Area of special flood hazard. See "special flood hazard area." 
3.  "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"). 
4.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
5.  "Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
6.  "Building" - see "Structure". 
7.  "Development" means any man-made change to any improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
8.  "Encroachment" means the advancement or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
9.  "Flood" or "flooding" or "flood water" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  the overflow of floodwaters; 
(2)  the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or 
(3)  the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
10.  "Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
11.  "Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
12.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
13.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
14.  "Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding") 
15.  "Floodplain Administrator" is the City Manager or his/her designee. 
16.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works and floodplain management regulations. 
17.  "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
18.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93 and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet flood proofing.) 
19.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
20.  "Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
21.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
22.  "Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
23.  "Hardship" as related to Section 15.16.210, Variances, of this ordinance means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive. 
24.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
25.  "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
2.  certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
26.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
27.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days. 
28.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
29.  "Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
30.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
31.  "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a flood-plain management regulation adopted by this community. 
32.  "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
33.  "One-hundred-year flood" means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood," which will be the term used throughout this chapter. 
34.  "Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions. 
35.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
36.  "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
37.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
38.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A. 
39.  "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
40.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground, and a manufactured home. 
41.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 60 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
42.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
43.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
44.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 111.1 § 2.0, 1988) 
45.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal riverine areas. 
46.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.  
15.16.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Scotts Valley.  
15.16.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study (FIS)," dated April 18, 1983, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps, (FIRMS) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These FIS, FIRM, AND FBFMs are on file at the office of the City Clerk, City Hall, One Civic Center Drive, Scotts Valley, California 95066. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator.  
15.16.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Scotts Valley from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
15.16.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.  
15.16.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.  
15.16.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Scotts Valley, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.  
15.16.120 - Development permit established. 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards established in Section 15.16.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
1.  for all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and 
2.  proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and 
3.  if available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
4.  if applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
B.  foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
1.  proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
2.  for a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 5.1.C.3 of this ordinance and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
3.  for foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test method): and 
C.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures as required in Section 15.16.150 C of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; 
D.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.16.140D; and 
F.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.  
15.16.140 - Floodplain administrator—Duties and responsibilities. 
The floodplain administrator is charged with administering, implementing, and enforcing this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit review: 
1.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  Determine that all other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  Review all permits to determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  Review all development permits to determine whether, until a regulatory floodway is designated, the proposed development will adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. 
1.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.070, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 15.16.150. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption; or 
2.  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 15.16.150: 
a.  Simplified method. 
i.  100 year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
ii.  base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
b.  Detailed method. The 100-year or base flood discharge and the base flood elevation shall be obtained using detailed methods identified in FEMA Publication 265, published in July 1995 and titled: "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations." 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
1.  notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.  submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  certification required by Section 15.16.150 C.1 and 15.16.150 C.4 (lowest floor elevations), 
2.  certification required by Section 15.16.150 C.2 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures), 
3.  certification required by Sections 15.16.150 C.3 (wet floodproofing standard), 
4.  certification of elevation required by Section 15.170 B (subdivision standards), 
5.  certification required by Section 15.16.190 A (floodway encroachments). 
E.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 6. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this ordinance as specified in Section 3.3.  
15.16.145 - Appeals. 
The City Council of the City of Scotts Valley shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.  
15.16.150 - Flood hazard reduction—Construction standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydro-dynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effect of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.16.180. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood-resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93 and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements which are constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential construction and new or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor in all zones, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.16.140 B.2 of this chapter. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction and new or substantial improvement to any nonresidential structure shall either be elevated in conformance with subdivision 1. of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Bulletins TB-193 and TB 7-93 and must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
a.  Shall have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.16.180.  
15.16.160 - Flood hazard reduction—Utilities standards. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.  
15.16.170 - Flood hazard reduction—Subdivisions standards. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.  
15.16.180 - Flood hazard reduction—Manufactured homes standards. 
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall: 
A.  Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and 
B.  Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
Upon the completion of the manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.  
15.16.190 - Flood hazard reduction—Floodways standards. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.16.150 through this section.  
15.16.200 - Variance procedure—Appeal board. 
A.  The Planning Commission of the City of Scotts Valley shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter, subject to the notice and procedural requirements for this type of hearing set forth or referenced in Chapter 17.56 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
B.  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Appeals to the planning commission shall be subject to all time, notice, procedural and substantive requirements set forth or referenced in Chapter 17.62 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code for appeals to the city council. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by any decisions of the planning commission (whether with respect to an appeal or a request for a variance) may appeal the decision to the city council. Any such appeal shall be subject to all time, notice, procedural and substantive requirements set forth or referenced in Chapter 17.62 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
D.  In passing upon such application, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subdivisions C.1. through 11. of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
E.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C. of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.  
15.16.210 - Variance procedure—Conditions. 
A.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
B.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
C.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
E.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections A. through D. of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Santa Cruz County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.  
Chapter 15.20 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Legislative findings. 
The city council of the city of Scotts Valley hereby finds and declares that all provisions set forth above are true and are hereby incorporated herein as findings; and said council does hereby further find and declare as follows: 
A.  The state of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has, among other things, determined the nexus that must be established in the enactment of development impact fees. 
B.  The imposition of development impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of public facilities and service improvements necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  This chapter recognizes that all new development within the city will result in additional growth and that such growth will place additional burdens on various city facilities, infrastructure, and services. This chapter further recognizes the types of land development that will generate impacts necessitating the acquisition of land and construction of public facilities and expansion of services and infrastructure in order to meet and accommodate them. 
D.  All land uses within the city should bear a proportionate financial burden in the construction and improvement of public facilities and services necessary to serve them. 
E.  The cost of providing public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects within the city exceeds the revenue generated by fees exacted from said development projects. 
F.  The city hereby adopts the report from MSI dated April 1990 entitled "Development Impact Fee Report for the City of Scotts Valley" which establishes the costs for providing public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects within the city. 
G.  The development impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs which are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incrementally, by new development within the city. 
H.  The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city. 
I.  The fees established by this chapter relate rationally to the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city, which public facilities are consistent with the general plan and the housing element of the general plan of the city. 
J.  The public facilities and anticipated future development herein referenced are based upon an analysis of existing land use and zoning. 
K.  The fees established by this ordinance are consistent with the goals and objectives of the city General Plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts caused by new development throughout the city. Development impact fees are necessary in order to finance the required public facilities and service improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of their construction costs. 
L.  Imposition of fees to finance public facilities and service improvements required by new development is necessary in order to avoid adversely impacting existing facilities and services. 
M.  The city has pending before it subdivision maps and other applications for residential, commercial and industrial development approval which the city must act upon. Further, the city has heretofore approved various development projects in the form of tentative map or other approvals, which have been expressly conditioned on payment of the fees established as a result of the development impact fee study undertaken by Management Services Institute (the results of said study constitute the report referenced above), and said condition was assented to by the developers of these projects. It is necessary for the provisions of this chapter to apply to these developments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare by the provision of adequate public facilities, to afford developers certainty with regard to their financial obligations, and to ensure that such development will not create a burden on the interrelated public facilities and services networks of the city. (Ord. 143 § 1, 1991)  
15.20.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. "Development project" shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any permit under the ordinances of the city, as the same presently exist or may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
The term "development project" shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures, and structures moved into the city. 
B.  "Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the city to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the costs of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, fees for processing applications for governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected under development agreements adopted pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864) of Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the California Government Code. 
C.  "Public facilities" includes public improvements, public services, and community amenities. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1991)  
15.20.030 - Establishment of development fees and providing for their adoption by resolution of the city council. 
The following development impact fees are hereby established and imposed on the issuance of all building permits for development within the city to finance the cost of the following categories of public facilities and improvements required by new development: 
A.  General Facilities and Equipment. A development impact fee is hereby established for general facilities and equipment. 
B.  Wastewater Treatment Facilities. A development impact fee is hereby established for wastewater treatment facilities. 
C.  Law Enforcement Facilities, Equipment and Training. A development impact fee is hereby established for law enforcement facilities, equipment and training. 
D.  Storm Drainage Facilities. A development impact fee is hereby established for storm drainage facilities. 
E.  Park and Recreation Facilities. A development impact fee is hereby established for park and recreation facilities. 
F.  Library Facilities. A development impact fee is hereby established for library facilities. 
G.  Streets and Thoroughfares. A development impact fee is hereby established for streets and thoroughfares. 
H.  Administrative Overhead. A development impact fee is hereby established for administrative overhead to cover the cost of general administration of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, performance of accounting tasks associated herewith, supervision and handling of funds, preparation and/or updating of master facilities plans and/or capital financing plans, and the like. This fee shall be set as a percentage of the fees set forth in subsections A through G, above, which are collected pursuant to this chapter. This fee does not relate to and is not designed to cover administrative costs incurred by the city in the case of any specific public facility constructed with the fees referenced in subsections A through G, above, since such project specific administrative costs are included in and shall be recovered from such fees. 
The city council shall, by council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees, describe the benefit and impact area on which the fees are imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed and describe the estimated cost of these facilities. (Ord. 143 § 3, 1991)  
15.20.040 - Imposition of development impact fee. 
A.  Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to develop land within the city by applying for a building permit, is hereby required to pay the appropriate development impact fees established pursuant to Section 15.20.030 as the same may be applicable, in the manner, amount and for the purposes therein referenced. 
B.  No permits or extension of permits for the activities referenced in subsection A of this section shall be granted unless and until the appropriate development impact fees hereby required have been paid to the city. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in subsection A, above, or in any other provision of this chapter, the development impact fees as established pursuant to Section 15.20.030 shall apply to any development project which has heretofore received a tentative map approval or other approval from the city, where the approval of the same, assented to by the developer, has been conditioned upon payment of the fees established as a result of the analysis and study (the "report") pertaining to development impact fees undertaken by Management Services Institute (referenced in Section 15.20.010). (Ord. 143 § 4, 1991)  
15.20.050 - Automatic annual adjustment. 
Each fee imposed by this chapter shall be adjusted automatically on July 1st of each fiscal year, beginning on July 1, 1991, by a percentage equal to the Engineering Cost Index as published by Engineer News Record for the preceding twelve months. This automatic adjustment shall not apply to fees which are based on various factors which result in automatic adjustments or those which specifically indicate otherwise. (Ord. 143 § 5, 1991)  
15.20.060 - Increase by resolution. 
The amount of each fee established pursuant to this chapter may be more specifically set and revised periodically by resolution of the city council, with this ordinance being considered as enabling and directive in this regard. (Ord. 143 § 6, 1991)  
15.20.070 - Creation of special funds. 
Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Moneys within each such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the city council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are hereby created and established for the purposes indicated: 
A.  A general facilities and equipment fund is hereby established. The general facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the general municipal facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land. 
B.  A wastewater treatment facilities fund is hereby established. The wastewater treatment facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the sewage treatment facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land. 
C.  A law enforcement facilities, equipment and training fund is hereby established. The law enforcement facilities, equipment and training fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of law enforcement facilities, equipment, and training, including any required acquisition of land. 
D.  A storm drainage facilities fund is hereby established. The storm drainage facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the park and recreation facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land, as well as grading, irrigation and turfing costs associated therewith. 
E.  A park and recreation facilities fund is hereby established. The park and recreation facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the park and recreation facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land, as well as grading, irrigation and turfing costs associated therewith. 
F.  A library facilities fund is hereby established. The library facilities fund is a fund for the payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the library facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land. 
G.  A streets and thoroughfares fund is hereby established. The streets and improvement fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the traffic network, including any required acquisition of land. 
H.  An administrative overhead fund is hereby established. The administrative overhead fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of administering the provisions of this chapter and any resolutions adopted pursuant hereto, all consistent with the provisions of Section 15.20.030. (Ord. 143 § 7, 1991)  
15.20.080 - Zoning to be utilized to compute fee. 
The approved zoning for the property to be developed shall be used in the computation of the fees required to be paid with respect to any property. If a parcel contains more than one zone, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by acreage or units, as appropriate, attributable to each zone. Public properties shall be classified into the category of use as between residential, commercial, or industrial as determined by the director of planning of the city of Scotts Valley (herein "planning director") or his duly authorized designee, and shall pay fees pursuant to that classification. All fees due hereunder shall be determined and calculated by the city engineer of the city of Scotts Valley (herein "city engineer") or his duly authorized designee. (Ord. 143 § 8, 1991)  
15.20.090 - Payment of fee. 
The fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be paid for the property on which a development project is proposed at the time of the issuance of any required building permit, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Provided, however, that fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66007, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
The term "building permit" as used herein includes any permits required for construction, reconstruction, remodeling, moving structures into the city, and the like, such as electrical and plumbing permits, moving permits, and the like. 
The fees created pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of net acreage or number of units, as set forth in the resolution referenced in Section 15.20.030. For development projects containing a fraction of a net acre, the fee shall be calculated on the fraction of the acre involved in the development project. All fees collected shall be promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate fund referenced in Section 15.20.070. 
Notwithstanding the above, the fee for streets and thoroughfares in the case of commercial and industrial developments shall be calculated on the basis of gross square footage (i.e., all of the floor area confined by the outside surface of the exterior walls of a building, except for that floor area devoted solely to vehicle parking or circulation) times the rate per square foot; and the fee for wastewater treatment facilities in the case of commercial and industrial developments shall be calculated on the basis of gallons per day times the rate per gallon; and the fee for storm drainage facilities in the case of all developments shall be calculated on the basis of the number of square feet of impervious area times the rate per square foot of impervious areas, all as established in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030. (Ord. 143 § 9, 1991)  
15.20.100 - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fees described herein may apply to the city council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of any one or more of said fees, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate public hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee if such change in use would render the same inappropriate. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same fashion and manner as prescribed by the laws of the city for hearing on development permits. 
The city council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth, by council resolution, specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustments, or waivers of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to this section. In this regard, this chapter shall be considered enabling and directory. (Ord. 143 § 10, 1991)  
15.20.110 - Use of funds. 
A.  Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for the purpose of paying (1) the actual or estimated costs of constructing and/or improving the public facilities within the city to which said specific fee or fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way therefor; (2) reimbursing the city for the development's share of those public facilities already constructed by the city or to reimburse the city for costs advanced, including without limitation, administrative costs incurred with respect to a specified public facility project; or (3) to reimburse other developers who have constructed public facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030 where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of said developer's project or projects. 
B.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public facilities for which development impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type to which the fees involved relate. 
C.  At least once each fiscal period, the city manager of the city of Scotts Valley (herein "city manager"), or his duly authorized designee shall present to the city council a proposed five year capital improvement program for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030 assigning moneys (including any accrued interest) from the funds referenced in Section 15.20.070 to specific improvement projects and related expenses. Moneys, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of Section 15.20.120. 
D.  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section 15.20.120. 
E.  The city shall be entitled to retain funds collected representing administrative overhead as compensation for the expense of collecting the fees and administering this chapter (all consistent with the provisions of Section 15.20.030). (Ord. 143 § 11, 1991)  
15.20.120 - Refund of fees paid. 
A.  If a building permit expires without commencement of construction, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the city shall retain one percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The fee payer must submit an application for such a refund to the city engineer within thirty calendar days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to timely submit the required application for refund shall constitute a waiver of any right to the refund. All determinations with respect to said refund applications shall be made by the city engineer. 
B.  In the event any fee collected pursuant to this chapter remains unexpended or uncommitted in any fund established pursuant to Section 15.20.070 five or more years after deposit of said fee, the city shall make findings once each fiscal year to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
C.  The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection B, shall be refunded to the then current record owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated basis. 
D.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), (e) and (f) shall apply fully to any refund of fees remaining expended or uncommitted in any such city fund for five or more years after deposit, and the provisions of subsections B and C, above, shall be subordinate to said section and shall be applied consistent therewith. (Ord. 143 § 12, 1991)  
15.20.130 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the development fees referenced in Section 15.20.030: 
1.  Alterations, renovations, or expansion of an existing building or structure where no additional dwelling units are created and the use is not changed; provided, however, that expansion of an existing commercial or industrial building or structure shall not be exempt from the fee for streets and thoroughfares or the fee for wastewater treatment facilities. Provided further, that the expansion of an existing building or structure shall not be exempt from the fee for storm drainage facilities. 
2.  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use. 
B.  All determinations regarding the exemptions provided above shall be made by the city engineer. (Ord. 143 § 13, 1991)  
15.20.140 - Credits. 
A.  New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is entitled to a fee credit if the existing development is a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use. 
B.  New development that will replace development that was partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or Act of God, is entitled to a fee credit if the development that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use, at the time thereof. 
C.  Credit for such eliminated development or development that was partially or totally destroyed (as above specified) shall be calculated by the city engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030 and shall be applied to new development on the same site. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, new development shall be given a credit against the fee due hereunder for park and recreation facilities to the extent of the amount of any fees paid and/or the value of any land dedicated by such new development, as well as the value of any credit due any such new development, for park and recreation facilities pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 64.2 or any other ordinance of the city, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time. (Ord. 143 § 14, 1991)  
15.20.150 - Developer construction of facilities. 
A.  In-lieu Fee Credits for Construction of Improvements. 
1.  A developer that has been required by the city to construct any facilities or improvements (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030 as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of the specific development impact fee(s) involved for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the need therefor that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. 
2.  Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or facility that mitigates the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and then only against the specific relevant fee(s) involved to which the facility or improvement relates. 
3.  Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to said fees, as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the city engineer, all consistent with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above. Subject to the applicable provisions of subsection B of this section, if the cost of the facilities or improvements is greater than required relevant fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the city to pay the applicant the excess amount. 
4.  An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee(s) required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the city engineer. The city engineer may set a time limit for reservation of the credit. 
5.  Credits shall be calculated by the city engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030. 
B.  Developer Construction of Facilities Exceeding Needs Related to Development Project. Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct any facility or improvement (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.030 which facility or improvement is determined by the city to exceed the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement agreement with the applicant and a credit against the specific relevant fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall be applied with respect to that portion of the improvement of facility which is attributable to and reasonably related to the need therefor caused by the development, and shall be determined, administered and processed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 15.20.150. The amount to be reimbursed shall be that portion of the cost for the improvement or facility which exceeds the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. The reimbursement agreement shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the city, and shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  Site-related Improvements. Credit shall not be given for site-related improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications, or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 15.20.030 hereof. 
D.  Determination of Credit. The developer seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities, or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation, including without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates, and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the city engineer to support the request for credit or reimbursement. The city engineer shall determine credit for construction of improvements or facilities based upon either those cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if he determines that such estimates submitted by the developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. The city engineer shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement. 
E.  Time for Making Claim for Credit. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
F.  Transferability of Credit—Council Approval. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the city council. 
G.  Appeal of Determinations of City Engineer. Determinations made by the city engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal (setting forth in detail the factual basis therefor) with the city clerk, together with a fee established by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of the determination of the city engineer. The appeal shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing to be held, noticed and conducted in accordance with the provisions prescribed in Section 15.20.100 for public hearings with respect to fee adjustments. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 143 § 15, 1991)  
15.20.160 - Review. 
A.  Except for the first year the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect, no later than six months following the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall prepare a report for the city council identifying the balance of fees in the various funds established pursuant to Section 15.20.070, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be constructed. In preparing the report, the city manager shall adjust the estimated costs of the public improvements in accordance with the Engineering Construction Cost Index as published by Engineer News Record for the elapsed time period from the previous July 1st or the date that the cost estimate was developed. The annual report shall also include a review of the administrative overhead charge. 
B.  At a noticed public hearing, the city council shall review the report and the development impact fees to determine whether the fee amounts continue to be reasonably related to the impact of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The council may revise the development impact fees to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being needed. 
C.  The report prepared by the city manager and its review by the city council, as well as any findings thereon, shall be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), to the extent applicable (which shall be controlling in the event of any conflict). (Ord. 143 § 16, 1991)  
15.20.170 - Controlling state law. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall at all times be subject and subordinate to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000), Division 1, of Title 7 of the California Government Code, as the same presently exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time, to the extent the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and said state law, the latter shall control. (Ord. 143 § 17, 1991)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS  
Chapter 16.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.02.010 - Chapter citation. 
This chapter may be cited as the Scotts Valley subdivision ordinance and shall supplement and implement the State Subdivision Map Act contained in Section 66.410 et seq. of the Government Code. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.02.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks, trailer parks or recreational vehicle parks; 
B.  Mineral, oil, gas or agricultural leases; 
C.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state of California; 
D.  All subdivisions whose tentative maps were approved by the council or the planning commission prior to the enactment of this chapter; except, that where any of the maps require a time extension, the provisions of this chapter shall become fully applicable to further processing of the subdivision; 
E.  A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created; provided, the lot line adjustment is approved by resolution of the local agency. Processing of Lot Line Adjustments shall be in accordance with Subdivision Map Act, Section 66412(d), except as allowed by the provisions of Section 17.48.090. (Ord. 64.1 § 1, 1978; Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975; Ord. 16.116, § 1, 3-4-2004)  
16.02.030 - Final map governs subdivisions. 
When any area in a subdivision, which a final map has been finally approved by the county and filed for record pursuant to this chapter, is thereafter annexed to the city, the final map and any agreements relating to such subdivision shall continue to govern such subdivision. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.02.040 - Tentative map—Void upon annexation. 
When any area in a subdivision or proposed subdivision of which a tentative map has been filed but a final map or a parcel map has not been finally approved, is annexed to the city, the tentative map approval shall become null and void. Any further consideration of the matter shall be made by the city upon a new application by the subdivider.(Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
16.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to the provisions of this chapter only and do not affect any other provisions of law. 
A.  "Boundary adjustment" means a minor reorientation of a property line or lines to avoid physical obstructions, encroachments of improvements, or to make the property line more closely conform to the natural topographical features of the land such as roads, streams, ridges and gulches. No new building sites can be created nor can the affected parcels be rendered illegal if not in accord with the current zoning at the time of such adjustment. 
B.  "Board of supervisors" means Santa Cruz County board of supervisors. 
C.  "City engineer" means Scotts Valley city engineer or his authorized representative. 
D.  "Design" means: 
1.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
2.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
3.  Location and size of all required easement and rights-of-way; 
4.  Fire roads and firebreaks; 
5.  Lot size and configuration; 
6.  Traffic access; 
7.  Grading; 
8.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; 
9.  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan. 
E.  "Director of public works" means the Scotts Valley director of public works or his authorized representative. 
F.  "Health officer" means Santa Cruz County health officer or his authorized representative. 
G.  "Improvement" means: 
1.  Such street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof; 
2.  Such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or any other entity approved by the city or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan. 
H.  "Parcel, lot or condominium unit" means all shall be units of measure for the purpose of determining the classification of a subdivision as noted in Section 16.06.010. 
I.  "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
J.  "Planning department" means Scotts Valley planning department. 
K.  "Planning director" means the planning director of the city or his authorized representative. 
L.  "Recorder" means Santa Cruz county recorder or his authorized representative. 
M.  "Streets" includes highways and roads. 
N.  "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers." 
O.  "Subdivision" means the division by any subdivider of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as a contiguous unit, for the purposes of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agriculture purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11.004 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" means cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
[P.  RESERVED.] 
Q.  "Subdivision Map Act" means the California State Map Act contained in Section 66.410 et seq. of the Government Code. (Ord. 64.1 §§ 2 and 3, 1978; Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975) 
II. MAPS  
Chapter 16.06 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
16.06.010 - Map requirements—General. 
A tentative and final map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominium units as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, except where: 
A.  Less than Five Acres. The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the county; or 
B.  Gross Area of More than Twenty Acres. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
C.  Industrial or Commercial Zoning. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city as to street alignments and widths; or 
D.  Gross Area of More Than Forty Acres. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of forty acres or more, or each of which is a quarter-quarter section or larger. 
A tentative map and a parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in paragraphs A, B, C, and D above and for any parcel or contiguous parcel of land, a condominium project, or a community apartment project divided into four or less parcels, except in the case of a boundary adjustment where the parcel will be waived. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.06.020 - Condominium maps—Content. 
A map of a condominium project or a community apartment project need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided, nor shall the city refuse approval of a tentative, parcel or final map of such a project on account of design or location of buildings on the property shown on the map not violative of the code or on account of the manner in which airspace is to be divided in conveying the condominium. Fees and lot design requirements shall be computed and imposed with respect to such maps on the basis of parcels or lots of the surface of the land shown thereon as included in the project. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.06.030 - Short-term lease—Railroad exemption. 
A parcel map shall not be required for subdivisions created by short-term leases, terminable by either party on not more than thirty days' notice in writing, of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, unless a showing is made to the planning director in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.06.040 - Maps to be recorded. 
Of the maps required by this chapter, only final and parcel maps may be filed for record in the office of the recorder. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.06.050 - Consent of owners. 
No final map or parcel map required by this chapter which creates a subdivision shall be recorded without the written consent of all parties having any record title interest in the real property proposed to be subdivided. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.08 - TENTATIVE MAP 
 
16.08.010 - Form and content. 
A tentative map for a subdivision for which a final map is required shall be clearly and legibly drawn on tracing cloth, polyester film or vellum of good quality. The sheet size shall be no larger than twenty-four by thirty-six inches. If necessary, use more than one sheet. The map shall be of such scale, preferably one inch equals one hundred feet, as to show clearly all details thereof. The map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The tract name or other designation; 
B.  Sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract; 
C.  Names and addresses of record owner and subdivider; name, address, and license number of engineer or surveyor under whose direction the map was prepared; 
D.  Locations, names and present widths of adjacent streets, highways and ways; 
E.  The locations, proposed names, widths, and approximate grades of all streets, highways and ways in the subdivision; 
F.  The locations and approximate widths of all easements for drainage, sewerage, or public utilities; 
G.  Approximate radii of all curves; 
H.  Approximate dimensions of all lots; 
I.  Approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and of all areas covered by water and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses, living or dry; 
J.  Existing use or uses of the property; 
K.  Proposed uses of the property and an outline of proposed restrictions; 
L.  Specific source and type of water supply e.g., public utility, well, spring, etc.); 
M.  Provisions for sewerage and sewage disposal, drainage and flood control which are proposed; 
N.  Public areas proposed, if any; 
O.  In areas to be developed, contours shall be drawn to intervals as follows: 
1. Slope 	Interval 
 0.00%- 1.00% 	 1 foot 
 1.00%- 5.00% 	 5 feet 
 5.00%-10.00% 	10 feet 
10.00%-and over 	20 feet 
 
2.  In areas not to be developed, greater intervals may be permitted which shall be extended into adjacent property a sufficient distance to establish proper topographical relationships; 
P.  Statement of the improvements proposed to be made or installed; 
Q.  Typical cross sections of all streets; 
R.  Date, north point and scale; 
S.  A site location sketch indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or region; 
T.  Where sanitary sewers are not available, soil per-colation rates and other soils test data as required by the health department; 
U.  Show the approximate known soil or geologic hazard areas; 
V.  Submit four copies of the preliminary soils report noted in Section 16.40.010 or two copies of the waiver noted in Section 16.40.030. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.08.020 - Parcel map accepted as tentative map. 
An assessor's parcel map may be accepted by the planning director as a tentative map for a subdivision for which a parcel map is required if it adequately shows the proposed subdivision. The map may be prepared by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Names and addresses of record owner and subdivider; 
B.  Sufficient description to define the location of the parcel to be subdivided; 
C.  Map scale and north point; 
D.  Approximate dimensions on the boundaries of all parcels to be created; 
E.  All of the land owner's current land holdings if they are contiguous or adjacent to the land to be subdivided; 
F.  The location of known existing wells, buildings, streams, and potential building sites on the parcels to be created; 
G.  The manner in which access will be provided to all parcels; 
H.  A statement regarding the manner in which domestic water and sewage disposal will be provided for the parcels to be created. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.10 - FINAL MAP 
 
16.10.010 - Form and content. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. It shall be based on a survey and shall conform to all of the following provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.020 - Reproduction to be legible. 
The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.030 - Sheets—Size and number. 
The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.040 - Monument locations and boundary lines. 
All survey information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and central angle, radius and arc length for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.050 - Parcels and blocks numbered. 
Each parcel shall be numbered and each block may be numbered or lettered. Street names acceptable to the planning director shall be shown. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.060 - Exterior boundary indicated. 
The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a distinctive symbol which shall be identified in a legend. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding survey. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.070 - Report noted on map. 
When a soils or a geologic report has been prepared in accordance with this chapter, this fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer and/or geologist making the report. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.080 - Specific tentative map requirements on map. 
All specific requirements noted as conditions of approval for the tentative map shall be incorporated into the final map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.090 - Title page. 
The title sheet shall contain the title and a tract number as secured from the planning department, conspicuously placed on the sheet. Below the title shall appear a subtitle consisting of a general description of all the property being subdivided by reference to recorded deeds or to maps which have been previously recorded or by reference to the plat of a United States survey. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.100 - Contents of each page. 
References in the description to tracts and subdivisions must be spelled out and worded identically with original records; and references to book and page of record must be complete. There must also appear on the map the scale, the north point and the basis of bearing, reference being made to a recorded subdivision map, recorded deed, United States survey, solar or Polaris observation. Every sheet comprising the map proper shall bear the title, scale, north point and sheet number. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.110 - Acknowledgements, dedications, etc. on title page. 
Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements, endorsements, acceptances of dedications and notarial seals required by law and by this chapter shall appear only once and shall be placed on the title sheet, or the title sheet and such other sheets as may be required. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.120 - Ground boundaries shown. 
All stakes, monuments or other evidences which were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the subdivision shall be shown. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block number, tract name and place of record, or by section, township and range or other property designation. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.130 - City boundaries. 
City boundaries which cross or adjoin the subdivision shall be clearly designated. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.140 - Survey monuments. 
The location, and kind of monuments placed in making the survey shall be shown. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.150 - Points reset from reference point. 
If any points were reset from reference point ties, that fact shall be stated. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.160 - Permanent monuments set. 
In making the survey, the engineer or surveyor shall set permanent monuments at all angles and curve points on the subdivision boundary, on the boundaries of each block and on all lot corners. In case the location of any water course, inaccessible terrain or physical obstruction makes it impracticable to place any of the monuments as required by this section, the city engineer may authorize, in lieu thereof, the placing of offset monuments. The exterior boundary of the land being subdivided shall be adequately monumented before the map is recorded. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.170 - Monument specifications. 
Monuments at angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be not less substantial than galvanized iron pipe not less than one and one-half inches in diameter and not less than thirty inches in length. Monuments on the exterior boundaries of blocks and lot corners shall be not less substantial than galvanized iron pipe not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than thirty inches in length. Each lot corner shall also be marked by a wooden stake, not less than one inch by two inches in cross section, eighteen inches long and driven six inches into the ground with the lot number marked on the side of the stake toward the lot. All monuments shall be appropriately marked with the engineer's or surveyor's license number in conformance with Section 8772 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.180 - Monument approval before map approval. 
All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer before approval of the map. In case the improvements in the subdivision are proposed to be installed subsequent to the recordation of the map, the city engineer may authorize the placing of reference point markers in lieu of some of the interior monuments required by this chapter which cannot be permanently placed until completion of the improvement work. In such case the agreement for the improvement work, as provided in Section 16.52.010, shall include the placing of the permanent monuments required by this chapter. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.190 - Boundary traverses. 
Boundary traverses of the subdivision and of all lots and blocks must close within a limit of error of one foot to five thousand feet of perimeter. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.200 - Monuments set after final map recordation. 
At the city engineer's option, interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map is recorded if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes to the city council a bond or cash deposit guaranteeing the payment of the cost of setting the monuments as part of the agreement noted in Section 16.52.010. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.210 - Street centerlines. 
Street centerlines or parallel offsets (ten feet maximum) within the improved road area shall be monumented with railroad spikes or one-half inch by thirty inch galvanized iron pipes at curve points and along tangents in sufficient quantities to readily enable reestablishment of the centerline. Said monuments shall in all cases be intervisible. The centerline monuments shall be set after completion of the street surfacing and must be in place prior to county acceptance of the tract improvements. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.220 - Final monuments set—Notice to subdivider. 
A.  Within five days after the final setting of all monuments has been completed by the engineer or surveyor, he shall give written notice to the subdivider, and to the city engineer that the final monuments have been set. 
B.  Upon payment to the engineer or surveyor for setting the final monuments, the subdivider shall present to the city engineer evidence of such payment and receipt thereof by the engineer or surveyor. 
C.  If the subdivider does not present evidence to the city engineer that he has paid the engineer or surveyor for the setting of the final monuments, and if the engineer or surveyor notifies the city council that he has not been paid by the subdivider for the setting of the final monuments, the city council may, within three months from the date of said notification, pay the engineer or surveyor from any deposit the amount due. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.230 - Alternate engineer or surveyor. 
In the event of the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibility for setting monuments, or in the event of his refusal to set such monuments, the city council may direct the city engineer, or such engineer or surveyor as it may select, to set such monuments. When the monuments are so set, the substitute engineer or surveyor shall amend any map filed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.28.010. All provisions of this chapter relating to payment shall apply to the services performed by the substituted engineer or surveyor. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.240 - Affidavits and certificates. 
The following affidavits and certificates, with acknowledgements where appropriate, shall appear on the final map: 
A.  Owner's certificates, with acknowledgements, consenting to the preparation and recording of the final map and to the dedication or offer to dedicate interest in real property for specified public purposes. Said certificate must be signed by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided except as follows. Neither a lien for state, county, municipal or local taxes, nor for special assessments, nor beneficial interest under trust deeds, nor a trust interest under bond indentures, nor mechanics' liens constitute a record title interest in land for the purpose of this chapter. 
B.  Signatures That May Be Omitted. Signatures of the parties owning the following types of interest may be omitted if their names and the nature of their respective interest are stated on the final map: 
1.  Rights-of-way, easements or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, except those owned by a public entity or public utility. If, however, the legislative body or advisory agency determines that division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement, the signature of such public entity or public utility may be omitted. Where such determination is made, the subdivider shall send, by certified mail, a sketch of the proposed final map, together with a copy of this section, to any public entity or public utility which has previously acquired a right-of-way or easement. 
a.  If the public entity or utility objects to either recording the final map without its signature, or the determination of the legislative body or advisory agency that the division and development of the property will not unreasonably interfere with the full and complete exercise of its right-of-way or easement, it shall so notify the subdivider and the legislative body or advisory agency within thirty days after receipt of the materials from the subdivider. 
b.  If the public entity or utility objects to recording the final map without its signature, the public entity or utility so objecting may affix its signature to the final map within thirty days of filing its objection with the legislative body or advisory agency. 
c.  If the public entity or utility either does not file an objection with the legislative body or advisory agency, or fails to affix its signature within thirty days of filing its objection to recording the map without its signature, the local agency may record the final map without such signature. 
d.  If the public entity or utility files an objection to the determination of the legislative body or advisory agency that the division and development of the property will not unreasonably interfere with the exercise of its right-of-way or easement, the legislative body or advisory agency shall set the matter for public hearing to be held not less than ten nor more than thirty days of receipt of the objection. At such hearing, the public entity or public utility shall present evidence in support of its position that the division and development of the property will unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way or easement. 
e.  If the legislative body or advisory agency finds, following such hearing, that the development and division will in fact unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way or easement, it shall set forth those conditions whereby such unreasonable interference will be eliminated; and upon compliance with such conditions by the subdivider, the final map may be recorded with or without the signature of the objector. If the legislative body or advisory agency finds that the development and division will in fact not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way or easement, the final map may be recorded without the signature of the objector, notwithstanding its objections thereto. 
f.  Failure of the public entity or public utility to file an objection pursuant to this section shall in no way affect its rights under a right-of-way or easement; 
2.  Rights-of-way, easements or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse or laches appear to be no longer of practical use or value and signatures are impossible or impractical to obtain. A statement of the circumstances preventing the procurement of the signatures shall also be stated on the map; 
3.  Interest in or rights to minerals, including but not limited to oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances. (Ord. 64.1 § 4, 1978; Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.250 - Nondedicated streets. 
In the event any street shown on a subdivision map is not offered for dedication, the owner's certificate as noted in Section 16.10.240 may contain a statement to this effect. If such statement appears on the map and if the map is approved by the council, the use of any such street or streets by the public shall be permissive only. 
An offer of dedication of real property for street or public utility easement purposes shall be deemed not to include any public utility facilities located on or under such real property unless and only to the extent and intent to dedicate such facilities is expressly stated in the certificate. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.10.260 - City engineer's certification. 
The city engineer shall complete and file with the council his certificate within twenty days from the time the final map is submitted to him by the subdivider for approval, if all tentative map conditions and all requirements of this chapter are met. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.12 - PARCEL MAP 
 
16.12.010 - Form and content. 
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility; 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown; 
C.  Each parcel shall be numbered or otherwise designated; 
D.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a distinctive symbol which shall be identified in legend; 
E.  The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not be shown as a matter of survey but only by reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five acres or more; 
F.  In accordance with the provisions of Section 16.10.240 a certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map shall be placed on the face of the map; 
G.  The parcel map shall define, delineate and designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private and any private streets or roads permitted under the provisions of the applicable tentative map approval conditions with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to readily determine the bearing and length of the boundaries of the subdivision and the parcels being created. Length, radius and central angle of all curves shall be shown; 
H.  All monuments and other evidence found on the site used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision shall be shown on the map; 
I.  City boundaries which cross or adjoin the subdivision shall be clearly designated; 
J.  The map shall identify location, and kind of survey monuments set or found in conjunction with the preparation of the map; 
K.  Easements and rights-of-way which affect the created parcels shall be noted on the map; 
L.  The survey monuments set or reset by the engineer or surveyor shall not be less substantial than one-half inch diameter galvanized iron pipe and not less than thirty inches long. The monuments shall also contain the certificate number of the engineer or surveyor performing the work in accordance with the provisions of Section 8772 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. 
M.  Any offers for dedications required as a tentative map condition shall be included as part of the owner's certificate. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.12.020 - Map based on survey or filed data. 
In all cases where a parcel map is required, such map shall be based either upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act, or be compiled from recorded or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map if the location of at least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.12.030 - Engineer's surveyor's certificate. 
In addition to the owner's certificate noted in Section 16.10.240, the following shall appear on a parcel Map: 
A.  "Engineer's Surveyor's Certificate. 
"This map was prepared by me or under my direction (and was compiled from record data) (and is based upon a field survey) in conformance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act at the request of (name of person authorizing map) on (date). I hereby state that the parcel map procedures of the local agency have been complied with and that this parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and the conditions of approval thereof which were required to be fulfilled prior to the filing of the parcel map. 
(signed) _____
R.C.E. (or L.S.) no. ___" 
B.  "Recorder's certificate. 
Filed this _______ day of _______, 19___, at ___.m. in Book _______ of _______, at page _______, at the request of _______. 
Signed _____ " 
County Recorder 
(Ord. 64.1 § 5, 1978; Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.12.040 - City engineer's certification. 
The parcel map shall be submitted to the city engineer for his examination prior to filing. 
Within twenty days after receiving the parcel map, the city engineer shall examine it for the survey information shown thereon, and if satisfied that it is substantially correct, and if all tentative map conditions and requirements of this chapter are met, the following certification shall be signed. 
"City Engineer's Certificate 
"This map conforms with the requirements of Section 66,410 et seq. of the California Government Code. All offers of dedication are rejected but are subject to subsequent acceptance per Section 66,477.2 of said Government Code. 
Dated: _______ 
Signed: _____
City Engineer" 
(Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975) 
III. PROCEDURE  
Chapter 16.14 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
16.14.010 - Generally. 
The procedures set forth in this section shall govern the processing, approval, conditional approval or disapproval, and filing of tentative, final, and parcel maps, and the modification thereof. Unless otherwise modified by the city council, no tentative map, final map, or parcel map, shall be submitted for processing, approval, conditional approval or disapproval for any parcel, or portion of a parcel, for which a parcel map, or final map, has been recorded at the county recorder's office within the previous eighteen months. (Ord. 64.3 § 2, 1979: Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.14.020 - Extension of time limits. 
The time limits specified in this chapter for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the council. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.14.030 - Processing fees established by resolution. 
Processing fees shall be established by resolutions of the council for tentative maps, final maps, and parcel maps. See Chapter 16.38. The prescribed fees, plus recording fees, when applicable, must be paid when the maps are filed. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.14.040 - Public hearing. 
Whenever a public hearing is required pursuant to this chapter, notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the location of the subdivision or proposed subdivision, shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city at least ten days before the hearing. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.16 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
16.16.010 - Filing. 
Tentative maps shall be filed with the planning director. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.020 - Final and parcel maps—Number of copies. 
A.  On subdivisions for which final maps are required, five copies of the map are required, of which one shall be the original tracing or an acceptable reproducible copy thereof. 
B.  On subdivisions for which parcel maps are required, five copies of the map are required. Where a subdivision is identified as a boundary adjustment and no parcel map is required, three copies of the tentative map are required. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.030 - Filing—Effective time. 
The time of filing a tentative subdivision map shall be construed to be the time at which the planning director formally accepts the map. Prior to formal acceptance, the map shall be examined to determine if it is complete, in full compliance with this chapter, as to form and content. If the tentative map application is incomplete, the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing as to what must be done to complete the application within five working days from the day the application was originally submitted. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.040 - Processing of map for which final map is required. 
A.  Subdivisions for which a final map is required shall be processed through the planning department and the planning commission to the council. Final action on these tentative maps is vested in the council, who may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map after a public hearing pursuant to Section 16.14.040 is held, except that where the planning commission recommends disapproval of a tentative map, the council will, in the absence of a filed complaint pursuant to Sections 16.16.080 and 16.16.090 consider the map disapproved and no further action is required. 
B.  A written report by the planning department staff on the proposed subdivision, which may be modified by action on the planing commission shall be filed with the clerk of the council within fifty days after formal acceptance of the tentative map by the planning director. 
C.  When Section 66455.5 of the Government Code requires the submission of the tentative map to the office of Intergovernmental Management, the time may be extended by the council or planning director as the case may be for action on such map if it is required to allow consideration of the evaluation received from the Office of Intergovernmental Management, but such extension shall not exceed fifteen days. 
D.  At the next regular meeting of the council following the filing of the planning department staff's report with its clerk, the council shall fix a date for a public hearing at which time the tentative map will be considered. The public hearing shall be conducted within thirty days thereafter. The council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within seven days following the public hearing and the subdivider shall be notified in writing by the council clerk of the details of the council's action within five working days following said action. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.050 - Processing of map for which parcel map is required. 
For subdivisions for which a parcel map is required, the same procedure as set forth in Section 16.16.040 shall be followed. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.060 - Report on tentative map. 
Any report or recommendation on a tentative map, or a tentative map time extension, by the staff to the planning commission or the council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the planning commission or council. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.070 - Automatic approval. 
If no action is taken upon a tentative map by the council within the time limits specified in this chapter or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of the clerk of the council to certify such approval. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.080 - Complaint (appeal)—Filing. 
At the option of the subdivider, a complaint appeal may be filed with the clerk of the council within fifteen days after an action of the planning commission which recommends disapproval of a subdivision for which time limits specified in this chapter or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of the planning director or the clerk of the city council to certify such approval. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.090 - Subdivision requiring final map—Appeal—Filing. 
At the option of the subdivider, an appeal may be filed with the clerk of the council within fifteen days after an action of the planning commission which recommends disapproval of a subdivision for which a final map is required. The council may set the matter for a public hearing which shall be held with thirty days after filing of the complaint. Within seven days following conclusion of the public hearing, if one is held, or within seven days following the decision not to set the matter for a public hearing, the council shall render its decision on the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map and the subdivider shall be notified in writing by the council's clerk of the council's decision within five working days following the decision. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.100 - Subdivisions requiring parcel map—Appeal to planning commission. 
A subdivider or any person adversely affected by the decision of the planning director, for subdivisions for which a parcel map is required, may file an appeal with the secretary of the planning commission within fifteen days after the decision rendered by the planning director. The planning commission shall at its next regular meeting consider the appeal or may set the matter for a public hearing, at its option, which shall be held within thirty days after the filing of the appeal. At the next regular meeting following either the appeal consideration or the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map and its clerk shall notify the applicant in writing within five working days following said decision of the action taken. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.110 - Subdivisions requiring parcel map—Appeal to council. 
A subdivider or any person affected by the decision of the planning commission, for subdivisions for which a parcel map is required, may file an appeal with the clerk of the council within fifteen days after the decision rendered by the planning commission. The council shall at its next regular meeting consider the appeal or may set the matter for a public hearing, at its option, which shall be held within thirty days after the filing of the appeal. At the next regular meeting following either the appeal consideration or the public hearing, the council shall render its decision on the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map and its clerk shall notify the applicant in writing within five working days following the decision of the action taken. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.120 - Action on appeals. 
Upon failure to act upon an appeal by either the planning commission or the council within the time limit specified in this chapter, the tentative map shall be deemed to be approved or disapproved as per the last previous action taken, insofar as it complies with applicable requirements of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of the clerk of the planning commission or the council as the case may be to certify and report such action to the applicant within five working days following such deadline for action. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.16.130 - Expiration of tentative maps. 
An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval. The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975; Ord. No. 16-122, § 1, 5-3-2006)  
16.16.140 - Extension of time to file final or parcel maps. 
Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which such map expires may be extended by the Council for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three (3) years. Requests for time extensions for all subdivision tentative map approval shall be initiated by the subdivider by letter to the Planning Director. Such requests shall be processed along the same channels and in the same manner as the original tentative map and the same appeal procedures shall apply. When considering such request, the Council may add or modify any conditions tied to approval of the original map. 
(Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975; Ord. No. 16-122, § 2, 5-3-2006)  
Chapter 16.18 - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORTS 
 
16.18.010 - Environmental impact reports. 
Environmental impact reports (EIR's) are frequently required when processing tentative maps. If an EIR is required pursuant to the current Environmental Impact Report Guidelines adopted by the council and applicable state and federal laws, no tentative map filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be approved until said EIR is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of the EIR Guidelines. The subdivider shall pay such fees as may be required by the city for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.20 - REVIEW OF TENTATIVE MAPS BY OTHER AGENCIES 
 
16.20.010 - Review by cities. 
A.  A city or the county may make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in any adjoining city or in any adjoining unincorporated territory, provided such subdivisions are within three miles of the exterior boundary of such city or county. A city or county which desires to make recommendations concerning such proposed subdivisions shall file with the planning director a map indicating the territory in which it desires to make such recommendations. 
B.  Upon receiving such territorial map from a city or the county, the planning director shall issue a receipt therefor and shall thereafter transmit to the official designated by such city or county one copy of each tentative map of subdivisions located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map. Such transmission shall be within five days after the receipt of the tentative map. 
C.  Any city or county receiving such tentative map shall make its recommendation to the council within fifteen days after receipt of tentative map. The recommendations shall be taken into consideration by the council before action is taken upon the tentative map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.20.020 - Review by state. 
A.  The state Department of Transportation may file with the planning director a map or an amended map of any territory within one mile on either or both sides of any state highway on which territory it believes subdivision would have an effect upon an existing state highway or a future state highway, the route of which has been adopted by the California Highway Commission. 
B.  The planning director shall issue a receipt for the territorial map and thereafter shall transmit to the appropriate district office of the Department of Transportation within three days after the receipt thereof, one copy of each tentative map of any subdivision located wholly or partly within the territory outlined on the territorial map. 
C.  The Department of Transportation, upon receiving a copy of the map may, within fifteen days after receipt thereof, make recommendations to the planning director in connection therewith regarding the effect of the proposed subdivision upon such highway or highway route. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.20.030 - Review by intergovernmental management office. 
Upon the filing of a tentative map, it may be submitted to the Office of Intergovernmental Management pursuant to Section 12037 of the Government Code for an evaluation of the environmental impact of the proposed subdivision. If the subdivision in question is a land project as defined by Section 11000.5 of the Business and Professions Code, such submission shall be required prior to approval of the map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.20.040 - Tentative map of unincorporated territory. 
A subdivider may file with the city a tentative map for a proposed subdivision of unincorporated territory adjacent to the city. The map, in the discretion of the city, may be acted upon in the manner provided in this chapter, except that if it is approved, such approval shall be conditioned upon annexation of the property to the city within such a period of time as shall be specified by the city, and such approval shall not be effective until annexation of such property to the city has been completed. If annexation is not completed within the time specified or an extension thereof, then the approval of such map by the city shall be null and void. No subdivision of unincorporated territory may be effective by approval of a map by a city unless annexation thereof to the city is completed prior to the approval of the final map thereof. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.22 - FINAL MAP 
 
16.22.010 - General. 
After the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.020 - Filing map. 
A final map conforming to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, if any, shall be filed with the city engineer prior to the expiration of the tentative map, after all required certificates on such map have been signed and, where necessary, acknowledged. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.030 - Accompanying data. 
A.  The final map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly authorized title company naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the preparation and recordation of the map and to the dedication of streets, alleys and other public places shown on said map, and certifying that as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to the subdivision. 
B.  Prior to submittal of the final map to the council for approval, the city engineer shall require formal notification from the health officer and all affected public utility companies that all water supply, sewage disposal and public utility requirements have been satisfied. The subdivider shall coordinate his work with the affected agencies to ascertain that said formal notifications can be issued. 
C.  The final map shall be accompanied by boundary traverses in accordance with the requirements noted in Section 16.10.190. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.040 - Time for filing. 
In order that the final map may be adequately checked and scheduled for final approval by the council prior to the expiration date of the tentative map, it shall be filed with the city engineer not less than six weeks prior to said expiration date. All conditions imposed by this chapter and the tentative map approval which in any way may inhibit the checking of said map shall be met prior to its submittal. All conditions imposed by this chapter and the tentative map approval shall be met within two weeks of the tentative map expiration date. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.050 - Filing map with both city and county. 
If the subdivision lies entirely within city territory, the map shall be filed with the city engineer; and if partially within the city and unincorporated territory, the map shall be filed with both the city engineer and the county surveyor, and each shall act thereon. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.060 - Council action. 
A.  Council Action on Final Map. The council, shall within a period of ten days after the final map is filed with its clerk by the city engineer, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of this chapter, or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. 
B.  Failure of Council to Act. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the clerk of the council shall certify its approval thereon. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.22.070 - Subdivider agreement for improvements. 
If, at the time of approval of the final map by the council, any public improvement required by the city has not been completed and accepted, the council as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map, shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense pursuant to Section 16.52.010. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.24 - PARCEL MAP 
 
16.24.010 - General. 
The procedure for processing, approval, conditional approval or disapproval and filing of parcel maps and modifications thereof, shall be as provided herein. The provisions of Sections 16.34.040, 16.34.050, and 16.34.060 relating to dedications and offers of dedication on final maps shall apply to dedications and offers of dedication on parcel maps. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.24.020 - Filing map. 
After the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the subdivider may cause a parcel map to be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable conditions of the tentative map. Said parcel map shall be filed with the city engineer not less than three weeks prior to the expiration of the tentative map. The parcel map shall meet all conditions of this chapter and the tentative map approval and shall contain all required certificates appropriately signed and acknowledge where necessary, prior to filing the map with the city engineer. Final approval of parcel maps is vested in the council. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.24.030 - Accompanying report. 
The parcel map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly authorized title company naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the preparation and recordation of the map and to the dedication of land and certifying that as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to the subdivision. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.26 - FILING MAP WITH RECORDER 
 
16.26.010 - Final and parcel map. 
After the approval by the city of a final or parcel map of a subdivision, the city clerk shall transmit the map to the clerk of the board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.020 - Security for taxes. 
When all security required under the provisions of this chapter to secure the payment of taxes and assessments which are a lien on some part of a subdivision of five or more parcels but which are not due and payable, have been deposited with the clerk of the board of supervisors and approved by the county, the clerk of the board of supervisors shall certify that such deposits have been made and shall transmit the final map to the final recorder. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.030 - Final proof of ownership. 
The subdivider shall present to the recorder evidence that, at the time of the filing of the final or parcel map in the office of the recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided, whose signatures are required by this chapter as shown by the records in the office of the recorder, otherwise the map shall not be filed.(Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.040 - Recording—Time limit. 
The recorder shall have not more than ten days within which to examine a final or parcel map and either accept or reject it for filing. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.050 - Recorder's certificate—Indexing. 
If the recorder accepts the map for filing, such acceptance shall be certified on the face thereof. The map shall be filed in a book of maps, or in a book of parcel maps, or in such other manner as will assure that such maps will be kept together. The map shall become a part of the official records of the recorder upon its acceptance by him for filing. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.060 - Recording fee. 
The fee for filing and indexing such map is as prescribed in Section 27372 of the government code and shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.070 - Preservation of maps—Prints. 
The original map shall be stored for safekeeping in a reproducible condition. The recorder shall maintain for public reference a set of counter maps that are prints of the original maps and produce the original maps for comparison upon demand. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.26.080 - Recordation—Constructive notice. 
The filing for record of a final or parcel map by the recorder shall automatically and finally determine the validity of such map and, when recorded, shall impart constructive notice thereof. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.28 - CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS 
 
16.28.010 - Method of correcting recorded maps. 
After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map for any of the following reasons: 
A.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
B.  To show any course or distance that was ordered therefrom; 
C.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
E.  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character which originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
F.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the County surveyor or City Engineer which does not affect any property right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps; 
G.  To make modifications and adjustments to a recorded map if all of the following findings are made by the city council following a noticed public hearing as provided for in Section 66451.3 of the California Government Code and where the city council has, at the hearing, only considered the specifics of the proposed modifications. The required findings are: 
1.  There are changes in circumstances which make any of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary. 
2.  The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner(s) of the impacted properties. 
3.  The modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. 
4.  The map as modified conforms to the provisions of Section 66474 of the California Government Code. 
As used in this section, the term "error" does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map. No recorded map shall be amended without the written consent of all property owners whose property is affected by the amendment. The city council may apply reasonable new conditions as part of the approval of an amendment if those conditions are made necessary as a result of the requested modifications. (Ord. 64.7 § 1, 1996: Ord. 64.1 § 6, 1978: Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.28.020 - Amending map—Conformity to requirements. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. An amending map shall conform to the requirements of Section 13.08.208 (final maps) or 13.08.212 (parcel maps) of this chapter. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.28.030 - City engineer's certification. 
The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction, and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.28.010, he shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.28.040 - Recording. 
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the county surveyor shall be filed in the office of the recorder. Upon such filing, the recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or certification of correction in the general index and map index respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.29 - OWNER-INITIATED PARCEL MERGERS 
 
16.29.010 - Owner-initiated parcel mergers. 
The merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership without reverting to acreage may be caused by the owner thereof, on a voluntary basis and on his own initiative, in accordance with and subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.020 - Merger of parcels by action of the owner. 
A.  Contiguous parcels or units under common ownership shall be deemed merged without reversion to acreage by the owner thereof, on a voluntary basis and on his own initiative, under any of the following circumstances, subject to the provisions of Section 16.29.030: 
1.  Lots or parcels which have been required to be combined as a condition of approval of a minor land division, parcel re-subdivision, boundary adjustment, or other discretionary approval, and such condition has been accepted by the owner; 
2.  Lots or parcels on which a dwelling or commercial structure or portion thereof has been built across the common boundary line of such lots or parcels, except when the encroachment is of such a minor and inadvertent nature that it can be eliminated through a boundary adjustment; 
3.  Lots or parcels which have been included in an owner's affidavit declaring his desire that the lots or parcels be merged. 
B.  When any one or more of the foregoing circumstances occurs, the merger shall not be effected and shall not be deemed completed unless the owner complies with the provisions of Section 16.29.030. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.030 - Approval of owner-initiated parcel mergers. 
No merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership shall occur under any of the circumstances referenced in Section 16.29.020 above, without the approval of the city engineer and the director of planning, or their duly authorized representatives, first had and obtained, and compliance with the procedures set forth in this section as follows: 
A.  The owner shall pay to the city a parcel merger fee for purposes of covering administrative processing costs, said fees to be established by a resolution adopted by the city council. 
B.  The owner shall provide to the city director of planning (hereinafter "director") the following documentation: 
1.  A deed with a metes and bounds description, a record of survey, or a merger map showing the perimeter boundaries of the affected contiguous parcels as merged. Any such instrument(s) must be prepared by a duly licensed registered civil engineer or land surveyor; 
2.  An affidavit or declaration executed under penalty of perjury and duly notarized, declaring that the owner of the affected contiguous parcels voluntarily and on his own initiative desires the affected contiguous parcel under his common ownership to be merged. The affidavit shall be executed by all owners of an interest in the contiguous parcels, and all signatures shall be duly notarized; 
3.  Appropriate evidence of record title ownership of the affected parcels evidencing the names of all persons who currently have an interest of record in the ownership of said parcels. Such evidence of record title ownership may be in the form of a title report prepared by a title insurance company or in some other appropriate form as required by the director. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.040 - Determination of merger. 
A.  The director shall approve the merger of the affected parcels if he determines that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  All requirements of Section 16.29.030 have been met; 
2.  The city engineer has found the deed, record of survey or parcel map to have been prepared in accordance with applicable requirements of state and/or city laws and/ or regulations, and that the same has been prepared by a duly licensed registered civil engineer or land surveyor; and has further found that all persons having a record ownership interest in the affected parcels have executed the owner's affidavit; 
3.  That any one or more of the conditions referenced in Section 16.29.020 exist; 
4.  The merger of the affected parcels is in conformance with the current zoning regulations applicable thereto and the general plan. 
B.  If the director finds all of the foregoing conditions to exist then the merger shall be approved. If any one or more of the foregoing conditions is found not to exist, then the merger shall be disapproved. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.050 - Notice of determination. 
A.  A determination by the director approving or disapproving the merger of the affected parcels shall be made within thirty days of the date a request for merger is submitted. A request for merger shall be deemed submitted on the date by which a letter of request is presented, all fees are paid, and all required documentation is presented. 
B.  Once the director has determined to approve or disapprove the proposed merger he shall forthwith mail a notice of determination to all persons who have signed the owner's affidavit. Provided, however, that no determination shall be effective until expiration of the appeal period referenced in Section 16.29.070 or the determination of the matter by the city council following the filing of an appeal or special consideration request as referenced in said section. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.060 - Approval of merger—Recording notice thereof. 
If the director determines to approve the proposed merger he shall forthwith from and after the effective date of said decision, record or cause to be recorded at the county recorder's office the deed, record of survey, or parcel map which establishes and describes the new boundaries of the merged parcels together with a notice of approval of owner-initiated merger of parcels. The notice shall specify the names of the record owners and particularly describe the real property. From and after the date of the recording of said documents the affected parcels shall thereafter be deemed merged. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.29.070 - Appeals. 
The disapproval by the director of a request for owner-initiated merger of parcels may be appealed by an owner of record of the affected parcels to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk in the manner specified in Chapter 17.62 of this code for appeals from decisions of the planning commission and design review board. The notice of appeal shall be filed in the manner, with the content, and within the period therein prescribed. In addition, any decision of the director to approve or disapprove a request for owner-initiated merger of parcels may be called up as a special consideration item by any member of the city council in the manner, fashion, and within the time period prescribed in Chapter 17.62 of this code for similar actions by any member of the city council with respect to decisions of the planning commission and design review board. Any such appeal or special consideration shall be conducted in accordance with and shall be subject to all provisions of Chapter 17.62. (Ord. 64.5 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 16.30 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
 
16.30.010 - Method of reverting. 
Reversion of subdivided land to acreage shall be done in accordance with the provisions in Sections 16.30.020—16.30.070. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.020 - Initiative to revert. 
Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by the council for property subdivided by a final map or a parcel map, or by petition to the council by all of the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision. The petition shall contain the following: 
A.  A title report to all the real property within the subdivision; 
B.  Sufficient data to enable the council to make all of the determinations and findings required by this section; 
C.  A final map for property previously subdivided by a final map or a parcel map for property previously subdivided by a parcel map to delineate dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition of reversion. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.030 - Fee. 
A fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council shall be paid by the party initiating the petition reversion to acreage. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.040 - Public hearing—Notice. 
A public hearing shall be held on the proposed reversion to acreage. Notice thereof shall be given in the time and manner provided in Section 13.08.304. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.050 - Findings required. 
Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage only if the council finds that: 
A.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
B.  Either: 
1.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
2.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later, or 
3.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.060 - Required conditions. 
As conditions of reversion the council shall require: 
A.  Dedications or offers of dedication necessary for widening of public roads and construction of drainage or sewer facilities following reversion; 
B.  Retention of all previously paid fees if necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section; 
C.  Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits if necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.30.070 - Effect upon recordation. 
Reversion shall be effective upon the final map or parcel map, as the case may be, being filed for record by the recorder, and thereupon all dedications and offers of dedication not shown thereon shall be of no further force or effect. 
When a reversion is effective, all fees and deposits shall be returned and all improvement security released, except those retained pursuant to Section 16.30.060. 
A tax bond shall not be required in reversion proceedings. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975) 
IV. REQUIREMENTS  
Chapter 16.32 - GENERAL 
 
16.32.010 - Compliance with chapter. 
The council shall disapprove a tentative map for failure to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.020 - Compliance with general plan. 
A.  The council shall not approve a tentative map unless it is found that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan required by Article 5 (commencing with Section 65300) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of the Government Code of the state of California, or any specific plan adopted pursuant to Article 8 (commencing with Section 65450) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
B.  A proposed subdivision shall be consistent with the general plan or a specific area plan where the city has officially adopted such a plan, and the proposed subdivision or land use is compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in such a plan. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.030 - Denial of approval—Findings. 
The council shall deny approval of a tentative of final subdivision map if it makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
D.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
E.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the council will approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This section shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the council to determine that the public at large has acquired easement for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.040 - Final map approvals based on compliance with tentative maps. 
The council shall not deny approval of a final subdivision map pursuant to Section 16.32.030 if a tentative map for the proposed subdivision was previously approved, and it is found that the map as presented is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.050 - Parcel map approvals based on compliance with tentative maps. 
The council shall not deny approval of a parcel map if a tentative map for the proposed subdivision was previously approved and if it is found that the map, as presented, is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.060 - Land projects—Approval— Limitations. 
The council shall not approve a final map for any land project, as defined in Section 11000.5 of the Business and Professions Code, unless: 
A.  The city has adopted a specific plan covering the area proposed to be included within the land project; 
B.  The city finds that the proposed land project, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the specific plan for the area. 
This section shall apply to land projects for which tentative maps were approved on or after November 10, 1969. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.32.070 - Sanitary waste considerations. 
The council shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by a California regional water quality control board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code. In the event that the council finds that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violation of requirements of said board, it may disapprove the tentative map or maps of the subdivision. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.34 - DEDICATIONS 
 
16.34.010 - General. 
A tentative map condition may require a subdivider to dedicate or irrevocably offer to dedicate real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutter's rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. Such irrevocable offers may be terminated as provided in Sections 16.34.070 and 16.34.080. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.020 - Roadways—Bicycle paths. 
Whenever a subdivider is required to dedicate roadways to the public, he may also be required to dedicate such additional land as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision, if the subdivision, as shown on the final map thereof, contains two hundred or more parcels. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.030 - Access rights—Waiver. 
Dedication of streets may include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property shown on a final or parcel map as abutting thereon, and if the dedication is accepted, any such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.040 - Acceptance—Rejection of dedications. 
A.  At the time the final map is approved, the council shall also accept, accept subject to improvements, or reject any offer of dedication. 
B.  At the time the parcel map is approved, the council shall also accept, accept subject to improvements, or reject any offer of dedication. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.050 - Rejection of offer—Later acceptance. 
If at the time the final map or parcel map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer or dedication shall remain open and the council may, by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the recorder. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.060 - Waterfront access—Acceptance— Time limit. 
In the case of any subdivision fronting upon any access route or routes from public highways to the bank of the waterway, river or stream and the public easement along a portion of the bank, waterway, river or stream must be accepted within three years after the approval of the final map or parcel map; in the case of any subdivision fronting upon any lake or reservoir which is owned in part or entirely by any public agency including the state, the offer of dedication of public access route or routes from public highways to any water of such lake or reservoir must be accepted within five years after the approval of the final map or parcel map; all other offers of dedication may be accepted at any time. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.070 - Termination of offers— Abandonment. 
Offers of dedication which are covered by Section 16.34.050 may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the abandonment or vacation of street by Part 3 (commencing with Section 940) of Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.080 - Termination of offers—Expiration of time. 
Offers of dedication which are not accepted within the time limits specified in Section 16.34.060 shall be deemed abandoned. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.090 - Effect of reversion or resubdivision on offers. 
Except as provided in Sections 16.30.050, 16.30.060, and 16.30.070, if a resubdivision or reversion to acreage of the tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offer of dedication previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the approval of the map by the council in case of a final map or parcel map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.100 - Time of acceptance. 
Acceptance of offers of dedication on a final map or a parcel map shall not be effective until either the final map is recorded in the office of the recorder or a resolution of acceptance by the council is recorded in such office. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.34.110 - School sites. 
A.  Any subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions in one or more school districts maintaining an elementary school shall dedicate to the school district or district within which such subdivisions are to be located, such land as the council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service. In no case shall the council require the dedication of an amount of land which would make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible or which would exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board. 
B.  This requirement shall not be applicable to a sub-divider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative maps in accordance with this chapter. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If, within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after, the filing of the final map on any portion of the subdivision. The school district shall, in the event that it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts: 
1.  The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider; 
2.  The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district's offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication; 
3.  Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land. 
C.  If the land is not used by the school district as a school site within ten years after dedication, the subdivider shall have the option to repurchase the property from the district for the amount paid therefor. 
D.  The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a certificate with the recorder. The certificate shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property; 
2.  A legal description of the real property dedicated; 
3.  A statement that the subdivider dedicating the property has an option to repurchase the property if it is not used by the school district as a school site within ten years after dedication; 
4.  Proof of the acceptance of the dedication by the school district and the date of acceptance. The certificates shall be recorded not more than ten days after the date of acceptance of the dedication. The subdivider shall have the right to compel the school district to record such certificate, but until such certificate is recorded, any rights acquired by any third party dealing in good faith with the school district shall not be impaired or otherwise affected by the option right of the subdivider. 
E.  If any subdivider is aggrieved by, or fails to agree to the reasonableness of any requirement imposed pursuant to this section, he may bring a special proceeding in the superior court pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.37 of the state of California. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.35 - DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL PURPOSES 
 
16.35.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to words used in this chapter: 
A.  "Commercial" means any space or building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes including sleeping rooms in hotels and motels with or without kitchens. 
B.  "Dwelling unit" means each single-family structure, and each habitation unit of an apartment duplex or multiple-dwelling structure for the purpose of habitation, including guest room or other rooms for purpose of temporary habitation. 
C.  "Industrial" means any space, building or structure designed or intended for manufacturing, processing, research, warehousing and similar uses. 
D.  "Mobile home" means such dwelling units as are portable in nature, including such trailers, vans, buses or other dwelling units as are mobile. 
E.  "Mobile home park" means such subdivisions such as are designed to accommodate mobile homes. 
F.  "Open space" means any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use as herein defined: 
1.  The preservation of natural resources; 
2.  The managed production of resources; 
3.  Outdoor recreation; 
4.  The public health and safety; 
5.  The preservation of aesthetic values; 
6.  The preservation of historic, cultural or scientific values. 
G.  "Park" means the land with or without facilities provided for active and passive recreation. 
H.  "Person" includes every person, firm or corporation. 
I.  "Population" means the aggregate of persons, either inhabiting a dwelling unit, subdivision or the city. 
J.  "Recreation" means active and passive human use of park land for the purpose of physical and/or mental enjoyment, pleasure and exercise; for the public health and safety. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.020 - Requirements. 
As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.030 - General standards. 
A.  It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within this city be devoted to local park and recreation purposes. 
B.  It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that certain lands of the city be open and essentially unimproved and devoted to open space purposes and that such open spaces be consistent with the standards and guidelines of the open space, recreation and conservation element of the city general plan. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.040 - Standards and formula for dedication of land. 
Where a park, recreation or open space use facility has been designated in the open space, recreation and conservation element of the general plan of Scotts Valley, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the additional residents of the city. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula: 
A.  The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows: 
Average number of persons/unit 1,000 population / park acreage standard 
B.  The following table of population density is to be followed: 
Types of Dwellings 	Average 
Density/DU 	Density 
Range 	Average/ 
DU Sac 
Standards 
Single-family 	3.6 	3.3 and up 	.0180 
Duplex, 
medium low 	3.1 	3.0-3.2 	.0155 
Cluster, 
medium 	2.8 	2.6-2.9 	.0140 
Cluster, 
medium - high 	2.3 	2.2-2.5 	.0115 
Apartments 	1.8 	1.5-2.1 	.0090 
Mobile homes 	1.8 	1.1-2.1 	.0090 
 
Dedication of the land shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.050 - Formula for fees in lieu of land dedication. 
A.  General Formula. If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the Scotts Valley open space, recreation and conservation element, to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate or pay a fee or both, for the purpose of providing park, recreation and open space equal to the need generated by the proposed subdivision, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, fees collected in lieu of dedication shall be in accord with subsection A of Section 16.35.040. 
B.  Fees in Lieu of Land—Fifty Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of local park, recreation or open space land required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection A of this section and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Whereas, Section 66477 of the Government Code does not require subdivisions of fifty parcels or less to dedicate land but pay a fee, nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to exclude the acceptance of a dedication in so far as the land offered shall be in accord with the provisions of this chapter, as to the quality and quantity of land dedicated. 
D.  Use of Money. The money collected under this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing park, recreation and open space land and/or facilities related to serving the subdivision by way of purchase and improvement of such lands for park, recreation and open space purposes. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.060 - Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. 
In subdivisions of over fifty lots, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu thereof or both in combination to the satisfaction of the city council, in accordance with the standards and fee schedule formulas established elsewhere in this chapter to the extent of the obligation of the subdivider as established by this chapter. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.070 - Amount of fee in lieu of land dedication. 
Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to dedicate pursuant to Section 16.35.040. The fee shall be paid pursuant to the provisions contained in Section 16.35.040. The fair market value shall be determined at the time of filing the tentative map. Fair market value can be determined on the basis of the unimproved assessed value at the time of filing or upon an independent appraisal, the cost of which is borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.080 - Determination of land or fee. 
A.  Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
1.  Open space, recreation and conservation element of the general plan; 
2.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
3.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
4.  The feasibility of dedication; 
5.  Availability of previously acquired park property; 
6.  The preservation of natural resources; 
7.  The managed production of resources; 
8.  Outdoor recreation; 
9.  The public health and safety; 
10.  The preservation of aesthetic values; 
11.  The preservation of historic, cultural or scientific values. 
B.  The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.090 - Credit for private open space. 
Where private open space for park, recreation and open space purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
A.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
B.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions; and 
C.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park, recreation and open space purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city of its successor; and 
D.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for park, recreation and open space purposes, consistent with the factors detailed in Section 16.35.080; and 
E.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the open space, recreation and conservation element of the general plan; and 
F.  That private park and recreational facilities for which credit is given meet the following minimum criteria: 
	Acres 
Children's play apparatus 	 .50 to  .75 
Landscape park-like and quiet areas 	 .50 to 1.00 
Family picnic area 	 .25 to  .50 
Game court area 	 .25 to  .50 
Turf play field 	1.00 to 3.00 
 
Before credit is given, the city staff shall make written findings that the provisions of the above subsections of this section are met and shall make recommendations to the planning commission and to the park, recreation and cultural activities commission on the basis of these findings. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.100 - Procedure. 
A.  At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to Section 16.35.040 the land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the subdivider. 
B.  At the time of filing the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land or pay the fees as previously determined by the city council. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.110 - Commencement of development. 
At the time of approval of the final subdivision map, the city council shall specify when development of the park and recreational facilities shall be commenced. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
16.35.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes; provided, however, that a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter also shall not apply to industrial subdivisions; nor to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added; nor to parcel maps for a subdivision containing less than five parcels for a shopping center containing more than three hundred thousand square feet of gross leasable area and no residential development or uses. (Ord. 64.2 (part), 1978)  
Chapter 16.36 - PUBLIC ACCESS TO LAKES AND RESERVOIRS 
 
16.36.010 - Required. 
The city shall not approve the tentative map of any subdivision fronting upon any lake or reservoir which is owned in part or entirely by any public agency including the state, which subdivision does not provide or have available reasonable access by fee or easement from public highways to any water of the lake or reservoir upon which the subdivision borders either within the sub-division or a reasonable distance from the subdivision. Any public access route or routes provided by the subdivider shall be expressly designated on the tentative and final map or parcel map, and such maps shall expressly designate the governmental entity to which such route or routes are dedicated and its acceptance of such dedication. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.36.020 - Determined by council. 
Reasonable access, as used in Section 16.36.010, shall be determined by the council. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.36.030 - Considerations. 
In making the determination of what shall be reasonable access, the city shall consider: 
A.  That access may be by highway, foot trail, bike trail, horse trail, or any other means of travel; 
B.  The size of the subdivision; 
C.  The type of shoreline and the various appropriate recreational, educational, and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, swimming, diving, boating, fishing, water skiing, scientific exploration, and teaching; 
D.  The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespasses. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.36.040 - Alternate access allowed. 
Nothing in this section shall require the council, to disapprove a tentative, parcel or final map solely on the basis that the reasonable access otherwise required by this section is not provided through or across the subdivision itself, if it is found that such reasonable access is otherwise available within a reasonable distance from the subdivision. 
Any finding shall be set forth on the face of the tentative and final map or parcel map. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.36.050 - Provisions not applicable—When. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the final map or parcel map of any subdivision for which the tentative map has been previously approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.36.060 - Route may be transferred by governmental entity. 
Any access route or routes provided by the subdivider pursuant to this section may be conveyed or transferred to any state or local agency by the governmental entity to which such route or routes have been dedicated, at any future time, by mutual consent of such governmental entity and the particular state or local agency. Such conveyance or transfer shall be recorded by the recipient state or local agency in the office of the recorder. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the subdivider to improve any route or routes which are primarily for the benefit of nonresidents of the subdivision area or nonowners of the real property in question. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.38 - FEES 
 
16.38.010 - Maps and plans. 
Fees in amounts to be established by resolution of the council shall accompany the submittal of tentative maps, parcel maps and final maps. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.38.020 - Appeals, complaint, and time extensions. 
Fees in amounts to be established by resolution of the council shall accompany appeals and complaints filed pursuant to Section 16.16.090 and also for requests for extension of time for tentative maps. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.38.030 - Improvement plan checking and construction inspection. 
Fees shall be paid for improvement plan checking and construction inspection as specified in Section 16.48.010. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.39 - STORM DRAINAGE FEES 
 
16.39.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Subterranean storm drains shall be designed and installed by a subdivider or developer of land to adequately and safely drain all stormwaters of the subdivision or development, and all surface waters reaching or reasonably calculated to reach the subdivision or development from areas outside of its boundaries and to drain the same to a natural water course. Drainage to a water course shall be either by direct discharge into the same, or by connection with adjacent existing storm drains already discharging into a water course and of a capacity sufficient, in the opinion of the city engineer to adequately and safely carry all of such additional drainage. 
B.  The storm drain system shall consist of mains not less than twelve inches in diameter, together with such manholes, catch basins, laterals and other structures, and at such grades, as required by the city engineer to conform to good drainage requirements for the area and topography of the subdivision or development to prevent standing of flooding waters within and outside of its boundaries. 
C.  In addition, the subdivider or developer shall comply with all reasonable conditions, laws and regulations imposed by any national, state, county or local jurisdiction having regulatory responsibility to discharge the waters into a water course. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1978)  
16.39.020 - Establishing drainage construction fund. 
There is established a drainage construction fund for construction of drainage facilities serving new buildings, improvements (including but not limited to paving) or structures to be constructed within the city, which, as determined by the city engineer, substantially impair the perviousness of the surface of land. (Ord. 80 § 2 (part), 1978)  
16.39.030 - Storm drainage fee. 
The subdivider or developer shall pay a storm drainage fee as established by resolution of the city council. If the parcel is in the Butler Lane Improvement District, storm drainage fees shall be deemed paid. If the parcel is in the Mount Hermon Road Storm Drainage District, sixty percent of the storm drainage fees shall be deemed paid under that District. (Ord. 80.1 § 1.00, 1980: Ord. 80 § 2 (part), 1978)  
16.39.040 - Payment of fees. 
Payment of fees shall be prior to issuance of a building permit for development of land and prior to the filing of a subdivision map, record of survey map, or parcel map. The applicant for the permit or for filing of the map shall certify to the number of square feet in each lot and/or area of impervious pavement, structure, etc. (Ord. 80 § 2 (part), 1978)  
16.39.050 - Total drainage cost obligation. 
The maximum obligation of expense in providing drainage facilities incurred by a subdivider or developer of land shall be the cost of installing all drainage facilities for or in connection with the property to be subdivided or developed required by the city engineer, or the amount of the drainage fees whichever is greater. (Ord. 80 § 3 (part), 1978)  
16.39.060 - Deductions from required fees. 
The city engineer, at his discretion, may allow a credit of up to seventy-five percent of the required fees when the required drainage improvements exceeds the amount of the drainage fee as determined by council resolution, and drainage improvements are required by the city engineer to be designed, sized, constructed, or located for the special, as distinguished from incidental, benefit of land other than that being subdivided or developed. (Ord. 80 § 3 (part), 1978)  
16.39.070 - Reimbursement agreements. 
When the estimated cost of required drainage facilities exceed the amount of drainage fees as determined by council resolution, and drainage facilities are required by the city engineer to be designed, sized, or located for the special, as distinguished from incidental, benefit of land other than that being subdivided or developed, the city council may, in its discretion and at the request of the applicant, enter into a written agreement with the subdivider of developer providing for reimbursement for a portion of the excess cost of the drainage improvements. The amount of such reimbursement shall be in the agreement, and shall not exceed that portion of the cost of installing the drainage improvements as is attributable to the special benefit for the land other than that being subdivided or developed. The exclusive source of funds for reimbursement shall be, and the city's liability under the agreement is limited to, any drainage fees which may be collected by the city in the future as a result of development of the property specially benefited within such term of years as is prescribed by the agreement. All such agreements shall be executed and effective on or before the approval of the final map in the case of subdivisions, or before the recordation of the parcel map in the case of 10+ divisions, and on or before the issuance of a building permit in the case of developments. (Ord. 80 § 3 (part), 1978)  
16.39.080 - Appeals and appeal fees. 
A.  Any person shall have the right of appeal of any requirement or fee imposed by the city engineer as provided in this chapter to the city administrator. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be within thirty days of receipt or notification of requirements. Upon receipt of written reply by the city administrator or within thirty days of appeal to the city administrator, the applicant may appeal such decisions or requirements to the city council. The action of the city council shall be final and binding thereafter. 
B.  The fee for filing an appeal as provided in this section or under the provisions of section 11552 of the Business and Professions Code of the state shall be fixed by council resolution. (Ord. 80 § 4, 1978)  
Chapter 16.40 - SOILS REPORT 
 
16.40.010 - Preliminary. 
A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer, specializing in soil and foundation engineering, who is registered in California, and based upon adequate test borings, shall be required for every subdivision for which a final map is required by this chapter. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.40.020 - Waiver. 
The preliminary soils report may be waived if the council determines that due to the knowledge it has, as to the qualities of the soils of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.40.030 - Further investigation. 
If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a more detailed soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required prior to approval of the final map or parcel map. 
Such detailed soils investigation shall be done by a civil engineer, specializing in soils and foundation engineering, registered in California, who shall recommend procedures or establish structural design criteria which are likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problems exist. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.40.040 - Corrective action—Approval. 
The council may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where such soils problems exist if it is determined that the recommended procedures or the use of the recommended structural design criteria are likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that said procedures or structural design criteria be incorporated in the design and construction of each structure. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.42 - TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS 
 
16.42.010 - Auditor-controller's certification. 
Concurrent with the filing of the final map with the council, the subdivider shall provide on the face of the map, a certificate from the county auditor-controller, as specified in Section 16.10.240. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.42.020 - Security-liens. 
A.  Security, taxes, and assessments. Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the clerk of the board, security conditioned upon the payment of all state, county, municipal and local taxes and current installment of principal and interest of all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. The security shall be included as part of the agreement notice in Section 16.52.010. 
B.  Amount of security. If the land being subdivided is a portion of a larger parcel shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit, the security for payment of taxes need be only for such sum as may be determined by the county to be sufficient to pay the current and delinquent taxes on the land being subdivided, together with all accrued penalties and costs if such taxes have been or are allowed to become delinquent. The county shall also order the creation of new assessor's parcel numbers pursuant to Section 2823 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. Separate assessor's parcel numbers shall be given to the portion of the larger parcel which is not within the proposed subdivision and to the parcel or parcels which are within the proposed subdivision. 
If the land being subdivided is sold for taxes, it may be redeemed for such sale without the redemption of the remainder of the larger parcel of which it is a part pursuant to the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code as if it were held in ownership separate from and other than the ownership of the remainder. 
C.  Payment of Assessment Bonds. Whenever land subject to a special assessment or bond which may be paid in full is divided by the line of a lot or parcel of the subdivision, such assessment or bond shall be paid in full, or security filed with the clerk of the board, payable to the county as trustee for the assessment bond holders for the payment of such special assessment or bond. This section shall not apply to bonds issued under the provisions of the Improvement Bond Act of 1915. 
D.  Delinquency—Remedy. If the taxes or special assessments are allowed to become delinquent, the county shall recover from the security the principal sum of the security without proof of loss. The county shall apply the sum received in payment of any or all of such taxes or special assessments, including penalties and costs, if any, accruing thereto, to the proper state, county, municipal, or district officers, for the satisfaction of the tax and special assessment liens and shall pay the balance, if any, over to the surety or depositor. 
E.  Delinquency—Remedy. If the taxes or special assessments are allowed to become delinquent and the security consists of a deposit of money, negotiable bond or instrument of credit, the clerk, subject to any rules of the board with respect thereto, shall apply the proceeds thereof to the payment of such taxes and special assessments, including penalties and costs. Any excess proceeds shall be deposited in the county treasury for the benefit of the persons entitled thereto. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975) 
V. IMPROVEMENTS  
Chapter 16.44 - GENERAL 
 
16.44.010 - Criteria. 
Improvement requirements on subdivisions will generally be specified as conditions of approval of the tentative map. The criteria for the design of the improvements shall be those that are adopted from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 64.3 § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.44.020 - Additional requirements. 
In addition to the design criteria referred to in Section 16.44.010, unless otherwise modified by the city council, the following shall apply: 
A.  Dead end streets shall conform to the following lengths in the below listed land use classifications. Any street which passes through two, or more, classifications shall adhere to the length listed for the most intensive use through which the street passes. 
Land Use Category Designated 
on the General Plan 	Length 
High residential 	300 feet 
Medium 	500 feet 
Low 	700 feet 
Very low 	1000 feet 
Rural 	2000 feet 
Mountain 	No requirement 
Commercial/prof. offices 	Length shall be approved byScotts Valley Fire District 
Research industrial 	" 
Mixed use 	" 
Institutions/facilities 	" 
 
B.  Streets and highways shall intersect one another at angles as near to a right angle as is practical in each specific case, and no intersections shall be at angles of less than thirty degrees. 
C.  Streets intersecting at an angle other than ninety degrees may require the use of setback lines, special rounding of corners, traffic circle of other device to assure desirable results as to traffic movement, visibility and safety. 
D.  If the centerlines of two streets, intercepting the same street from opposite directions are offset from each other, said offset shall be a minimum distance of two hundred feet measured along the centerline of the street intercepted. (Ord. 64.3 § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.44.030 - Planned unit developments. 
Where, in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, the land is zoned so as to authorize a planned unit development on the land or a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided or for which such rezoning proceedings are in process, the plan of the subdivision shall be appropriate for the planned unit development. Exceptions to the subdivision regulations which are necessary to make the planned unit development practical may be authorized by the council and shall be noted as conditions on the planned unit development permit. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.44.040 - Requirements tied to parcel maps. 
Improvement requirements for the subdivisions, for which parcel maps are required, shall be specified as a condition of the tentative map approval. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.46 - IMPROVEMENT PLANS 
 
16.46.010 - Requirements tied to final maps. 
After approval of the tentative map for which a final map is required, but before starting any construction work, the subdivider or his authorized representative shall submit two complete sets of improvement plans to the city engineer for his review and approval not later than six weeks prior to the expiration date of the tentative map. Said plans shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is licensed to practice civil engineering in the state of California. The improvements shall include, but not be limited to, site grading, drainage, erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, street construction, sewer construction and landscaping. 
The city engineer shall within twenty-five days after receipt of the plans, send a checklist or a marked-up print to the subdivider or his authorized representative upon which will be noted recommended or required revisions. After all necessary changes are made, the original tracings shall be submitted to the city engineer for his signature to indicate approval. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.46.020 - Approval of plans. 
The approval of the improvement plans by the city engineer shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the final map by the council. The approval of the improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the same. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.48 - PLAN CHECK AND INSPECTION FEES 
 
16.48.010 - Generally. 
A.  The subdivider shall pay the city engineer the actual cost of checking the improvement plans, inspecting the work, testing the materials, and preparing as-built plans. 
B.  At the time of submittal of the improvement plans for checking a deposit of twenty-five dollars shall be made towards the actual cost of checking the plans. Prior to release of the approved plans by the city engineer the subdivider shall pay any balance due. The cash deposit shall not be refunded if the subdivision is abandoned and no improvements are constructed. 
C.  To assure payment of the construction inspection and materials testing costs, the subdivider shall make a cash deposit or provide a bond to the city in the amount of three percent of the engineer's estimate of the cost of improvements as accepted by the city engineer. This security shall be included as part of the agreement as noted in Section 16.52.010. Immediately prior to acceptance of the tract improvements by the city, the construction inspection and materials testing costs will be totaled and billed to the subdivider. Where a bond has been posted, payment in full shall be made, or where a cash deposit has been made, the balance due shall be paid prior to the city acceptance of the improvements, unless a refund is due the subdivider. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.50 - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 
 
16.50.010 - Superintendence. 
The contractor shall designate, in writing, before starting work, an authorized representative who shall have complete authority to represent and act for the contractor. The authorized representative or his agent shall be present at the site of the work at all times while the work is actually in progress. During periods when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the director of public works shall be made for any emergency work which may be required. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.50.020 - Access for inspection. 
The director of public works shall, at all times, have access to the work site during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for ascertaining that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the requirements and intentions of the approved improvement plans, and approved special provisions which may be a part of the project. All work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to his inspection and approval. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any of his obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed. Work and materials not meeting such requirements may be rejected, notwithstanding that such work or materials have been previously inspected by the director of public works. Any superintendent, foreman, laborer, or other person employed on the work by the contractor, who performs his work in an unsatisfactory manner, or who is disorderly, intemperate, or incompetent, shall, upon request of the director of public works, be removed from the site immediately, and such person shall not again be employed on the job. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.50.030 - Notification—Required inspections. 
The director of public works shall make such inspections as he deems necessary and shall be notified twenty-four hours in advance of any required inspection. Minimum inspection requirements follow: 
A.  The inspection of clearing and grubbing work before grading operations are started in any cut or fill area; 
B.  The inspection and compaction testing of subgrade before the placing of sub-base, base, and surfacing; 
C.  The inspection of storm drain and sewer pipe installation and backfill, including compaction testing; 
D.  The inspection and compaction testing of sub-base and base prior to paving; 
E.  The inspection of all penetration treatment, seal coat, and paving while the work is in progress. 
F.  The inspection of concrete forms. 
G.  The inspection of concrete while being placed. 
H.  Final inspection. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.52 - IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT AND SECURITIES 
 
16.52.010 - Agreement. 
If the improvements specified for a subdivision for which a final map is required have not been completed prior to filing the final map, the subdivider shall, concurrent with the acceptance of the final map, enter into an agreement with the council agreeing to have the work completed within a specified time. Standard agreement forms are available upon demand from the city engineer. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.52.020 - Security—Bonds—Deposits. 
To assure satisfactory completion of the improvement, securities in the form of either: 
A.  Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate securities. 
B.  A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies, certificates of deposit assigned to the city and kept in the name of the city, and/or any passbook assigned to the city and in the name of the city, for funds held on deposit by any financial institution subject to regulation by the state or federal government. 
C.  An instrument of credit from a financial institution, subject to state or federal regulations, pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the terms of the agreement on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution. 
The forms to be used for subsection A or C above, will be those furnished by the city engineer upon request. (Ord. 64.6 § 1, 1991: Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.52.030 - Securities to be furnished. 
The securities to be furnished are as follows: 
A.  For "faithful performance" the amount of one hundred percent of the cost of the improvements as determined by the subdivision engineer and accepted by the director of public works, to guarantee faithful completion of the work; and 
B.  For "materials and labor" the amount of fifty per- cent of the cost of improvements as determined by the subdivision engineer and accepted by the city engineer to guarantee payment to material men and laborers furnishing materials, equipment, or labor in connection with the subdivision improvements; 
C.  Such other securities as may be needed in accordance with Sections 16.10.180, 16.10.200, 16.42.020A and 16.48.010. 
D.  As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the city in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.54 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
16.54.010 - Buildable lots. 
The approval of any tentative, final or parcel map shall not be deemed approval of the particular lot or lots as a building site. It is understood that before a building permit may be issued for a particular lot, all local, state and federal laws and regulations must be fully complied with. It is further understood that no representations or assurances have been made or given to any person that the particular lots shown on the tentative, final or parcel maps, which have been approved by the council, are or will be buildable lots. 
The council may refuse, to approve a tentative, final and/or parcel map if the council finds, from the evidence presented to it, that the lot or lots created by such division would not be buildable lots. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
16.54.020 - River or stream. 
The council shall not approve either a tentative or a final map of any proposed subdivision to be fronted upon a public waterway, river or stream which does not provide for a dedication of a public easement along a portion of a bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision all as more particularly set forth in Government Code Section 66478.5. (Ord. 64 § 3 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 16.56 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
16.56.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (§ 66410 et seq. of the Government Code) and the Subdivision Ordinance (Section 16.02.010 et seq. of this title). Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
B.  To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.040 - Definitions. 
A.  A "vesting tentative map" shall mean a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in the subdivision ordinance (Section 16.02.010 of this title [hereinafter all references to subdivision ordinance are to the aforesaid provisions]), that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words vesting tentative map at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.56.060 of this chapter, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the subdivision ordinance are applicable. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the subdivision map act, as implemented and supplemented by the subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Article II. - Procedures 
 
16.56.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the subdivision ordinance for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words vesting tentative map. 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a sub-divider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  Height, size and location of buildings; 
2.  Sewer, water, storm drain and road details; 
3.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put; 
4.  Detailed grading plans; 
5.  Geological studies; 
6.  Flood control information; 
7.  Architectural plans; 
8.  Any other information normally deferred to the building permit stage. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the city for the filing and processing of a tentative map. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Article 3. - Development Rights 
 
16.56.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code § 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to in this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.56.080 of this chapter. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of twenty-four months beyond the date of recording of the final map. 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section, shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in sub-section (C)(1) of this section, expires. Any such extension request shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance relating to extensions of time for tentative maps. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, the rights referred to in this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.56.090(A), of this chapter, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.56.090(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
16.56.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 16.56.090 of this chapter, and such approvals or permits may be granted to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 64.4 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Chapter 16.58 - IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
 
16.58.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that in order to implement the goals and objectives of the circulation element of the general plan of the city and to mitigate the cumulative impacts to the city's transportation system caused by new development in the city, certain public roadway and intersection improvements to the transportation system need to be constructed. The city council determines that a cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee (herein "fee") is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of their construction and related costs. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council finds the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
B.  The city council further finds that all new development contributes to cumulative traffic impacts, which are significant, widespread, off-site impacts to the transportation system that are difficult to measure and mitigate on a project-by-project basis, yet are cumulatively measurable and mitigable. The city has completed a city-wide transportation study entitled "Scotts Valley Citywide Transportation Study - Final Report" dated November 1988, and prepared by TJKM Transportation Consultants. In addition, a report has been prepared by the director of public works/city engineer, dated November 15, 1988, and entitled "Cumulative Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee." The study and the report are on file in the office of the city clerk and with the public works department. 
C.  The study identifies the total cumulative traffic impacts of projected new development and the method for determining each individual new development's share of that traffic impact. 
D.  The cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee will assure that each new development bears the burden of its individual, incremental share of those improvements determined to be necessary to assist in accommodating the cumulative traffic impacts caused by new development. The fee shall be for the future construction of transportation system improvements described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.52.020 (and as the resolution may be amended from time to time thereafter). 
E.  These cumulative traffic impacts and the referenced improvements needed to mitigate them, as well as the fee established pursuant to Section 16.52.020, are over and above and separate from and independent of, any street improvements and traffic-related improvements including, without limitation, frontage improvements, street and intersection improvements that provide circulation within a development or access to it, and off-site improvements, which are necessary to serve a development and which the developer is required to construct as a condition of approval of his development, all of which are required under other city ordinances (including, without limitation, the zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance). (Ord. 16.73 § 1, 1988)  
16.58.020 - Cumulative traffic impact mitigation fees—Resolution setting fee. 
A cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee is established on issuance of all building permits for development in the city to pay for transportation system improvements attributable thereto. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments, as well as any other pertinent provisions or matters it determines appropriate, all in conformance with the applicable provisions of Sections 66000 et seq. of the Government Code. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the cumulative impacts of developments on the city transportation system and whether the described public facilities are still needed, require modification or should be replaced by other public facilities necessary to mitigate cumulative impacts to the city's transportation system caused by new development. (Ord. 16.73 § 2, 1988)  
16.58.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "City administrator" means and refers to the city administrator of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
B.  "Director of public works" or "director" means and refers to the director of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
C.  "Gross square footage (G.S.F.)" means all of the floor area confined by the outside surface of the exterior walls of a building, except for that floor area devoted solely to vehicle parking or circulation. 
D.  "New development" means any construction, addition, enlargement, installation, conversion, or renovation of a structure that requires the issuance of a building permit and that has the potential to add one or more peak trips to the city's transportation network. 
E.  "Peak trip" means an arrival or departure of a motor vehicle generated by a development during the hour of the highest volume of traffic on the street network in the vicinity of the development. For residential developments peak trips are expressed on a per dwelling unit basis. For commercial and industrial developments peak trips are expressed on a per one thousand gross square footage basis or equivalency. (Ord. 16.73 § 3, 1988)  
16.58.040 - Limited use of fee. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall, subject to Section 16.58.110, be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the city's future construction of improvements described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.58.020 (and as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter), or to reimburse the city for those described improvements constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 16.58.140, to construct such improvements which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity, all in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 16.58.140. (Ord 16.73 § 4, 1988)  
16.58.050 - Development subject to the fee. 
Except for the exempt categories of new development listed in Section 16.58.060, all new development for which a building permit is required for construction or reconstruction is subject to the payment of the cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee established pursuant to Section 16.58.020. (Ord. 16.73 § 5, 1988)  
16.58.060 - Exemptions. 
The following categories of new development are exempt from the fee: 
A.  The addition, extension, conversion, enlargement, or renovation of a residential structure that does not add one or more dwelling units, as defined in the city building code and/or zoning ordinance. 
B.  New development that has been heretofore required or conditionally required by the city to pay to or place on deposit with the city a fee or assessment or an enhanced fee or assessment as a condition of approval of a discretionary development permit, if the purpose of the fee as stated in the permit conditions of approval was to mitigate the project's share of cumulative traffic impacts. The planning department shall provide the building department with a current list of projects that shall receive this exemption. (Ord. 16.73 § 6, 1988)  
16.58.070 - Time of fee payment. 
A.  Fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the director of public works on or before the date of final inspection or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, fees may be required to be paid at an earlier time if (a) it is determined that the fees will be collected for public improvements or facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated and for which the city has adopted a proposed construction schedule or plan prior to final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or (b) the fees are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made. The determinations herein referenced shall be made by the city administrator (or his duly authorized representative) or the city council. "Appropriated," as used in this subsection, means authorization by the city council to make expenditures and incur obligations for specific purposes. 
B.  No city official or department shall authorize release of utilities for any new development that is subject to the fee under Section 16.58.050 until notification is received from the director of public works that all cumulative traffic impact mitigation fees required by this chapter have been paid or no fees are required of the project due to fee credits or reductions received according to Sections 16.58.120, 16.58.130 or 16.58.140. 
C.  Upon an applicant's request, the building official may authorize temporary release of utilities prior to final inspection, as an aid to construction, if the applicant deposits with the director of public works a certificate of deposit equal to the amount of required fees, and the director notifies the building official of the receipt of said deposit. 
D.  In the event fees are not paid when due, no further inspections or approvals shall be given by the city with respect to said development, and no final inspection, certificate of occupancy, or utility release of occupancy shall be given with respect thereto until such fees or such portion thereof as is then due, has been paid in full. 
E.  "Final inspection" or "certificate of occupancy," as used herein, have the same meaning as described in Sections 305 and 307 of the Uniform Building Code, International Conference of Building Officials, 1985 Edition. "Utility release of occupancy," as used herein, refers to release of a building by the city for the purpose of being authorized to receive utility service. (Ord. 16.73 § 7, 1988)  
16.58.080 - Fee liability determination and calculation. 
A.  Each applicant, upon application for a building permit for new development, shall submit the following information to the director of public works on a form provided by the director, and shall provide such additional information as may be requested by the director for greater accuracy: 
1.  The proposed number and type of residential units and/or gross square footage of building area for each use category listed in Section 16.58.090; 
2.  The existing number and type of residential units and/or gross square footage of building area for which a credit is sought under Sections 16.58.120, 16.58.130 or 16.58.140; and 
3.  The proposed and existing uses in the development shall be assigned to use categories according to the list established pursuant to Section 16.58.100. 
B.  If the new development does not fit within any category of use set forth in the list established pursuant to Section 16.58.100, then the director of public works shall calculate the fee based upon trip generation rates specific to the type of development, using the cost-per-trip formulation shown in Section 16.58.090. 
C.  All fees shall be calculated by the director in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 16.58.020. 
D.  The building permit issued for new development shall indicate whether a cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee is required to be paid and, if so, the amount and the time of payment. (Ord. 16.73 § 8, 1988)  
16.58.090 - Fee rates and calculation formula. 
As provided in Section 16.58.020, the city council shall adopt a resolution establishing a cumulative traffic impact mitigation fee schedule that sets forth fee rates for development. The fee rates shall be determined for the following land use categories in accordance with the formula set forth below: 
FEE RATES 
Land Use 
Single-family dwelling 
Multi-family dwelling 
Commercial 
Industrial 
Cost Per Trip 
$   per peak trip 
Fee Calculation Formula 

Number of units 		Fee rate 		Required fee 
or 	X 	or 	= 	or 
Gross. Square Footage* 		cost per trip** 		Credit for existing 
1000 				development 
 
* Gross square footage is divided by 1000. 
** The applicable fee rate shall be used in calculations for all projects, except that cost per trip shall be used in accordance with Section 16.58.080(B). Fee rate consists of cost per trip X peak trip-generation rate (per dwelling unit in the case of residential development and per 1000 gross square footage in the case of commercial and industrial development). 
The single-family land use category represents all single-family residential uses in the city's zoning ordinance and corresponds to the same category set forth in the study referenced in Section 16.58.010. 
The multi-family land use category represents all multifamily residential uses in the city's zoning ordinance and corresponds to the same category set forth in the aforesaid study. 
The commercial land use category includes all commercial uses (including, without limitation, professional office uses) in the city's zoning ordinance and corresponds to the same land use category set forth in said study. 
The industrial land use category includes all industrial uses in the city's zoning ordinance and corresponds to the same land use category set forth in said study. (Ord. 16.73 § 9, 1988)  
16.58.100 - Guide to categorizing uses. 
The director of public works shall maintain a list of the types of new development that fall within the land use categories shown in Section 16.58.090, to assist in determining the fee rates that should apply to a particular project. (Ord. 16.73 § 10, 1988)  
16.58.110 - Transportation system capital facilities plan. 
A.  The improvements described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.58.020, and any subsequent amendments, changes, additions or deletions thereto, shall be set forth in a transportation system capital facilities plan. The plan shall, among other things, prioritize the improvements to be constructed. The city shall adopt an operating budget in connection with said plan. The plan and operating budget shall be adopted at such time as the city council determines appropriate in the exercise of its discretion. The plan may be a separate plan or may be part of a capital facilities plan that treats other services and facilities provided by the city including, without limitation, sewer and storm drainage. 
B.  The fees collected under this chapter and all earnings from investment of the fees shall not be expended or committed for any improvement described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.58.020 (and any subsequent amendment thereof) until such time as (1) the aforesaid plan is adopted by the city council and (2) the improvement project has been processed in accordance with the law and approved by the city council. 
C.  The fees collected under this chapter and all earnings from investment of the fees shall be expended solely for funding the costs of the aforesaid improvements. These costs are deemed to be costs directly related to mitigation of the cumulative impacts that new development in the city places upon the transportation system. The costs to be covered by the fee may include without limitation, costs of construction, land and right-of-way acquisition, engineering, and other relevant costs; provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, the fee established pursuant to Section 16.58.020 and the costs to be covered thereby, shall be consistent with and subject to applicable requirements and limitations of Government Code Section 66000(b) and any other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 16.73 § 11, 1988)  
16.58.120 - Fee credits for elimination of existing development or replacement of development destroyed by casualty. 
A.  New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is entitled to a fee credit, if the existing development is a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use. 
B.  New development that will replace development that is partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or act of God, is entitled to a fee credit, if the development that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use, at the time thereof. 
C.  Credit for such eliminated development or development that is partially or totally destroyed (as above specified) shall be calculated by the director of public works in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 16.58.020 and shall be applied to new development on the same site. (Ord. 16.73 § 12, 1988)  
16.58.130 - In-lieu fee credits for construction of improvements. 
A.  An applicant that has been required by the city to construction any transportation system improvement(s) (or a portion thereof) described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.58.020 as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of cumulative traffic impact mitigation fees for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be granted for improvements that mitigate all or a portion of a development's share of cumulative traffic impacts. 
B.  Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement that mitigates cumulative impacts shall be eligible for in-lieu credit. 
C.  The applicant shall submit a traffic study and/or other documentation as may be appropriate, using methods acceptable to the director of public works, to support the application for in-lieu credit. The approval authority for the development permit shall determine whether improvements are eligible for in-lieu credit. 
D.  Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the in-lieu improvements, as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the director of public works. If the cost of in-lieu improvements is greater than required fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the city to pay the applicant the excess amount. 
E.  An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the fees required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the director of public works. The director of public works may set a time limit for reservation of the credit. No interest shall accrue to the credit over time. 
F.  Credits shall be calculated by the director of public works in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 16.58.020. (Ord. 16.73 § 13, 1988)  
16.58.140 - Construction of improvements with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct any transportation system improvement(s) (or a portion thereof) described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.58.020 which improvement is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed to mitigate the cumulative traffic impacts of the development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the improvement or the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall be applied with respect to that portion of the improvement which is attributable to mitigation of the cumulative traffic impacts caused by the development; and shall be determined, administered and processed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 16.58.130. The amount to be reimbursed shall be that portion of the cost of the improvement related to providing supplemental size, length or capacity in excess of that attributable to mitigation of the cumulative traffic impacts caused by the development. The reimbursement agreement shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the city, and shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 16.73 § 14, 1988)  
16.58.150 - Fee adjustments. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 16.58.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the cumulative traffic impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities or improvements to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the discretionary development permit application for the project, or if no discretionary development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the discretionary development permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later; or within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application if no discretionary development permit is required. The decision of the city council shall be final. The hearing on the matter shall be noticed, conducted and concluded in the same fashion and manner as prescribed by the laws of the city for hearings on discretionary development permits. (Ord. 16.73 § 15, 1988)  
16.58.160 - Refunds. 
Refunds of unexpended or uncommitted fees required pursuant to law shall be made to the then current record owner or owners of the development project or projects on a prorated basis. (Ord. 16.73 § 16, 1988)  
16.58.170 - Enforcement. 
A.  In case of noncompliance with this chapter, the cumulative traffic impact mitigation fees and interest that would have accumulated shall be calculated from the date that construction was completed and not from the date of discovery, complaint, or enforcement. 
B.  Payment of fees shall be enforced as a lien on the property. (Ord. 16.73 § 17, 1988)  
16.58.180 - Performance. 
Failure of any city official or department to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any applicant from payment of cumulative traffic impact mitigation fees required by this chapter. (Ord. 16.73 § 18, 1988)  
16.58.190 - Severability. 
A.  If any clause, section, or part of this chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity, is found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this chapter, or such person or entity, and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, sections, or parts of this chapter or the effect of the chapter on other persons or entities. 
B.  It is declared to be the intention of the city council of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid clause, sentence, section, or part of this chapter not been included herein, or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this chapter. To this end the provisions of the chapter are severable. (Ord. 16.73 § 19, 1988)  
Title 17 - ZONING  
Chapter 17.02 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
 
17.02.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Title of the City of Scotts Valley." 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.020 - Adoption of zoning regulations and zoning map. 
A.  This chapter establishes comprehensive zoning regulations for the city, which regulations shall consist of the following: 
1.  Regulations, known as zoning regulations, governing the use of land and the placement of buildings and improvements within the various classes of districts; and 
2.  A map, or set of maps, known as the zoning map, establishing and delineating various classes of districts within the city. 
B.  The zoning regulations and zoning map shall govern the use of land, including the construction, alteration, movement, replacement or maintenance of buildings; the conduct and density of residential, commercial, industrial and public service activities; the areas and dimensions of sites; the appearance, design, height, bulk and placement of structures on each site; the provision of open space, amenities, off-street parking and loading; the relationships between buildings and uses on adjoining sites or within adjoining classes of districts; and such further aspects of land use and development as are appropriate to attain the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.030 - Purpose. 
There is adopted, as provided herein, a zoning ordinance for the City of Scotts Valley, California, said ordinance being a precise, detailed plan for the use of land in the city based upon the goals and policies in the General Plan and enacted in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare throughout the city and to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To encourage the most appropriate use of land and the harmonious relationship among land uses; 
B.  To promote a safe and efficient traffic circulation system; 
C.  To provide adequate open space; 
D.  To prevent the overcrowding of land and the undue concentration of population, and to help ensure safety from fire and other dangers; 
E.  To facilitate the approval of and encourage the adequate provision of needed community facilities; 
F.  To conserve and stabilize the value of property; and 
G.  To conserve the city's natural beauty, to improve its appearance and to preserve and enhance its distinctive physical character. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.040 - Scope. 
This title has been prepared in accordance with the following principles: 
A.  The title is based on the goals and policies in the Scotts Valley General Plan regarding the general pattern of future land uses, population densities and other principles for future land development. 
B.  The city recognizes that all land uses should be protected from other uses which are unrelated or incompatible. Each zoning district is exclusive with respect to every other zoning district. Industrial districts are protected from encroachment by residential uses. 
C.  The importance to the public welfare of order and beauty in the appearance of Scotts Valley, implemented through provisions for the review of site plans and the design of structures, is further acknowledged. Such provisions are intended to provide the minimum regulation necessary to encourage attractive and orderly design. 
D.  Industrial and commercial uses are subject to performance standards to control potential nuisances and protect other land uses in the vicinity of said uses. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.050 - Conformity to regulations—Uses in existence before ordinance adoption. 
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct or occupy any building or structure, or carry on or engage in any occupation or use, within the corporate limits of the city except as permitted by the regulations adopted in this title. Any use or occupation of land or of any building or structure existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is not permitted by the provisions hereof but which did exist therein as a lawful nonconforming use, may continue under the provisions of this title as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.060 - Uses unlawful under prior regulations. 
Any use or occupation of land or of any building or structure existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which was not a use legally existing under the provisions of the ordinances and resolutions in effect immediately prior thereto shall not by this title be perpetuated, and shall not be continued under the terms of this title as a lawful nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.070 - Interpretation of zoning ordinance. 
The city's interpretation and application of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare. Where this title imposes a greater restriction than other rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control. It is not intended by this title to abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any deed restriction, covenant, easement or other agreement between parties; provided, that where this title imposes a greater restriction on the use of land or structures or requires greater open space, this title shall control. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.080 - Application forms prescribed by city council. 
The form of application for change of zoning, use permits, variances or other permits as referenced in this title shall be as prescribed by the city council of the City of Scotts Valley. Any such forms in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which related to any applications covering the same subjects referenced in this title may continue to be used, except as may otherwise be specifically provided herein, until such time as the same may hereafter be modified, changed or superseded. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.090 - Establishment and payment of application fees. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees and costs for processing the various applications referenced in this title. No application shall be deemed filed or complete until all documents required in connection with such application have been submitted and all required fees and costs have been paid in full. Any such resolutions in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which established a schedule of fees and costs for processing any applications that are the same as those referenced in this title, shall continue to be effective for all purposes except as may herein or hereinafter be amended, modified, repealed or rescinded. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.100 - Appointments to commissions, committees and boards. 
All appointments heretofore made to any commission, committee or board, under and pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, which commission, committee or board is provided for in the ordinance codified in this title, shall continue in full force and effect in all respects including, but not limited to the nature and length of the term of office or appointment, as though such appointments had been made under and pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.110 - Applicability. 
This title shall apply to all property within the city. Unincorporated territory within the planning area shall also be under the jurisdiction of this title once annexed. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.02.120. - Uses unlawful under state and/or federal law. 
No use which violates California state law and/or federal law shall be permitted in any zoning district in the City of Scotts Valley. 
(Ord. No. 16-122, § 3, 5-3-2006)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.04.010 - Applicability of chapter. 
For the purpose of implementing the intent of this title, the words, phrases and terms included herein shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.020 - General terminology. 
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The word "building" shall include the word "structure." The word "used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used." The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. (Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.030 - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of this title, certain terms used herein are defined as set out in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise. (Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.040 - Definition of "A" terms. 
"Agent or owner" means any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for the property owner. 
"Agriculture" means the art or science of cultivating the ground, including harvesting of crops, rearing and management of livestock, tillage, husbandry, farming, horticulture and forestry, and the science and art of the production of plants and animals useful to man. 
"Alley or lane" means a public or private street which affords only secondary access to abutting property. 
"Amusement center or arcade" means any business, use or structure which contains six or more games of chance, pinball or science and/or viewing machines which may or may not be coin-operated, whether the operation be the main business or incidental to the main business on the premises. 
"Animal" means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
"Apiary" means a place where bees, hive boxes, and related appliances wherever the same are kept, located, or found, especially a colony of bees kept for their honey. 
"Arbor" means a horizontal frame constructed materials including, but not limited to lattice, vines, or wood, metal or similar materials attached to vertical elements, such as a fence or upright panels, used as a screen or support for plants. See definition of Fence, Open. 
"Automobile body shop" means collision repair services, including body, frame, or fender repair and automobile painting. 
"Automobile repair shop" means rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; replacement of parts; and general mechanical repair service to passenger cars and trucks. 
"Automobile sales area or trailer sales area" means an open area, other than a street, used for display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
"Automobile service station or filling station" means a place where gasoline, kerosene, or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil; or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and where services are performed, including tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of merchandise, greasing of automobiles and automobile washing (not including mechanical wash), and not to include repairs performed of a minor or major type unless otherwise permitted by this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16-112 § 3, 2000; Ord. 16.123, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-2007; Ord. 16.130, § 1, 8-18-2010)  
17.04.050 - Definition of "B" terms. 
"Basement" means that portion of a structure located entirely below grade, except for the top of such basement, which may extend for a vertical distance not exceeding two feet from the grade to the ceiling of the basement. As used herein, the term "grade" shall mean either the natural grade or the finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls of the structure, whichever is lower. 
"Bed and breakfast establishment" means a structure designed as a single-family dwelling in which rooms are rented for transient occupancy and breakfast is served to the guests on the premises. The building shall not contain more than eight guest rooms which may be occupied by not more than sixteen guests at one time. The building must be managed and occupied by the owner of the property. 
"Bedroom" means a private room intended for sleeping, which has closet space, is separable from other rooms by a door, and has access to a bathroom. 
"Bee colony" is the group of bees which consists of the queen, the drones, and the workers, which live in the hive box or similar receptacle. 
"Beekeeping" (or apiculture, from Latin apis, bee) is the maintenance of honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, by humans. A beekeeper (or apiarist) keeps bees in order to collect honey and beeswax, for the purpose of pollinating vegetation, or to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers. 
"Bees" means honey-producing insects of the species aspis mellifica, including the adults, eggs, larvae, pupae or other immature states thereof, together with such materials as are deposited into hives by the adults, except honey and rendered beeswax. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea, presently classified by the unranked taxon name Anthophila. 
"Breezeway" means a covered passageway, open to the outdoors, connecting two buildings. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. 
"Building coverage" means the horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all main and accessory buildings on a lot. The coverage of a structure, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
"Building envelope" means the three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by maximum height regulations, yard setbacks, and sky exposure plane regulations. 
Building, Height of. See "Height of building" (Section 17.04.110). 
"Building, main" means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. 
"Building site" means the area enclosed within the exterior walls of the proposed structure plus any covered or uncovered decks and/or balconies and an area extending ten feet in all directions beyond the exterior walls and covered or uncovered decks and/or balconies. 
"Bulk" means magnitude, dimension, size, mass. 
"Business services" means businesses that primarily (but not exclusively) serve the needs of professional offices, including but not limited to print shops, copy shops, business equipment repair shops, bookkeeping and accounting firms, and computer consulting and repair. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.109 § 1, 1999; Ord. 16.130, § 2, 8-18-2010)  
17.04.060 - Definition of "C" terms. 
"Carport" means a roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides. 
"CC&Rs" means covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
"City" means the City of Scotts Valley, California. 
"City council" means the City Council of the City of Scotts Valley, California. 
"Combining district" means a zoning district which must be attached to or combined with an underlying zoning district to become effective. Once the district designation is combined with an underlying district (the base district), the combining district regulations are applied to all uses of the base district, in addition to those applicable in the base district. When in conflict, the most restrictive regulations shall control. 
"Common area" means the area that is available for the common use of condominium unit owners or occupants in an entire project. This could mean the common area used by condominium unit owners or occupants, or common area shared by tenants or owners in a commercial project. 
"Community care facility" means any building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, or care services for children, adults, or adults and children, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, or incompetent person. All community care facilities shall be appropriately licensed or registered pursuant to state law, unless exempted therefrom by state law. This definition and all other definitions relating to community care facilities shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with definitions found in state law or state administrative regulations. This could include foster homes, sober living environments, assisted living for elderly or disabled people. 
A small community care facility is allowed six or fewer residents. When determining the number of residents, that number does not include persons operating the facility, their family members or staff. A large community care facility has seven or more residents. 
"Community facilities" means a place, structure, area or other facility used for and providing fraternal, social or recreational programs or activities generally open to the public. The term includes parks, swimming pools, recreational courts, community centers, libraries, museums and golf courses. 
"Court" means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings. A court shall be counted as open space in coverage requirements. 
"Crop and tree farming" means the raising for commercial purposes of any truck, field or orchard crops, or wholesale nursery or greenhouses, including necessary buildings incidental to such crops. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 3, 4, 9-5-2007)  
17.04.070 - Definition of "D" terms. 
"Day care center" means a facility (including nonresidential structures) that provides supervision and care of more than six children for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day. The term includes nursery school, preschool and similar facilities. 
"Depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site, measured along a line midway between the side property lines. 
"Developer" means the owner, option holder or subdivider of real property who has a controlling proprietary interest in the proposed project. 
"Dwelling" means any building or portion thereof, designed or used as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. 
"Dwelling, multifamily" means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used for residence purposes by two or more families or housekeeping units. 
"Dwelling, single-family" means a detached building designed or used for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping unit. 
"Dwelling, townhouse" means a one-family dwelling in a row of at least two such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common, fire-resistant walls. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building, or portion thereof, designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen. 
Dwelling Unit, Second. See "Second dwelling unit" (Section 17.04.220). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.080 - Definition of "E" terms. 
"Emergency shelters" means housing with minimal supportive services that is limited to occupancy of six months or less. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay; as defined and used in Section 50801(e) of the California Health and Safety Code. However, emergency shelter providers are not obligated to accept individuals if the shelter is at it approved capacity. 
"Essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems. Essential services also include collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, or for the public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings, electrical substations or transmission lines of fifty kilovolt or greater capacity. 
(Ord. 16.89 § 1, 1993: Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16-138, § 1, 7-15-2015)  
17.04.090 - Definition of "F" terms. 
"Fabrication and assembly" means the manufacturing from standardized parts of a distinct object differing from the individual components. 
"Family" means a person or persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group of not more than five persons, excluding servants, not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
"Family animal raising" means the noncommercial raising or maintaining of not to exceed an aggregate of twenty-five laying fowl or birds, not including guinea fowl, crowing roosters or turkey gobblers, and not to exceed an aggregate of twenty-five rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, guinea pigs or similar animals. 
"Family child care homes "means a home that regularly provides care, protection and supervision for fourteen or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family child care home or a small family child care home. Family child care home is the same as described in state law as a family day care home. (See Section 1596.78 of the California Health and Safety Code.) 
A.  "Large family child care home" means a home that provides family child care for up to twelve children, or for up to fourteen children if certain criteria are met, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1597.465 and as defined in state regulations (see California Administrative Code Sections 102352(f)(1)(B) and 102316.5(b). These capacities include children under age ten who live in the licensee's home and the assistant provider's children under age ten. 
B.  "Small family child care home" means a home that provides family child care for up to six children, or for up to eight children if certain criteria are met, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44 and as defined in regulations (see California Administrative Code Sections 102352(f)(1)(B) and 102316.5(b). These capacities include children under age ten who live in the licensee's home. 
"Fence" means a barrier to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary. 
"Fence, open" means a fence constructed of wood, metal, plastic or other materials assembled in a manner in which a minimum of fifty percent of the fence surface allows for the passage of air and light when viewed from a point perpendicular to the orientation of the fence. Open fences can include arbors and trellises. For example, wood or plastic lattice is considered to be material suitable for an open fence. 
"Fence, solid" means a fence constructed of wood, metal, plastic, cement, brick, block, or other materials or any combination thereof. Solid fences also include walls which retain soil on one side and may or may not be attached to a fence. 
"Fence, view" means a fence constructed of metal wire, wrought iron, plastic or other materials in a manner in which a minimum of ninety percent of the fence surface allows for a clear view of the area beyond the fence from any angle. For example, chain link, wrought iron or metal materials are considered to be materials suitable for a view fence which allows exiting pedestrians and vehicles to see beyond the fence and safely enter or exit an area. 
"Firearms" means a device as defined by California Penal Code Section 16520. 
"Firearms retail" means a use providing retail sale of firearms. 
"Flag lot" means a parcel that is located behind parcel which has frontage along a street and which provides an access easement to the rear flag lot. The driveway access easement may be public or private but must have a minimum width of 12 feet along a public street (see Figure 17.46.060 in Section 17.46.060). 
"Floor area" means the total horizontal area, in square feet, on each floor within the exterior walls of a structure, but not including the area of inner courts, shaft enclosures or exterior walls. 
"Footcandle" means a unit of measuring illumination equal to the amount of direct light thrown by one candle on a square foot of surface which is one foot away from the source of illumination. 
"Forest products, other" means logs, poles, posts, pilings, split products, chips, fuel wood and other solid products. 
"Foster home" means a private family home in which one or more children under nineteen years of age, not related to the proprietary family, are resident on a more or less permanent basis, and in which the children participate in normal family relationships with the proprietary family. 
"Frontage" means the property line(s) of a site abutting a street. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16-112 § 4, 2000; Ord. No. 16.120, § 1, 9-21-2005; Ord. 16.123, §§ 5, 6, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16.139, § 2, 12-20-2017)  
17.04.100 - Definition of "G" terms. 
"Garage, private" means an accessory structure or a portion of a main structure designed for the storage of motor vehicles, boats or trailers, having a permanent roof and designed to be enclosed on all sides. The minimum size of a private garage shall be twenty-two feet by twenty-two feet for two cars and twenty-two feet by twelve feet for one car. 
"Garage, public" means a structure, or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles or trailers. 
"Grading" means any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition. 
"Ground coverage" means the percentage of the total lot area that is covered by structures as herein defined. 
"Guesthouse" means accessory living quarters, without kitchen or cooking facilities, of a permanent type of construction, clearly subordinate and incidental to the main building on the same lot, and not separately rented, let or leased, whether compensation be direct or indirect. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.109 § 2, 1999)  
17.04.110 - Definition of "H" terms. 
"Height of building" means the vertical distance from the highest point of a structure to either the natural grade or the finished grade of the structure pad, whichever distance is greater, excluding basements or crawl spaces around the structure which are below grade and not created by a fill; provided, however, that for the purposes of measuring height, chimneys, flagpoles, and radio and television aerials shall not be considered a part of the structure. 
"Hive" is the same definition as colony. 
"Hive box" means any box, receptacle, or container made or prepared for the use of bees, or similar container of which bees have taken possession. A hive box is usually called a Langstroth deep or super, and is roughly 19.75 inches long, 16.5 inches wide, and 9.5 inches tall. It contains ten frames of foundation on which the bees build comb for producing brood and food. A hive box requires some kind of top board, some kind of bottom board, and an entrance which is usually incorporated in the bottom board. 
"Home occupation" means any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof, which does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the zone of which it is a part, and which does not interfere with the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood. 
"Hospital" means an institution providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured. 
"Hotel" means a structure or portion thereof or a group of attached or detached structures containing individual guest rooms or suites where lodging is provided primarily to transients for compensation. The term includes motel, inn, tourist court, bed and breakfast establishment or similar use. 
Hot Tub. See "Spa" (Section 17.04.220). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16-112 § 5, 2000; Ord. 16.130, § 3, 8-18-2010)  
17.04.120 - Definition of "I" terms. 
"Institutional facility" means a place, structure or area operated by a public or private organization or agency, used for and providing educational, residential or healthcare services to the community at large. The term includes residential developments and healthcare facilities operated by nonprofit organizations and both public and private schools or colleges. 
"Intermittent stream" means a water channel in which the flow of water usually ceases during summer and no flows connect pools of water. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.130 - Definition of "J" terms. 
"Junkyard" means a site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment yards, used lumber yards and the like. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.140 - Definition of "K" terms. 
"Kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or wherein are kept five or more dogs, cats or similar small animals in any combination for more than five days, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit breeding or exhibiting, and including places where dogs or cats or similar small animals in any combination are boarded or kept for sale. 
"Kitchen" means any room, or part of a room, which is designed, built, used or intended to be used for food preparation and dishwashing, but not including a bar, pantry or similar room adjacent to or connected with a kitchen. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.150 - Definition of "L" terms. 
"Land clearing" means the removal of vegetation down to duff or bare soil, by any method. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land consisting of a single lot of record. 
"Lot area" means the computed area contained within the lot lines. 
"Lot, corner" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. The point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines is the corner. 
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines, measured along a line midway between the side property lines, or between the front lot line and intersection of the two side lines if there should be no rear lot line. 
"Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
"Lot, key" means an interior lot adjoining the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot. 
"Lot line, front" means the line separating the lot from the street, extending the full width of the site. 
"Lot line, rear" means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
"Lot lines" means the property lines establishing the circumference of the lot. 
"Lot line, side" means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street or exterior side lot line. 
"Lot, reversed corner" means a corner lot, the exterior side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of a lot or parcel of land which adjoins the rear lot line of said corner lot (see Figure 17.04.150). 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front line at the minimum required building setback line. 
Figure 17.04.150 Lot Types
  
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.160 - Definition of "M" terms. 
"Medical clinic" means a structure for health care, other than a hospital, with or without emergency room facilities but without beds for overnight treatment. 
"Ministorage (Miniwarehouse)" means a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes which are leased or rented on an individual basis with direct access to paved driveways. 
"Mixed use" means a development that contains both commercial (retail or office) uses and residential uses. 
"Motel" means a structure or portion thereof or a group of attached or detached structures containing individual guest rooms or suites where lodging is provided primarily to transients for compensation. The term includes motel, inn, tourist court, bed and breakfast establishment or similar use. 
Multifamily dwelling. See "Dwelling, multifamily" (Section 17.04.070). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, § 7, 9-5-2007)  
17.04.170 - Definition of "N" terms. 
"Net site area" is defined in the Hillside Residential Combining District Regulations (Chap. 17.40) to determine average slope. This term does not apply to other sections within the zoning ordinance. 
"Nonconforming structure, lawful" means any structure or improvement that was lawfully established and in existence at the time the ordinance codified in this title, or any amendment thereto, became effective, but which, due to the application of this title or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the use is located. 
"Nonconforming use, lawful" means a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title but which, under this title, does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. 
"Nursery" means a commercial use of land and/or greenhouses used to raise and sell trees, flowers, shrubs, plants and ancillary packaged horticultural products. 
"Nursing home" means a structure used for the rooming or boarding of any aged or convalescent person or persons, whether ambulatory or nonambulatory, for which a license is required by a county, state or federal agency. The term "convalescent" is construed to include the mentally ill and the inebriate. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 8, 9, 9-5-2007)  
17.04.180 - Definition of "O" terms. 
"Offices, administrative or executive" means offices pertaining to the management of office operations or the direction of enterprises, but not including merchandising or sales offices. 
"Offices, professional" means offices pertaining to the practice of the professions and arts, including but not limited to architecture, dentistry, engineering, law and medicine, but not including the sale of drugs or prescriptions, except as incidental to the principal use and where there is no external evidence of such incidental use. 
"Off-street loading facilities" means a site or a portion of a site devoted to loading or unloading motor vehicles, trucks or tractor-trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
"Off-street parking facilities" means a site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
"On-site" means located on the lot(s) or parcel(s) that is (are) the subject of an application for development. 
"Outdoor storage." Outdoor storage uses are prohibited in the C-S zone on Scotts Valley Drive and on all properties located on Scotts Valley Drive, no matter the zone. On all other properties zoned C-S, outdoor storage uses are conditional uses. Outdoor storage shall mean a space or place for storing items in the open air, not inside a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than twenty-four hours. A completely enclosed building is four or more walls with a roof but not a carport or porch. Items considered as outdoor storage shall include any of the following items, but not limited to, as determined by the community development director: 
1.  Appliances and furniture which are clearly not intended for outdoor use on the property; 
2.  Building materials that are not part of a current project under construction; 
3.  Commercial vehicles; 
4.  Contractor's storage yard; 
5.  Inoperable vehicles; 
6.  Junkyards, see existing definition in this Title; 
7.  Machinery and equipment; 
8.  Portable outdoor storage containers, roll-off bins, shipping cargo containers; 
9.  Recreational vehicles; 
10.  Trailers; 
11.  Watercraft; and, 
12.  Other similar items as determined by the community development director to be inconsistent with the purpose and objectives of the applicable zoning district. 
Permitted outdoor storage uses may remain in place until their individual use permits expire, or in accordance with Chapter 17.48, Nonconforming Uses and Structures, of this Title. Unpermitted outdoor storage uses shall vacate the subject properties by July 1, 2016. 
This definition shall not apply to: 
13.  Auto rental businesses; 
14.  Auto repair shops; 
15.  Christmas tree sales; 
16.  Construction sites with an active building permit for new development which involve storing construction materials that are intended to be used within sixty days on the subject property; 
17.  Garden shops; 
18.  Gasoline service stations; 
19.  Merchandise associated with a retail or other permitted use which is displayed outdoors during the day and brought indoors at the end of the business day unless otherwise approved for merchandise to remain outdoors; 
20.  Occasional sidewalk sales; 
21.  Off-street parking and loading areas; 
22.  Open-air markets; 
23.  Outdoor garden shops; 
24.  Outdoor theatrical activities; 
25.  Sale of nursery products; and, 
26.  Vehicle sales, in accordance with this Title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 1, 7-15-2015)  
17.04.190 - Definition of "P" terms. 
"Parapet" means the extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level. 
"Perennial stream" means a water channel in which water is present during all seasons of the year. 
"Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, join stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
"Personal service" means a use providing services of a personal convenience nature and not primarily for the sale of goods or merchandise, including repair shops, beauty shops and barber shops, repair and fitting of clothes and personal accessories, laundry and cleaning (where bulk cleaning and servicing is done elsewhere) and similar services. 
"Planned unit development (PUD)" means a form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings and the provision of common open space, density increases and a mix of building types and land uses. 
"Planning director" means the Director of the Planning Department of the City of Scotts Valley or the designated representative. The term "planning director" and "community development director" are interchangeable and have the same meaning. 
"Planning commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of Scotts Valley. 
"Public uses" means publicly owned or operated facilities and spaces, including public streets, parking spaces, parks, public facilities and open spaces maintained or available for the public to use. 
"Public utility service yard" means a site or portion of a site on which a public utility company may store, house and/or service equipment such as service trucks and other trucks and trailers, pumps, spools of wire, pipe conduits, transformers, cross arms, utility poles or any other material, tools or supplies necessary for the normal maintenance of utility facilities. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16-112 § 6, 2000; Ord. 16.123, § 10, 9-5-2007)  
17.04.200 - Definition of "Q" terms. 
"Quasi-public uses" means uses owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or philanthropic institution and providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious or similar types of public programs. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.210 - Definition of "R" terms. 
"Recreation, commercial" means clubs or recreation facilities operated as a business which may or may not be open to the general public for a fee. 
"Recreation, private" means clubs or recreation facilities of a noncommercial nature operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members of such nonprofit organizations. 
"Recreation, public" means publicly owned or operated clubs or recreation facilities. 
"Research and development" means firms or businesses whose function includes information gathering, scholarly or scientific inquiry or investigation, medical research, high technology or the development of computer software. 
"Rest home" means premises used for the housing of and caring for the ambulatory, aged or infirm, which premises require a license from the state or county (this includes a home for the aged). 
"Restaurant" means any eating or drinking establishment having seating capacity which sells or offers for sale to the public any food or drink for immediate human consumption on the premises, including any coffeeshop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, bar, soda fountain, dining room, drive-in and/or drive-through facility. 
"Retail service" means a use engaged in providing retail sale or rental of items primarily intended for consumer or household use, including but not limited to the following: groceries, meat, vegetables, dairy products, baked goods, candy and other food products; liquor and bottled goods; household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs; cards, stationery, notions, tobacco products, cosmetics and specialty items; flowers, plants and garden products; hobby materials; toys; handcrafted items; clothing, shoes, apparel, jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras and photography equipment; household electronic equipment, computers, televisions, video and tape recorders and similar items; books, records and tapes; sporting equipment; furniture, furnishings, appliances, antiques, art objects, paint and wallpaper, floor coverings and lighting fixtures; office supplies; musical instruments; hardware and building supplies; and bicycles, mopeds and automotive parts and accessories. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, § 11, 9-5-2007)  
17.04.220 - Definition of "S" terms. 
"Screening" shall mean a visual buffer consisting of wood, masonry, dense evergreen hedge, or other plant material, or a combination of these elements, or other material approved by the community development director, to reduce visual unsightliness of uses and/or items stored on the subject property. 
"Second dwelling unit" means an additional dwelling unit which contains no greater than eight hundred square feet of living space, not including the garage, which shares a lot with a primary residence. The second unit is served by the same driveway access to the street as the existing main dwelling. 
"Setback" means the distance between the existing or planned right-of-way line or property line and a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps. 
"Site" means any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land. 
"Site area" means the total area (e.g., square feet, acres) included within the property lines of a site. 
"Site coverage" means the percentage of site area covered by impervious surfaces, including all structures, open or enclosed or projections of structures. 
"Spa" means a self-contained or non-self-contained hydro-massage pool or tub for recreation or therapeutic use, designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor-driven blower. It may be installed on the ground or on a supporting structure, or in the ground or in a supporting structure. A spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over twenty-four inches deep. 
"Stable, private" means a detached building for the keeping of horses which are owned by the occupant(s) of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
"Stable, public" means a stable other than a private stable. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the uppermost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the uppermost floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
"Street" means a public or private right-of-way which provides means of access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term (but not alley or lane, which terms are defined in Section 17.04.040). 
"Structural alteration" means any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
"Structure" means an object directly or indirectly fixed or attached to the ground which is built or constructed by man. A structure includes, but is not limited to, buildings, edifices, bridges, signs, fences, foundations, kiosks, arches, fountains, walls and building appendages such as marquees, awnings, canopies, decks, and lighting fixtures. 
"Structure, accessory" means a detached structure, the use of which is subordinate and incidental to and customarily associated with, the main structure or the principal use of the site and which is located on the same site as the main structure or principal use. The term includes, but is not limited to detached garages or carports, cabanas, gazebos, arbors, sheds and buildings connected to a main structure by a breeze way. 
"Structure, principal" means a structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use. 
"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community; as defined by Section 50675 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Swimming pool" means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four inches deep. This includes in ground, above ground and on-ground swimming pools, and fixed-in-place wading pools. This definition does not include hot tubs or spas. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 8, 1991; Ord. 16-112 § 7, 2000; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 2, 7-15-2015; Ord. No. 16-138, § 2, 7-15-2015)  
17.04.230 - Definition of "T" terms. 
"Target population" means adults with low-income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people; as defined in Section 50675.14 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
_____
"Top of bank" means the edge of the floodway as depicted in Figure 17.04.230. Within the area formed by the edges of a floodway shall lie a stream channel and the portions of the adjacent hundred-year flood plain as required to efficiently carry the flood flows of the stream. This area includes areas A and B as shown on the diagram in Figure 17.04.230. This definition is not intended to be used to define a bank-to-bank easement or offer of dedication for open space and drainage or any other purpose in other ordinances of the city or other titles of this code. "Top of bank" is defined only for purposes of the zoning ordinance codified in this title. 
Figure 17.04.230 Top of Bank Diagram
  
_____
"Tot lot" means an improved and equipped play area for small children (usually up to elementary school age). 
Townhouse. See "Dwelling, townhouse" 
"Transitional housing" means temporary rental housing intended for occupancy by target populations transitioning to permanent housing that is operated under program requirements calling for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months as defined in Section 50675.2 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Trellis" means a vertical structure or frame constructed of materials including but not limited to lattice work or other similar wood, metal or plastic embellishment used as a screen or as a support for climbing plants. See definition of Fence, open. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16-112 § 8, 2000; Ord. 16.123, § 12, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 3, 7-15-2015)  
17.04.240 - Definition of "U" terms. 
"Use" means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered or enlarged or for which either a site or structure(s) may be occupied or maintained. 
"Use, accessory" means a use which is clearly incidental and secondary to the main use and which does not change the character thereof. (See also "Structure, accessory," Section 17.04.220). 
"Used car" means any vehicle used by a previous owner or traded in. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.250 - Definition of "V" terms. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.260 - Definition of "W" terms. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.270 - Definition of "X" terms. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989) 
_____ 
17.04.280 - Definition of "Y" terms. 
"Yard, front" means an open space extending the full width of the lot, measured between the portion of the building closest to the front lot line and said front lot line (except where the front lot line lies within a public or private right-of-way, in which case the measurement is between the portion of the building closest to the front lot line and the edge of the right-of-way closest thereto), measured perpendicularly to said front lot line, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise specified in this title (see Figure 17.04.280). 
"Yard, rear" means an open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise specified in this title (see Figure 17.04.280). 
Figure 17.04.280 Setback Illustrations
  
"Yard, side" means an open space extending from the rear boundary of the front yard to the front boundary of the rear yard (or to the rear lot line in the event there is no rear yard) between a building and nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise specified in this title. 
"Yard, side (exterior)" means a side yard which abuts a street (applies to corner lots) (see Figure 17.04.150). 
"Yard, side (interior)" means a side yard which abuts an adjoining lot (see Figure 17.04.150). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.04.290 - Definition of "Z" terms. 
"Zone or zoning district" means a portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this title. Zone or zoning districts are shown on the official zoning map or maps referred to in Chapter 17.08. 
"Zoning map" means the official zoning map or maps of the City of Scotts Valley, adopted by the city council and effective upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, together with all amendments thereto hereafter made. 
"Zoning permit" means a document signed by the building inspector, as required in this title, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.06 - ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.06.010 - Zoning districts. 
The zoning districts hereby established and into which the city is divided, are designated as follows: 
Symbol 	District name 
R-VH 	Very high-density residential zoning district 
R-H 	High-density residential zoning district 
R-M-6 	Multiple residential and zoning district 
R-M-8 	Multiple residential and zoning district 
R-1 	Residential single-family zoning district 
R-R-2.5 	Residential-rural zoning district 
R-MT-5 	Residential-mountain zoning district 
C-S 	Service commercial zoning district 
C-SC 	Shopping center commercial zoning district 
C-P 	Professional commercial zoning district 
I-L 	Light industrial zoning district 
I-RD 	Research and development zoning district 
P 	Public/quasi-public zoning district 
OS 	Open-space zoning district 
 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, § 13, 9-5-2007)  
17.06.020 - Combining zoning districts. 
The zoning districts set forth in this section are termed combining districts. The combining district regulations are in addition to the regulations of the base zoning district to which the combining district is attached. Notwithstanding any provision in this title to the contrary, in the event of a conflict between the regulations of the base zoning district and the regulations of the combining district, the regulations of the combining district will control. 
Symbol 	District name 
TP 	Timberland production zoning district 
ST 	Special treatment combining district 
FW 	Floodway combining district 
HR 	Hillside residential combining district 
 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.06.030 - Zoning map. 
The designations, locations and boundaries of the zoning districts are set forth in the official zoning map or maps of the city, which are referred to in Chapter 17.08. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.06.040 - Determination of boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts shown on the "official zoning map," the following shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Where a zoning boundary divides a lot, the zoning boundary shall be determined by following a major topographical or physical feature. 
C.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the adjoining parcel to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley. 
D.  Where any further uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid zoning districts, the planning commission shall determine the location of such boundaries. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.06.050 - Zoning of annexed parcels. 
All territory hereafter annexed to the city of shall be classified as a part of that zoning district of the city specified by the city council at the time of the annexation, after report and recommendation of the planning commission, all as prescribed or referenced in Section 17.44.040. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.06.060 - Effect of establishment of zoning districts. 
Except as otherwise provided herein: 
A.  No building or any part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than that which is included among the uses herein after listed as permitted in the zone in which such building, land or premises is located. 
B.  No building or any part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building is located. 
C.  No building, or any part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any zone, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or open space is located. 
D.  No yard or other open space provided about any building, for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building and no yard or other open space on one building site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.08 - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
 
17.08.010 - Official map and amendments. 
This chapter consists of the official zoning map(s) of the city. Said map(s), properly attested, shall be and remain on file in the office of the Scotts Valley planning department. Said map(s) and all notations, references, data and other information shown thereon, together with any and all amendments thereto that are adopted hereafter from time to time, shall be and are made a part of this title (and this chapter) by this reference as though set forth in full herein. The official zoning map(s) of the city is (are) adopted by the city council as a part of this title and shall be effective upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. Any amendments to said map(s) hereafter made shall be effective upon the effective date of the amending ordinance and shall by this reference automatically become a part hereof as though set forth in full herein. 
The official zoning map(s) is (are) currently and shall at all times remain on file in the office of the planning department of the city, together with any future amendments thereto that are hereafter made. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.09 - R-VH VERY HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.09.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-VH zoning classification is designed to provide areas for apartments, townhouses, condominiums and similar developments with open space and other amenities which will enhance the living qualities of the development and promote the housing goals of the general plan. In addition, the very high-density residential district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings, at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To provide a more urban type living environment. 
C.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling unit; 
D.  To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion by providing housing on the city's transportation corridors; 
F.  To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise and congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic; 
G.  To provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate, for off-street loading of trucks; 
H.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences; 
I.  To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 14, 9-5-2007)  
17.09.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Small family child care homes; 
B.  Small community care residential facilities; 
C.  Multifamily dwellings conforming to the density requirements of this chapter; 
D.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), the keeping of four cats, four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four private garages and parking areas. 
E.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 14, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16.132, § 1, 5-1-2013; Ord. No. 16-138, § 14, 7-15-2015)  
17.09.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Community facilities and institutions; 
B.  Day-care centers; 
C.  Public utility and public service facilities; 
D.  Large family child care home: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 14, 9-5-2007)  
17.09.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-VH zoning district: 
A.  Lot area and density requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum 
Overall 
Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density 	Minimum 
Lot Width 	Minimum 
Lot Depth 
R-VHD 	6,000 sq. ft. 	2,100 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	60 feet 	60 feet 
 
B.  Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be sixty feet. 
C.  Yards. 
1.  Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be ten feet for residential buildings and twenty feet for garages. 
2.  Side yard setback for existing parcel. The minimum side yard shall be ten feet or ten percent of the lot width which ever is greater for the existing parcel perimeter. Side yard setback for internally created new parcels shall be determined by the planning commission. However, if a garage entrance is located off a side yard the setback shall be twenty feet at the garage entrance to allow for space for a vehicle to park in front of the garage. 
3.  Rear yard. The rear yard shall be twenty percent of the depth of the lot, provided that a rear yard of more than twenty-five feet shall not be required and a rear yard of less than fifteen feet shall not be permitted, subject to the following exceptions: 
a.  The rear yard may be reduced to not less than fifteen feet, provided, that one side yard is not less than twenty-five feet. 
b.  One foot shall be added to the rear yard for each two feet in height above which the top plate line exceeds twenty feet in height. 
D.  Maximum site coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-VH zoning district shall be fifty-five percent. 
E.  Building height. No structure in the R-VH zoning district shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. 
F.  Each dwelling shall have private, useable outdoor space, i.e. decks, balconies, yards or patios of one hundred square feet per residential unit. If the design is not suitable for private open space, useable common open space may be provided at two hundred square feet per residential unit if approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 14, 9-5-2007)  
17.09.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Design review shall be required for all new structures or alterations to existing structures in the R-VH Zoning District. The design review shall be conducted by the planning commission at a noticed public hearing. 
B.  Standards and guidelines contained in Section 17.50.030 shall be used to review the project design. The project design may be approved as submitted, approved with added conditions or denied based on conformance with design standards. 
C.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 14, 9-5-2007)  
Chapter 17.10 - R-H HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.10.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-H zoning classification is designed to provide areas for apartments, townhouses, condominiums and similar developments with a maximum of open space and other amenities which will enhance the living qualities of the development and promote the housing goals of the general plan. In addition, the high-density residential district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings, at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To preserve as many of the desirable characteristics of one-family residential districts as possible while permitting higher densities; 
C.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling unit; 
D.  To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the land around them; 
F.  To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise and congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic; 
G.  To provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate, for off-street loading of trucks; 
H.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences; 
I.  To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.10.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Small family child care homes; 
B.  Mobile homes and manufactured housing; 
C.  Multifamily dwellings conforming to the density requirements of this chapter; 
D.  Single-family dwellings; 
E.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), the keeping of four cats, four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four and private garages and parking areas; 
F.  Small community care facilities. 
G.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 15—17, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16.132, § 2, 5-1-2013; Ord. No. 16-138, § 15, 7-15-2015)  
17.10.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
B.  Community facilities and institutions; 
C.  Day-care centers; 
D.  Occupancy of existing dwelling while constructing a replacement dwelling on the same lot; 
E.  Public utility and public service facilities; 
F.  Large family child care homes: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015; 
G.  Tract offices. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 18, 19, 9-5-2007)  
17.10.035 - Large community care facilities. 
No person shall operate a large community care home without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020. In addition the applicant shall submit the following: 
a.  A letter or certification of final approval from the state or county licensing authority, 
b.  A site plan of the property showing parking, outdoor exercise area, and fencing. 
c.  A letter from the fire department approving the safety of the structure for the use, 
d.  A letter of application describing the type of use, number of residents, age of residents, any special resident care that is provided, and a daily work schedule showing the number of employees at the facility, and 
e.  Landscaping and other information as required by the community development director. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 20, 9-5-2007)  
17.10.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-H zoning district: 
A.  Lot area and density requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum 
Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density* 	Minimum 
Lot Width 	Minimum 
Lot Depth 
R-H 	6,000 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	60 feet 	60 feet 
 
*If, after dividing the area of the lot by the area required per dwelling unit or structure containing a dwelling unit, a remainder of more than ninety percent of the area required for an additional unit is obtained, one additional dwelling unit may be located on the site. 
B.  Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be sixty feet. 
C.  Yards. 
1.  Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be twenty feet. 
2.  Side Yard. 
a.  Permitted Uses. The minimum side yard for a permitted use shall be ten percent of the width of the site; provided, that a side yard of more than ten feet shall not be required and a side yard of less than five feet shall not be permitted, subject to the following exceptions: 
i.  On the street side of a corner lot, the side yard shall be twenty percent of the width of the site; provided, that a side yard of more than twenty feet shall not be required and a side yard of less than eight feet shall not be permitted. 
ii.  One foot shall be added to each side yard for each two feet of height above which the top plate line exceeds twenty feet in height (see Figure 17.10.040). 
Figure 17.10.040 Top Plate Line
  
iii.  One foot shall be added to the interior side yard for each five feet by which a wall of a structure within twenty-five feet of the side property line exceeds forty feet in length parallel or approximately parallel to the side property line. 
iv.  A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling shall be not less than twelve feet. 
b.  Conditional Uses. The side yard for a conditional use and its accessory structures shall be ten percent of the average width of the site, with a minimum of ten feet and a maximum of twenty feet required, subject to the following exceptions: 
i.  On the street side of a corner lot, the side yard shall be not less than twenty percent of the width of the site, with a minimum of fifteen feet and a maximum of forty feet required. 
ii.  One foot shall be added to each side yard for each two feet of height above which the top plate line exceeds twenty feet of height (see Figure 17.10.040). 
iii.  One foot shall be added to the interior side yard for each five feet by which a wall of a structure within twenty-five feet of the side property line exceeds thirty feet in length parallel or approximately parallel to the side property line. 
3.  Rear Yard. The rear yard shall be twenty percent of the depth of the lot, provided that a rear yard of more than twenty-five feet shall not be required and a rear yard of less than fifteen feet shall not be permitted, subject to the following exceptions: 
a.  The rear yard may be reduced to not less than fifteen feet, provided, that one side yard is not less than twenty-five feet. 
b.  One foot shall be added to the rear yard for each two feet in height above which the top plate line exceeds twenty feet in height. 
D.  Maximum Site Coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-H zoning district shall be fifty-five percent. 
E.  Building Height. No structure in the R-H zoning district shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.10.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the R-H zoning district. 
B.  Special conditions of review apply to any application and proposal for any apartment project proposed on a parcel in excess of twenty thousand square feet in the R-H zone. The proposed design review application shall be reviewed by the planning commission in a noticed public hearing and shall, following the hearing, determine the final architectural and site design of the proposal and shall also find that the project is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The planning commission in its discretion, may approve, modify or deny the project. 
C.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.102 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 17.12 - R-M-6 AND R-M-8 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.12.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-M-6 and R-M-8 zoning classifications are designed to provide areas for single-family subdivisions and townhouse and condominium development at lower density ranges than the R-H district. The R-M-6 and R-M-8 districts multiple-residential districts are intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To preserve as many of the desirable characteristics of one-family residential districts as possible while permitting higher densities; 
C.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling unit; 
D.  To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the land around them; 
F.  To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise and congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic; 
G.  To provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate, for off-street loading of trucks; 
H.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences; 
I.  To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Small family child care homes; 
B.  Mobile homes and manufactured housing; 
C.  Multifamily dwellings conforming to the density requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Single-family dwellings; 
E.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), private garages and parking areas and the keeping of not to exceed four cats and four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four; 
F.  Small community care facilities. 
G.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 21—23, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16.132, § 3, 5-1-2013; Ord. No. 16-138, § 16, 7-15-2015)  
17.12.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
B.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
C.  Day care centers; 
D.  Foster homes; 
E.  Occupancy of existing dwelling while constructing a replacement dwelling on the same lot; 
F.  Public and quasi-public uses, including churches, synagogues and other places of worship, firehouses, parks and playgrounds, schools, and public utility buildings and uses; 
G.  Large family child care homes: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015; 
H.  Tract offices and temporary construction trailers. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 24, 25, 9-5-2007)  
17.12.035 - Large community care facilities. 
No person shall operate a large community care home without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020. In addition the applicant shall submit the following: 
a.  A letter or certification of final approval from the state or county licensing authority, 
b.  A site plan of the property showing parking, outdoor exercise area, and fencing. 
c.  A letter from the fire department approving the safety of the structure for the use, 
d.  A letter of application describing the type of use, number of residents, age of residents, any special resident care that is provided, and a daily work schedule showing the number of employees at the facility, and 
e.  Landscaping and other information as required by the community development director. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 26, 9-5-2007)  
17.12.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-M-6 and R-M-8 zoning districts. 
A.  Lot Area and Density Requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum 
Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density 	Minimum 
Lot Width 	Minimum 
Lot Depth 
R-M-6 	6,000sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit* 	50 feet 	100 feet 
R-M-8 	8,000 sq. ft. 	8,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	60 feet 	100 feet 
 
*If, after dividing the area of the lot by the area required per dwelling unit or structure containing a dwelling unit, a remainder of more than seventy percent of the area required for an additional unit is obtained, one additional dwelling unit may be located on the site. 
B.  Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be sixty feet. 
C.  Maximum Site Coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-M zoning district shall be fifty-five percent. 
D.  Yards. Yard requirements are as follows: 
Zone 	Front Yard 	Side Yard 	Rear Yard 
R-M-6 	20 feet 	10% lot width with max of 6 feet 	.15 feet 
R-M-8 	20 feet 	10% lot width with max of 8 feet 	.15 feet 
 
E.  Building Height. No structure in the R-M-6 and R-M-8 zoning districts shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989)  
17.12.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures (excluding single-family homes), alterations to structures and signage in the R-M zoning district. 
B.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.14 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.14.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-1 zoning classification is designed to provide areas for single-family residential development where lot sizes and densities are designed to accommodate large areas of open space for recreational activities compatible with a residential environment. The R-1 single-family residential district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling unit; 
C.  To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
D.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the land around them; 
E.  To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise and congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic; 
F.  To provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles; 
G.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences; 
H.  To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
This zoning classification is divided into the classes of R-1-10, R-1-20 and R-1-40, which are intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "medium residential," "low-density residential," and "estate residential," respectively. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.14.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family, is six or fewer; 
B.  Mobile homes and manufactured housing; 
C.  Single-family dwellings; 
D.  Secondary dwelling units conforming to the requirements of Chapter 17.41 of this title and the Uniform Building Code; 
E.  Accessory structures in conformance with Section 17.46.070 of this title and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), the keeping of four cats, four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four and private garages and parking areas. 
F.  Small family child care homes; 
G.  Small community care facilities. 
H.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 3, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, §§ 27, 28, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16.132, § 4, 5-1-2013; Ord. No. 16-138, § 17, 7-15-2015)  
17.14.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
B.  Day care centers; 
C.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family, exceeds six; 
D.  Occupancy of existing dwelling while constructing a replacement dwelling on the same lot; 
E.  Private stables, in accordance with Section 17.46.040 of this title; 
F.  Public and quasi-public uses, including churches, synagogues and other places of worship, firehouses, parks and playgrounds, schools, and public utility buildings and uses; 
G.  Large family child care homes: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015; 
H.  Townhouses and condominiums conforming to the density requirements of this chapter; 
I.  Tract offices and temporary construction trailers. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 2, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, §§ 29, 30, 9-5-2007)  
17.14.035 - Large community care facilities. 
No person shall operate a large community care home without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020. In addition the applicant shall submit the following: 
a.  A letter or certification of final approval from the state or county licensing authority, 
b.  A site plan of the property showing parking, outdoor exercise area, and fencing. 
c.  A letter from the fire department approving the safety of the structure for the use, 
d.  A letter of application describing the type of use, number of residents, age of residents, any special resident care that is provided, and a daily work schedule showing the number of employees at the facility, and 
e.  Landscaping and other information as required by the community development director. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 31, 9-5-2007)  
17.14.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1 zoning district: 
A.  Lot Area and Density Requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density 	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Depth 
R-1-10 	10,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	60 feet 	100 feet 
R-1-20 	20,000 sq. ft. 	20,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	90 feet 	125 feet 
R-1-40 	40,000 sq. ft. 	40,000 sq. ft./dwelling unit 	100 feet 	150 feet 
 
B.  Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be sixty (60) feet. 
C.  Maximum Site Coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-1 zoning district shall be fifty percent (50%). 
D.  Yards. Yard requirements are as follows: 
Zone 	Front Yard 	Side Yard 	Rear Yard 
R-1-10 	20 feet 	10% of lot width with a maximum of 10 feet 	15 feet 
R-1-20 	30 feet 	10% of lot width with a maximum of 10 feet 	15 feet 
R-1-40 	30 feet 	10% of lot width with a maximum of 10 feet 	20 feet 
 
E.  Building Height. No single-family dwelling in the R-1 zoning district shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. Detached accessory structures, secondary dwelling units, and guesthouses may have building heights up to 35 feet when all required yard setbacks conform with the same yard setbacks required for the main dwelling. 
F.  Roof Forms and Pitches. The roof forms and pitches of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with those of the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
G.  Exterior Building Materials and Colors. The exterior building materials and colors of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
H.  Conversion of Use. The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with existing three (3) feet reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Section 17.46.070J. of the City's Municipal Code) into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than three (3) but less than the required yard setbacks for the main dwelling, into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
I.  Building Height of Detached Accessory Structures. The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be 18 feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 5, 6-4-2003)  
17.14.050 - Other required conditions. 
No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.16 - R-R-2.5 RESIDENTIAL-RURAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.16.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-R-2.5 district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "rural residential." This zoning classification is designed to provide areas for large-lot residential living and minor agricultural activities and is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings, at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling unit; 
C.  To minimize traffic congestion; 
D.  To provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles; 
E.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Family day care homes; 
B.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family, is six or fewer; 
C.  Single-family dwellings; 
D.  Secondary dwelling units conforming to the requirements of Chapter 17.41 of this title and the Uniform Building Code; 
E.  Accessory structures in conformance with Section 17.46.070 of this title and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to crop and tree farming for family use only, family animal raising, guesthouse, home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), the keeping of four cats or four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four, and private garages and parking areas, and private stables on a minimum lot size of 2.5 acres, in accordance with Section 17.46.040 of this title; 
F.  Small family child care homes; 
G.  Small community care facilities. 
H.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 6, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, §§ 32, 33, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 18, 7-15-2015)  
17.16.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
B.  Day care centers; 
C.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family, exceeds six; 
D.  Occupancy of existing dwelling while constructing a replacement dwelling on the same lot; 
E.  Private stables with a lot size less than 2.5 acres, in accordance with Section 17.46.040 of this title; 
F.  Public and quasi-public uses, including churches, synagogues and other places of worship, firehouses, hospitals, parks and playgrounds, schools, and public utility buildings and uses; 
G.  Temporary tract offices and construction trailers; 
H.  Wholesale nurseries; 
I.  Large family child care homes: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 7, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, § 34, 9-5-2007)  
17.16.035 - Large community care facilities. 
No person shall operate a large community care home without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020. In addition the applicant shall submit the following: 
a.  A letter or certification of final approval from the state or county licensing authority, 
b.  A site plan of the property showing parking, outdoor exercise area, and fencing. 
c.  A letter from the fire department approving the safety of the structure for the use, 
d.  A letter of application describing the type of use, number of residents, age of residents, any special resident care that is provided, and a daily work schedule showing the number of employees at the facility, and 
e.  Landscaping and other information as required by the community development director. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 35, 9-5-2007)  
17.16.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-R-2.5 zoning district: 
A.  Lot Area and Density Requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum 
Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density 	Minimum 
Lot Width 	Minimum 
Lot Depth 
R-R-2.5 	2.5 acres 	2.5 acres/dwelling unit 	100 feet 	150 feet 
 
B.  Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be one hundred feet. 
C.  Maximum Site Coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-R-2.5 zoning district shall be thirty-five percent. 
D.  Yards. Yard requirements are as follows: 
Zone 	Front Yard 	Side Yard 	Rear Yard 
R-R-2.5 	40 feet 	15 feet 	20 feet 
 
E.  Building Height. No single-family dwelling in the R-R-2.5 zoning district shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. Detached accessory structures, secondary dwelling units, and guesthouses may have building heights up to thirty-five feet when all required yard setbacks conform with the same yard setbacks required for the main dwelling. 
F.  Roof Forms and Pitches. The roof forms and pitches of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with those of the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
G.  Exterior Building Materials and Colors. The exterior building materials and colors of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
H.  Conversion of Use. The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with existing three feet reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Section 17.46.070J. of the City's Municipal Code) into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than three but less than the required yard setbacks for the main dwelling, into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
I.  Building Height of Detached Accessory Structures. The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be eighteen feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 8, 6-4-2003)  
17.16.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
B.  Minimum side and rear yards for buildings and areas that accommodate animals shall be forty feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.18 - R-MT-5 RESIDENTIAL-MOUNTAIN ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.18.010 - Description and purpose. 
The R-MT-5 zoning district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "mountain residential." This zoning classification is designed primarily for hillside areas of the city where environmental constraints require development at lower densities. A maximum density of one dwelling unit per five acres is allowed in this district. This zoning classification is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of dwellings, at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space to each dwelling unit; 
C.  To minimize traffic congestion; 
D.  To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.18.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Crop and tree farming; 
B.  Small family child care homes; 
C.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family is six or less; 
D.  Public parks and recreation areas; 
E.  Single-family dwellings; 
F.  Secondary dwelling units conforming to the requirements of Chapter 17.41 of this title and the Uniform Building Code; 
G.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to crop and tree farming for family use only, family animal raising, guest house, home occupations (subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.040 of this title), the keeping of four cats or four dogs or a combination thereof not to exceed a total of four and private garages and parking areas, and private stables on a minimum lot size of 2.5 acres, in accordance with Section 17.46.040 of this title; 
H.  Small community care facility. 
I.  Transitional housing and supportive housing. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 9, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, §§ 36—38, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 19, 7-15-2015)  
17.18.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
B.  Day care centers; 
C.  Foster homes where the total number of children, including those of the proprietary family, exceeds six; 
D.  Mining and mineral extraction, subject to the development standards of this section and the provisions of Section 17.44.110 of this title; 
E.  Occupancy of existing dwelling while constructing a replacement dwelling on the same lot; 
F.  Private stables on a lot size of less than 2.5 acres, in accordance with Section 17.46.040 of this title; 
G.  Public and quasi-public uses, including churches, synagogues and other places of worship, firehouses, hospitals, parks and playgrounds, schools, and public utility buildings and uses; 
H.  Large family child care homes: No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within Section 17.50.015. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 10, 6-4-2003; Ord. 16.123, § 39, 9-5-2007)  
17.18.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-MT-5 zoning district: 
A.  Lot Area and Density Requirements. All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Zone 	Minimum Lot Area 	Maximum 
Lot 
Density 	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Depth 
R-MT 	5 acres 	5 acres/dwelling unit 	100 feet 	150 feet 
 
B.  Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be one hundred feet. 
C.  Maximum Site Coverage. The maximum site coverage in the R-MT zoning district shall be thirty-five percent. 
D.  Yards. Yard requirements are as follows: 
Zone 	Front Yard 	Side Yard 	Rear Yard 
R-MT 	40 feet 	20 feet 	25 feet 
 
E.  Building Height. No single-family dwelling in the R-MT-5 zoning district shall exceed thirty-five feet in height unless otherwise provided in Section 17.46.050 of this title. Detached accessory structures, secondary dwelling units, and guesthouses may have building heights up to thirty-five feet when all required yard setbacks conform with the same yard setbacks required for the main dwelling. 
F.  Roof Forms and Pitches. The roof forms and pitches of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with those of the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
G.  Exterior Building Materials and Colors. The exterior building materials and colors of secondary dwelling units, guesthouses, room additions, and site-built detached accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
H.  Conversion of Use. The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with existing three feet reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Section 17.46.070J. of the City's Municipal Code) into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than three but less than the required yard setbacks for the main dwelling, into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
I.  Building Height of Detached Accessory Structures. The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be 18 feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 11, 6-4-2003)  
17.18.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
B.  Minimum side and rear yards for buildings and areas that accommodate animals shall be forty feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.20 - C-S SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.20.010 - Description and purpose. 
The C-S district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "service commercial." This district is designed to create and maintain areas accommodating city-wide and regional service that may be inappropriate in neighborhood or pedestrian-oriented shopping areas and which generally require automotive access for customer convenience, servicing of vehicles or equipment, loading or unloading, or parking of commercial service vehicles. 
The service commercial zone is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices, service establishments and businesses offering various ranges of commodities and services scaled to meet the needs of different geographical areas and various categories of patrons they serve; 
B.  To provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service establishments and businesses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and in mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
[C.  Reserved.] 
D.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial development, including off-street parking and truck loading facilities; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
F.  To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic and other objectionable influences incidental to industrial uses; 
G.  To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.20.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Retail establishments; 
B.  Banks; 
C.  Business and personal service establishments; 
D.  Emergency shelters (=25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110; 
E.  Medical, professional and general business offices; 
F.  Radio and television broadcast studios (excluding transmission towers); and 
G.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are customarily incidental to the permitted use, including, but not limited to, incidental storage facilities and signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.56 of this title; 
H.  Multiple-family dwellings located either above the ground-level commercial use or at ground level at the rear of a commercial space on sites designated in the Housing Element; 
I.  Day care centers. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.84 § 1, 1992; Ord. 16.87 § 3(part), 1993; Ord. 16.89 § 2, 1993; Ord. 16.123, §§ 40, 41, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 5, 7-15-2015)  
17.20.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Animal hospitals; 
B.  Automobile sales, including sale of used cars in conjunction with the sale of new cars; 
C.  Automotive repair and related services (such as auto supply and detail shops) in an enclosed building. This conditional use category excludes auto body repair and auto painting as well as any other use that is incompatible with surrounding uses or that may be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neighbors; 
D.  Automotive service stations; 
E.  Carwash; 
F.  Coin-operated laundries; 
G.  Commercial recreation; 
H.  Equipment rental yards; 
I.  Hotels and motels; 
1.  Multiple-family dwellings located either above the ground-level commercial use or at ground level at the rear of a commercial space; 
J.  Outdoor Storage; 
K.  Public utility service yards; 
L.  Recreational vehicle sales, including boat sales; 
M.  Restaurants and bars; 
N.  Wholesale establishments; 
O.  Service shops, including printing, photographic, cabinet repair, electrical repair, heating and ventilating shops, and catering services; 
P.  Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs; 
Q.  Churches, synagogues and other places of worship; 
R.  Other uses the planning commission finds to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title; 
S.  Transitional Housing. No person shall operate a transitional housing facility without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020 and subject to the requirements of Section 17.44.170 of this title; 
T.  Emergency shelters (>25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110; 
U.  Firearms retail. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.84 § 2, 1992; Ord. 16.103 § 1, 1996; Ord. 16.123, § 42, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 3, 7-15-2015; Ord. No. 16-138, §§ 6, 12, 7-15-2015; Ord. No. 16.139, § 3, 12-20-2017)  
17.20.035 - Prohibited uses. 
Outdoor storage uses are prohibited in the C-S zone on Scotts Valley Drive and on all properties located on Scotts Valley Drive, no matter the zone. On all other properties zoned C-S, outdoor storage uses are conditional uses. Permitted outdoor storage uses may remain in place until their individual use permits expire, or in accordance with Chapter 17.48, Nonconforming Uses and Structures, of this Title. Unpermitted outdoor storage uses shall vacate the properties by July 1, 2016. Every person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to Title 4 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 4, 7-15-2015)  
17.20.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in the C-S zoning district: 
A.  Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet; 
B.  Minimum lot width: One hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet; 
D.  Minimum lot frontage: One hundred feet; 
E.  Maximum building coverage: Forty-five percent; 
F.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front, twenty feet, 
2.  Rear, zero feet, 
3.  Side, zero feet, 
4.  Interior lot: Where the lot is adjacent to any "R" district, the side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, 
5.  Corner lot: The exterior side yard of a corner lot shall be a minimum of fifteen feet, 
6.  Rear yard: There are no rear yard requirements except if abutting an R district; then rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet; 
G.  No structure shall exceed thirty-five feet in height in the C-S districts. However, if the first floor of the structure is used for parking and is at a natural grade, the thirty-five-foot height limit may be exceeded upon the granting of a use permit by the planning commission, subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title. In addition to the findings required in Section 17.50.020, the planning commission also must be able to make the following findings: 
1.  On a parcel which slopes down from an arterial or collector street, the garage is below the level of the adjacent street(s) or on parcels sloping up from a major street, the garage is below natural grade, 
2.  The garage will be buffered from view by earthen mounds three feet in height and landscaping, including shrubs, will be installed. The landscaping plan has been prepared showing the buffer and landscaping; 
H.  Where a site adjoins any residential zoning district, a solid wall or a fence, vine-covered fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard and permanently maintained. In addition, a minimum of five feet adjoining the property line shall be landscaped with plant material and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to insure privacy or to screen views, as determined by the design review board; 
I.  Not less than ten percent of the total site area shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; 
J.  Not less than ten feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; 
K.  Trash disposal: Each parcel shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Such disposal areas shall be screened from public view by masonry or solid wood fencing of at least six feet in height; 
L.  All business, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, garden shops, Christmas tree sales, open-air markets, outdoor theatrical activities and the sale of nursery products; 
M.  Hours of Operation. All commercial activity located on the same site as multiple-family dwellings shall be limited to the hours of operation between seven a.m. and nine p.m., Monday through Friday, and between nine a.m. and six p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays; 
N.  Outdoor seating at restaurants will be allowed by permit issued by the planning department under the following conditions: 
1.  A site plan shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval; 
2.  The plan shall be reviewed and approved by the building department, fire district and police department to insure compliance with federal, state and local laws; 
3.  All seating shall be confined to a specific area; and 
4.  Failure to maintain the seating within the identified area or interference with the free flow of pedestrians shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of the outdoor seating permit. 
O.  Outdoor Storage: 
1.  Location. Outdoor storage uses are prohibited next to housing; 
2.  Development standards. To ensure adequate screening of new outdoor storage uses, design review approval by the planning commission shall be required and processed with the required use permit application. Screening of outdoor storage shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Permanent screening from any adjacent public and private rights-of-way and/or adjacent property; 
b.  Solid or semi-solid fence of brick, stone, tile, masonry units, or wood at least eight feet tall. Chain-link fence may not be acceptable; 
c.  Stored materials not to project above the wall or fence, unless approved; 
d.  Public works department review for adequacy of access; 
e.  Gates securely locked when not in use; and, 
f.  Any other requirements deemed appropriate by the community development director. 
3.  Maintenance: All required screening shall be regularly well-maintained in a good and upright condition and shall be repaired or replaced to the original required state if damaged, destroyed, or in need of repair. Screening shall remain in place for as long as the use is allowed on the property. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 9, 1991; Ord. 16.88 § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 5, 7-15-2015)  
17.20.045 - Development standards for mixed use projects. 
A.  Density range is fifteen to twenty residential units per acre. 
B.  Parking for both the non-residential and the residential units shall be as specified in the zoning ordinance. The planning commission may reduce parking standards in cases where shared parking is feasible and viable. 
C.  Each dwelling shall have private, usable outdoor space, i.e. decks, balconies, yards or patios of one hundred square feet per residential unit. The planning commission may determine that the required private outdoor space is not appropriate in a particular building design and allow the required outdoor space to be common open space for all residential units. 
D.  Truck docks shall not be located within fifty feet of any residential. 
E.  Minimum setbacks for residential: 
1.  Front from the street: Ten feet; and front from a garage: Twenty feet. 
2.  Rear: Fifteen feet. 
3.  Side: Ten feet. 
4.  Corner from the street, ten feet and corner from a garage, twenty feet. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 43, 9-5-2007)  
17.20.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the C-S zoning district. 
B.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards specified in the applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
C.  All roofs shall be architecturally designed to provide an appearance which is compatible with the exterior walls of the building. The design review board shall review and approve the roofscape. 
D.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.22 - C-SC SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.22.010 - Description and purpose. 
The C-SC zoning district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "shopping center commercial." This classification is primarily intended to accommodate retail and service establishments for the development of community shopping centers. 
The shopping center commercial district is also intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices, service establishments, amusement establishments and businesses offering various ranges of commodities and services scaled to meet the needs of different geographical areas and various categories of patrons they serve; 
B.  To provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service establishments, amusement establishments and businesses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and in mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
C.  To provide space for community facilities and institutions which appropriately may be located in commercial areas; 
D.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial development, including off-street parking and truck loading facilities; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
F.  To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic and other objectionable influences incidental to industrial uses; 
G.  To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.22.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Professional offices; 
B.  Retail and personal service establishments; 
C.  Emergency shelters (=25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110; and 
D.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use which are customarily incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.87 § 3 (part), 1993; Ord. 16.89 § 3, 1993; Ord. No. 16-138, § 7, 7-15-2015)  
17.22.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Automobile sales, including the sale of used cars in conjunction with the sale of new cars; 
B.  Churches, synagogues and other places of worship; 
C.  Commercial recreation; 
D.  Institutional uses; 
E.  Day care center; 
F.  Radio and/or television broadcasting studios; 
G.  Theatres; 
H.  Restaurants; 
I.  Permitted uses in the C-S district, provided they are compatible with surrounding land uses; 
J.  Other uses the planning commission finds to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title; 
K.  Emergency shelters (>25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110; 
L.  Firearms retail. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.123, §§ 44, 45, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 8, 7-15-2015; Ord. No. 16.139, § 4, 12-20-2017)  
17.22.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in the C-SC zoning district: 
A.  Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet; 
B.  Minimum lot width: One hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet; 
D.  Minimum lot frontage: One hundred feet; 
E.  Maximum building coverage: Thirty-five percent; 
F.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front: Twenty feet. 
2.  Rear: Zero feet. 
3.  Side: Zero feet. 
4.  Interior lot: Where the lot is adjacent to any residential district, the side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
5.  Corner lot: The exterior side of a corner lot shall be a minimum of fifteen feet. 
6.  Rear yard: There are no rear yard requirements exempt if abutting a residential district, then rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet; 
G.  Maximum height: Thirty-five feet; 
H.  [Reserved]; 
I.  Not less than ten feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; 
J.  All business, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, garden shops, Christmas tree sales, open-air markets, outdoor theatrical activities and the sale of nursery products; 
K.  A minimum of ten percent of the total site area shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; and 
L.  Outdoor seating at restaurants will be allowed by permit issued by the planning department under the following conditions: 
1.  A site plan shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval; 
2.  The plans shall be reviewed and approved by the building department, fire district and police department to insure compliance with federal, state and local laws; 
3.  All seating shall be confined to a specific area; and 
4.  Failure to maintain the seating within the identified area or interference with the free flow of pedestrians shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of the outdoor seating permit. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.88 § 2, 1994; Ord. 16.123, §§ 46, 47, 9-5-2007)  
17.22.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the C-SC zoning district. 
B.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards specified in the applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
C.  Trash disposal: Each parcel shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. These areas shall be screened from public view by masonry or solid wood fencing six feet in height (refer to Figure 17.44.020). 
D.  No building shall be located closer than twenty- five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
E.  All roofs shall be architecturally designed to provide an appearance which is compatible with the exterior walls of the building. The design review board shall review and approve the roofscape. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.24 - C-P PROFESSIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.24.010 - Description and purpose. 
The C-P zoning district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "professional-commercial." This land use classification is designed to accommodate administrative, business and professional offices of a nonretail nature. The professional commercial zone district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To provide appropriately located areas for offices, service establishments, amusement establishments and businesses offering various ranges of services scaled to meet the needs of different geographical areas and various categories of patrons they serve; 
B.  To provide opportunities for offices, service establishments, amusement establishments and businesses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and in mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
C.  To provide space for community facilities and institutions which appropriately may be located in commercial areas; 
D.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial development, including off-street parking and truck loading facilities; 
E.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
F.  To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic and other objectionable influences incidental to industrial uses; 
G.  To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Medical, dental and therapeutic clinics; 
B.  Business and personal service establishments; 
C.  Professional, executive, administrative and financial offices; 
D.  Accessory uses and structures located on the same site with a permitted use which are customarily incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to incidental storage facilities and signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.87 § 3 (part), 1993)  
17.24.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Community facilities and institutions; 
B.  Private noncommercial clubs; 
C.  Schools and studios; 
D.  Libraries; 
E.  Churches, synagogues and other places of worship; 
F.  Other uses the planning commission finds to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.24.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in the C-P zoning district: 
A.  Minimum lot area, ten thousand square feet; 
B.  Minimum lot width, one hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth, one hundred feet; 
D.  Minimum lot frontage, one hundred feet; 
E.  Maximum building coverage, thirty-five percent; 
F.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front, twenty feet, 
2.  Rear, zero feet, 
3.  Side, zero feet, 
4.  Interior lot: Where the lot is adjacent to any "R" district, the side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, 
5.  Corner lot: The exterior side yard of a corner lot shall be a minimum of fifteen feet, 
6.  Rear yard: There are no rear yard requirements except if abutting an "R" district, then rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet; 
G.  Maximum height: Thirty-five feet; 
H.  Where a site adjoins any residential zoning district, a solid wall or fence, vine-covered fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard and permanently maintained. In addition, a minimum of five feet adjoining the property line shall be landscaped with plant material and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to insure privacy or to screen views, as determined by the design review board; 
I.  Not less than ten feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained. 
J.  A minimum of ten percent of the total site area shall be landscaped and permanently maintained. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.24.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the C-P zoning district. 
B.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards specified in the applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
C.  Trash disposal: Each parcel shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal areas shall be screened from public view by masonry or solid wood fencing six feet in height. 
D.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
E.  All roofs shall be architecturally designed to provide an appearance which is compatible with the exterior walls of the building. The design review board shall review and approve the roofscape. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.26 - I-L LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.26.010 - Description and purpose. 
The I-L district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "light industrial." This land use classification is designed to accommodate industrial and industrially related land uses and provide a location for businesses that are inappropriate in commercial or residential zones because of their operations or sizes and because they may create noise, odor, dust or glare and create impacts to traffic, the aquifer or air quality. Uses in this classification shall not encroach upon the character of adjoining land uses and will not expose adjoining uses to hazardous conditions. 
The light industrial district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial plants and related activities; 
B.  To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by dwellings and other inharmonious uses; 
C.  To protect residential and commercial properties and nuisance-free nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectional influences such as fire, explosion, noxious fumes, radiation and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses; 
D.  To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other; 
E.  To provide sufficient open space to meet the needs of modern industrial building development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and landscaping; 
F.  To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impacts of industrial plants on nearby residential districts; 
G.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
H.  To regulate the number and concentration of industrial uses that use significant amounts of hazardous materials; 
I.  To construct and preserve an attractive industrial zoning district with generous amounts of landscaping and careful consideration towards architecture and appearance from the freeway. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.98 § 2, 1996)  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
The key element to permitted uses is that neither toxic materials are used in manufacturing a product, nor does any process involve a change of phase/state of any material in significant quantities (per Uniform Building Code Chapter 9). Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Building construction and supply facilities; 
B.  Manufacturing, assembling, processing and packaging of components and finished materials where significant amounts of hazardous materials (defined in Chapter 13.12 of this code) are not being used; 
C.  Printing, publishing and allied industrial uses, tool and die shops; 
D.  Warehousing of nontoxic materials and distribution depot facilities; 
E.  Machine shops when toxic cleaners are not used; 
F.  Research, development and/or testing of mechanical, electrical and/or chemical equipment which do not involve the use or production of a hazardous material and when parking requirements of the zoning ordinance are met; 
G.  Automobile repairs; 
H.  Communication services, including radio broadcasting stations, television stations and telephone service companies; 
I.  Accessory uses and structures located on the same site with a permitted use, including but not limited to incidental storage facilities, offices, gift shops, food service for employees and signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.56 of this title; 
J.  Any recreational vehicle use in existence in an I-L district on January 1, 1998, may remain as a permitted use in the I-L district until such use terminates, provided that the use shall be limited to the location where it existed on that date and that the use may not be expanded or enlarged, either as to land devoted to that use or exceed 110 spaces (the number of spaces available for that use in January 1998), and further provided, that the use operates in a manner consistent with any federal or state laws regulating permanent residential uses in travel trailers or recreational vehicles, and, further, that the park provide adequate emergency access, as approved by the city, to be installed and in place no later than October 15, 1999. Except as provided herein, no trailer use may exist in an I-L district. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.87 § 3 (part), 1993; Ord. 16.98 § 3, 1996; Ord. 16.110 § 1, 1999; Ord. 16.123, § 48, 9-5-2007)  
17.26.030 - Conditional uses. 
Some industrial businesses use toxic materials and processes which involve a change of phase/state of materials used during processing. Any impact caused by a use requiring a conditional use permit may be examined as well as methods of handling hazardous materials and protection of the aquifer and air quality. The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  All uses in the C-S (service commercial) district; 
B.  Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or recreational nature; 
C.  Public utility buildings and service yards; 
D.  Warehousing of toxic materials; 
E.  Manufacturing, assembling, processing and packaging of components and finished materials where significant amounts of hazardous materials are used e.g., production of printed wiring boards, semi-conductor processes and wave or reflow soldering, not including such operations as saw and planing mills or any manufacturing uses involving primary production of wood, metal or chemical products from raw materials; 
F.  Ministorage buildings; 
G.  Offices in conjunction with a permitted or conditional use when parking requirements are not satisfied; 
H.  Laboratories for research and testing of mechanical, electrical, electronic and/or chemical products which involve the use or production of a hazardous material (defined in Chapter 13.12 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code); 
I.  Manufacture of food products and pharmaceuticals that do not include production of fish or meat products, vinegar, chemicals or the rendering or refining of fats and oils; 
J.  Propane storage facilities and related propane sales which are located to another site that meet the requirements of the Scotts Valley Fire District with a total maximum water storage capacity of seventy thousand gallons for all propane storage facilities in the city limits; provided, however, that only companies in existence and operating within the city limits of the City of Scotts Valley on January 1, 1999, may be located in the I-L district with a conditional use permit, it being the intent of this provision that no new propane storage company shall be allowed in the city limits, and if preexisting companies voluntarily leave, no new companies will be allowed to replace them; 
K.  Other uses the planning commission finds to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title; 
L.  Automobile body shop. 
M.  Outdoor storage, in accordance with this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.98 § 4, 1996; Ord. 16.103 § 2, 1996; Amended during 6/97 supplement; Amended during 7/97 supplement; Ord. No. 16.111 § 1, 1999; Ord. 16.123, § 49, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 6, 7-15-2015)  
17.26.035 - Transitional housing. 
No person shall operate a transitional housing facility without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020 and subject to requirements of Section 17.44.170 of this title. The following applies to the C-S (Service Commercial) Zoning District. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 50, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 16-138, § 11, 7-15-2015)  
17.26.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in the I-L zoning district: 
A.  Minimum lot area, forty thousand square feet; 
B.  Minimum lot width, one hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth, one hundred feet; 
D.  Minimum lot frontage, one hundred feet; 
E.  Maximum building coverage, fifty percent; 
F.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front, fifteen feet, 
2.  Rear, zero feet, 
3.  Side, zero feet; 
G.  Special yard requirements: Minimum setback for all yards abutting residential and open-space districts is fifty feet. One foot shall be added to each setback requirement for each three feet of building height above sixteen feet; 
H.  Maximum height, thirty-five feet; 
I.  Where a site adjoins any residential zoning district, a solid wall or fence, vine-covered fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard and permanently maintained. In addition, a minimum of five feet adjoining the residential property line shall be landscaped with plant material and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to insure privacy or to screen views, as determined by a landscape architect; 
J.  Not less than ten feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; 
K.  A minimum of ten percent of the total site area shall be landscaped and permanently maintained; 
L.  Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Section 17.44.030 of this title. A maximum of two loading spaces shall be permitted on the street side of any building within sixty-five feet of the street right-of-way. There are no restrictions on the number of loading spaces located more than sixty-five feet from the street right-of-way. Loading areas shall be designed so as not to interfere with required parking, access and circulation; 
M.  Trash disposal: Each parcel shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas in compliance with Section 17.44.020; 
N.  Outdoor Storage: 
1.  Location. Outdoor storage uses are prohibited next to housing; 
2.  Development standards. To ensure adequate screening of new outdoor storage uses, design review approval by the planning commission shall be required and processed with the required use permit application. Screening of outdoor storage shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Permanent screening from any adjacent public and private rights-of-way and/or adjacent property; 
b.  Solid or semi-solid fence of brick, stone, tile, masonry units, or wood at least eight feet tall. Chain-link fence may not be acceptable; 
c.  Stored materials not to project above the wall or fence, unless approved; 
d.  Public works department review for adequacy of access; 
e.  Gates securely locked when not in use; and, 
f.  Any other requirements deemed appropriate by the community development director. 
3.  Maintenance: All required screening shall be regularly well-maintained in a good and upright condition and shall be repaired or replaced to the original required state if damaged, destroyed, or in need of repair. Screening shall remain in place for as long as the use is allowed on the property. 
(Ord. 16.98 § 5, 1996: Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16-133.3, § 7, 7-15-2015)  
17.26.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the I-L zoning district. 
B.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards specified in the applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
C.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
D.  All roofs shall be architecturally designed to provide an appearance which is compatible with the exterior walls of the building. The design review board shall review and approve the roofscape. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.30 - P PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.30.010 - Description and purpose. 
The P district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "public/quasi-public." The district is designed to accommodate governmental, public utility, educational, community service, religious or recreational facilities. Such uses are somewhat unique in that their proximity to sensitive land uses is not generally detrimental to the quality of life and in many cases is desirable and convenient. The district is intended to provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which may complement a residential environment. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  All facilities and structures owned by any federal, state, county or city government or agency thereof or by any school district or community college district, special district, including but not limited to a water district or a fire district or any agency thereof, which is used for administrative, office, educational or recreational purposes or for the provision of services to the public; 
B.  Emergency services, including but not limited to police and fire stations, Red Cross and immediate medical services; 
C.  Emergency shelters (=25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110; 
D.  Single-family dwellings; and 
E.  Accessory uses and structures located on the same site with a permitted use which are customarily incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to incidental storage facilities and signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.87 § 3 (part), 1993; Ord. 16.89 § 4, 1993; Ord. No. 16-138, § 9, 7-15-2015)  
17.30.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Art, dance, gymnastic, exercise or music studios or classes; 
B.  Business or trade schools; 
C.  Churches, synagogues and similar houses of worship; 
D.  Community centers; 
E.  Day care centers; 
F.  Facilities of all public utilities and corporations or other organizations whose activities are under the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission, the Interstate Commerce Commission or the California Public Utilities Commission; 
G.  Outdoor recreational facilities, including parks, playgrounds, golf courses, public swimming pools and tennis courts; 
H.  Residential care facilities; 
I.  Cultural facilities, including but not limited to theaters, museums and centers for the arts; 
J.  Hospitals; 
K.  Private schools, colleges and universities and their related facilities, including faculty and student housing; 
L.  Other uses the planning commission determines to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title; 
M.  Emergency shelters (>25 occupants), subject to compliance with Section 17.44.110. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16-138, § 10, 7-15-2015)  
17.30.040 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in the P zoning district: 
A.  Minimum lot area, ten thousand square feet; 
B.  Minimum lot width, sixty feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth, one hundred feet; 
D.  Minimum lot frontage, one hundred feet; 
E.  Maximum building coverage, thirty percent; 
F.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front, twenty feet, 
2.  Rear, ten feet, 
3.  Side, ten feet; 
G.  Special yard requirements: Minimum setback for all yards abutting residential and/or open-space districts is fifty feet; 
H.  Maximum height, thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.30.050 - Other required conditions. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review by the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the P zoning district. 
B.  All uses shall conform to the performance standards specified in the applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
C.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
D.  All roofs shall be architecturally designed to provide an appearance which is compatible with the exterior walls of the building. The design review board shall review and approve the roofscape. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.32 - OS OPEN-SPACE ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.32.010 - Description and purpose. 
The OS district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "open space." This land use classification is designed to preserve and enhance the use of open-space lands as a limited and valuable resource. It is further intended to permit limited but reasonable use of open-space land while protecting the public health, safety and welfare; to insure the continued availability of land in agricultural production; to preserve the topography of the city that shapes it and gives it identity; and to implement the city's open space element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Fish and wildlife management activities or facilities; 
B.  Flood-control channels and drainage facilities; 
C.  Public and private recreation areas, parks, playgrounds, wildlife preserves and timber preserves; 
D.  Watershed management activities or facilities, including but not limited to aquifer recharge areas, stream restoration projects and related activities; 
E.  Accessory uses and structures located on the same site with a permitted use which are customarily incidental to the permitted use, including but not limited to incidental storage facilities and signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the premises and which are in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1687 § 3 (part), 1993)  
17.32.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Commercial and private stables and riding academies; 
B.  Crop and tree farming and grazing of horses, cattle, sheep and goats; 
C.  Golf courses, driving ranges and other similar commercial recreational facilities, but not including drive-in movie theaters or any facility where the principal use is enclosed in a building; 
D.  General outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to tennis and basketball courts; soccer, softball and baseball fields; campgrounds; picnicking grounds; and recreational trails; 
E.  Kennels, aviaries and other wholesale animal-raising facilities; 
F.  One or more single-family dwellings, with accessory structures, at a density not to exceed one dwelling unit per ten acres; if more than two dwellings are involved, the development proposal must be clustered and in conformance with an approved planned unit development; 
G.  The growing and harvesting of Christmas trees; 
H.  The growing and harvesting of timber and other forest products (not including Christmas trees), in conformance with the development standards of this section and Chapter 17.34 of this title; 
I.  Other uses which the planning commission determines to be of a similar nature to those listed above, subject to the requirements of Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.32.040 - Development standards. 
A.  Architectural and site plan review and approval of the design review board shall be required for all structures, alterations to structures and signage in the OS zoning district. 
B.  Any proposed timber harvesting shall require a timber management plan prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester. Such plan shall provide for the eventual harvest of timber within a reasonable period of time. The timber management plan shall be subject to approval as submitted or as amended by the city. Prior to commencement of the use, the parcel owner and his successors in interest shall be bound to carry out the approved timber management plan. Said management plan shall be approved by the city council, after report and recommendation of the planning commission, pursuant to Section 51110.2 of the Public Resources Code of California. 
C.  Any parcel proposed for timber harvesting shall currently meet the timber stocking standards as set forth in Section 4561 of the Public Resources Code and the Forest Practice Rules adopted by the State Board of Forestry for the district in which the parcel is located, or the owner must sign an agreement with the city council to meet such stocking standards and forest practice rules by the fifth year following the signing of such agreement. If the parcel is subsequently allowed to have a timber harvesting use, failure to meet such stocking standards and Forest Practice Rules within this time period provides the city council with grounds for revoking any use permit issued. 
D.  The land area proposed for timber harvesting shall be in the ownership of one person, as defined in Section 38106 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and shall be comprised of a single parcel or contiguous parcels consisting of at least five acres in area. 
E.  Parcels with use permits for timber harvesting may not be divided into parcels containing less than one hundred sixty acres unless the owners of resulting parcels submit a joint timber management plan prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester and such owners enter into a binding contract with the city, approved by the city council, to manage and harvest timber on the timberland jointly. Such owners shall be bound by the provisions of such management plan for a minimum period of twenty years. Any such divisions shall require approval by a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
F.  Any land division pursuant to Subsection E of this section shall not create parcels smaller than forty acres, except pursuant to an approved planned unit development. 
G.  No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of a perennial or intermittent stream, as shown in Section 17.04.230 of this title. All proposed structures shall be constructed above the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
H.  All uses shall be subject to the performance standards specified in applicable provisions of Section 17.44.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.34 - TP TIMBERLAND PRODUCTION ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.34.010 - Description and purpose. 
The TP district is intended to apply to all lands designated in the General Plan as "timberland preserve." The creation of the timberland production zone (TPZ) is necessary to protect and maintain the timberland of the city through regulation of timberland use. Establishment of this zoning district is consistent with the requirements of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976. It is designed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. The TP zoning district is a combining district intended to be attached to an open space (OS) base district when the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Timber" means trees of any species maintained for eventual harvest for forest products purposes, whether planted or of natural growth, standing or down, on privately owned land. This term includes Christmas trees but does not include nursery stock. 
B.  "Timberland" means privately owned land or land acquired for state forest purposes, which is devoted to and used for growing and harvesting timber or for growing and harvesting timber and compatible uses, and which is capable of growing an average annual volume of wood fiber of at least fifteen cubic feet per acre. 
C.  "Timber management plan" means a written plan for development and utilization of timber resources and compatible uses which assures the continued viability of the timberland and which includes reasonable rotation and cutting cycle data. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the TP zoning district: 
A.  Fish and wildlife habitat; 
B.  Grazing and other agricultural uses on that portion of the land not under timber production; 
C.  The growing and harvesting of timber and other forest products, including Christmas trees, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; 
D.  One single-family dwelling, with accessory structures and utilities, on a separate legal parcel with a minimum area of forty acres; 
E.  Watershed management. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.040 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the TP zoning district upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  Conversion to agricultural uses not exceeding ten percent of the total of the timber area on the parcel; 
B.  Erection, construction, alteration and maintenance of gas, electric, water or communications facilities; 
C.  Outdoor recreational, educational or religious or sectarian activities; 
D.  One or more single-family dwellings, with accessory structures, at a density not to exceed one dwelling unit per ten acres; if more than two dwellings are involved, the development proposal must be clustered and in conformance with an approved planned unit development (PUD) permit. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.050 - Required special findings for conditional uses. 
The following special findings shall be made in addition to the findings required for all use permits, pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title: 
A.  That the proposed conditional use would be consistent with the purposes of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976 and the purposes of this chapter; and 
B.  That the proposed conditional use is supported by a timber management plan submitted as a part of the application for such proposed conditional use, which timber management plan has been approved by the city council and which approved plan and compliance therewith are made a condition of any use permit granted. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.060 - Zoning procedures. 
An owner of land may make application to zone his or her land as timberland production. The city council by ordinance, following the recommendation of the planning commission, pursuant to Section 51110.2 of the Public Resources Code and after public hearings, may zone as timberland production all parcels submitted to it by petition pursuant to this chapter. 
A.  A map shall be submitted with the legal description (or reference to a document recorded in the official records of the Santa Cruz County recorder's office containing the legal description) of the parcel desired to be zoned timberland production. 
B.  A timber management plan shall have been prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester. Such plan shall provide for the eventual harvest of timber within a reasonable period of time. The timber management plan shall be approved as submitted or as amended by the city council. Prior to rezoning of the parcel to the TP zone, the parcel owner shall bind himself or herself and his or her successors in interest to carry out the approved timber management plan. 
C.  The parcel shall currently meet the timber stocking standards as set forth in Section 4561 of the Public Resources Code and the Forest Practice Rules adopted by the State Board of Forestry for the district in which the parcel is located or the owner must sign an agreement with the city, approved by the city council, to meet such stocking standards and forest practice rules by the fifth anniversary of the signing of such agreement. If the parcel is subsequently zoned as timberland production (TP), failure to meet such stocking standards and Forest Practice Rules within this time period provides the city council with grounds for rezoning the parcel(s). 
D.  The parcel(s) shall be timberland. 
E.  The parcel(s) shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  The parcel concerned shall be in the ownership of one person, as defined in Section 38106 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and shall be comprised of single or contiguous parcels consisting of at least five acres in area. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.070 - Rezoning to an alternative zoning district. 
Rezoning of the land from timberland production zone (TP) to another zoning district shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976, in addition to any other applicable rezoning requirements. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.34.080 - Land divisions of TPZ parcels. 
A.  Parcels zoned as timberland production under this chapter may not be divided into parcels containing less than one hundred sixty acres unless the owners of resulting parcels submit a joint timber management plan prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester and such owners enter into a binding contract with the city, approved by the city council, to manage and harvest timber on the timberland jointly and are bound by the provisions of such management plan for a minimum period of twenty years. Any such divisions shall require approval by a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
B.  Any land division pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall not create parcels smaller than forty acres, except pursuant to an approved planned unit development that conforms to the density standards and special findings prescribed in Chapter 17.38 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.36 - ST SPECIAL TREATMENT COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.36.010 - Description and purpose. 
The ST combining district is intended to apply to all lands designed in the General Plan as "special treatment" areas, with the exception of the Bethany Neighborhood Special Treatment Area (BNSTA) which will be reviewed and considered per Land Use Action 12 (LA-12), and in other areas subsequently designated by the city council where special planning efforts are desired. The intention of this zoning district is to encourage the incorporation of special design considerations into project development and redevelopment, in an effort to implement a visually pleasing environment in areas deemed to be of special importance to community image. It is further intended that development within an ST combining district shall be subject to submittal requirements of a specific plan with the exception of the BNSTA which will be reviewed and considered per Land Use Action 12 (LA-12), as enumerated herein. In addition, the city encourages planned development where appropriate when proposing developments in the special treatment areas. The development standards set forth in this chapter are consistent with the intent of the special treatment overlay designation for areas specified as special treatment planning areas in the General Plan. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16.135, § 1, 11-5-2014)  
17.36.020 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply in all special treatment "ST" combining districts and shall be in addition to the regulations of the base zoning district to which this combining district is attached. 
A.  A specific plan shall accompany development proposal(s) in this district, with the exception of the BNSTA which will be reviewed and considered per Land Use Action 12 (LA-12). The specific plan shall be prepared consistent with California Government Code Section 65451 and the goals, objectives, policies, programs and land use designations described in the General Plan. The following is a summary of those requirements which shall apply to development proposals in this district. 
A specific plan shall include a text and diagram(s) which specify all of the following in detail: 
1.  The distribution, location and extent of the existing and proposed uses of land, including but not limited to open space, within the area covered by the plan; 
2.  The existing and proposed distribution, location and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, including but not limited to streets and roads, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan; 
3.  Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable; 
4.  A program of implementation measures necessary for the systematic implementation of the General Plan, including but not limited to regulations, standards, conditions, programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out the provisions of subdivisions 1 through 3 of this section and to implement all applicable provisions of the open-space element of the General Plan and provisions of an economic feasibility analysis and consideration of financial mechanisms to provide for public improvements; 
5.  A statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the General Plan; 
6.  Any other measures which may be necessary or convenient to ensure the implementation of the General Plan. 
B.  The following general design criteria shall apply to all development in the ST combining district: 
1.  The design should be compatible with the immediate environment of the site, including the streetscape. In the Scotts Valley Drive study area, standards of the Scotts Valley Drive Master Plan shall apply to the project under review; 
2.  The design should produce harmonious transition in both scale and character between adjacent land uses; 
3.  Buffers should be provided between land use types and where density variations warrant; 
4.  Development should be clustered whenever possible to protect visual natural resources and to provide open space; 
5.  Open space and recreational areas should be included as part of future development planning. The amount and arrangement of open space and landscaping should be appropriate to the design and function of the structure(s); 
6.  Provisions for the dedication of park land, recreational improvements and maintenance agreements, as appropriate, within future development should be included; 
7.  Landscaping should be compatible with and complement site planning as well as the design of building(s); 
8.  Specific special treatment planning areas, as defined in the General Plan, shall be designed with respect to notable use and design considerations recognized in the General Plan; 
9.  Materials, textures, colors and details of construction should be an appropriate expression of the development's design concept and function and the same should be compatible with adjacent structures and functions; 
10.  Provisions for comprehensive circulation planning and improvements for future development should be included; 
11.  Access to the parcel(s) and circulation thereon should be safe and convenient for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles; 
12.  The provision of adequate services to provide for future development should be included; 
13.  The project should protect and enhance buildings that have historic and cultural value by virtue of preservation, architectural character, historic association and the like; 
14.  Energy efficiency shall be included in all site and architectural design. 
C.  The following architectural standards shall apply to all buildings in the ST combining district: 
1.  Harmony: Structures and parts of structures of both new and old construction shall be compatible in terms of architectural styles, features, colors and materials; 
2.  Wall treatment: All exterior wall elevations visible from and/or facing streets are to have architectural treatment. No building surface on a street shall have a flat, void surface without architectural treatment or elements. Examples of architectural treatment include exterior finishes, siding, stucco patterns, paint patterns and graphics. Examples of architectural elements includes form modulation, windows, canopies and balconies; 
3.  Mechanical equipment and utilities: All roof- mounted mechanical equipment or duct work which projects vertically above the roof or parapet is to be screened by an enclosure which is detailed consistently with the building design. Solar heating equipment need not be screened but must be as unobtrusive as possible; 
4.  Gutters and downspouts: Gutters and downspouts are to be painted to match the surface to which they are attached, unless used as a major design element, in which case the color is to be consistent with the color scheme of the building; 
5.  Storage areas: All outdoor storage for goods, materials, commercial vehicles or equipment shall be visually screened, said screening shall form a complete opaque screen with a maximum height of eight feet; 
6.  Refuse collection areas: All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be screened by a complete opaque screen; 
7.  Pedestrians: At street levels, structures should be sensitive to the pedestrian, making him or her comfortable when walking past, by including planters, fountains and seating areas along the sidewalk; 
8.  Energy conservation: Buildings should be designed to minimize mechanical heating and cooling. Sunlight should be used for direct heating and illumination wherever possible. Natural ventilation and shading should be used to cool a building. Active and passive solar heating is encouraged; 
9.  Design theme: Architectural themes chosen for buildings, shopping districts, industrial parks, the Scotts Valley Drive area, entrances to the city or other identifiable districts of the city shall be implemented through well-developed and articulated physical features. Examples of these features are corridors, posts, beams, arches, columns, colonnades, canopies, cornices, balconies, ornamental tiles, recesses, overhangs, exterior wall materials, graphics, window treatment, fountains, landscaping and other artistic features. 
D.  The following site planning standards shall apply to all parcels within the ST combining district, where applicable: 
1.  Site suitability: The structure should be planned to fit a site's natural conditions, rather than altering a site to accommodate a stock building plan. Existing topography should be preserved to make the project design more attractive or functional. Topography may be modified where it contributes to good appearance, but natural grade and vegetation should be retained if possible. Excessive cuts and fills should be avoided; 
2.  Functions: A site's various activities and elements should be logically located so that the project may operate efficiently. Pedestrian and vehicular routes should be separated. Loading and service areas should be separated from customer parking and traffic areas; 
3.  Transition: From the street to project, there should be a pleasing transition that provides for adequate landscaping, walkways and parking; 
4.  Parking areas: Parking areas should be screened from public streets and divided with landscaping, buildings, walls, fences, berms or other means. In large parking lots, islands of trees shall be incorporated into the design; 
5.  Trash collection and other service areas: Trash containers and service and loading docks should be conveniently located and sized, but must not interfere with other circulation or parking on the site. Trash containers should be located away from public streets and store entrances and should be completely screened with materials similar to or compatible with buildings located on the same site. All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be enclosed per city-approved standard details, as illustrated in Figure 17.44.020; 
6.  Traffic circulation: Circulation should provide for safe and efficient traffic movement. Adequate auto stack-up areas should permit a minimum of two cars to enter the parking lot area without obstructing either street through traffic or vehicle back-up areas within the parking lot. The number of curb cuts connecting the site with collector or arterial streets should be minimized. Traffic circulation between the site and adjacent lots shall be coordinated. Mutual access easements and mutual driveways should be used to minimize paved areas and curb cuts; 
7.  Energy conservation: Solar access shall be planned into the site design where possible. Solar access shall be reserved, where appropriate, through recorded easements or other devices or instruments. Climatic factors such as prevailing winds, shade trees, window and door orientation and the positioning of buildings on the site shall all be coordinated to maximize energy conservation; 
8.  Grading and drainage: Grading and drainage plans illustrating existing topography, proposed cuts and fills, sedimentation and erosion control measures, the direction of all site drainage, and all structural drainage facilities shall be submitted as a part of architectural and site plan review. On-site stormwater detention ponds shall be required where permanent storm drainage facilities are not available. Permanent stormwater drainage facilities shall be used to transmit stormwater to recharge areas whenever possible; 
9.  Elimination of architectural barriers to the physically handicapped: State laws require that all facilities which are open to the public must be accessible to and usable by the physically handicapped. Plans for construction of new public facilities and remodeling of existing facilities shall incorporate features that insure accessibility to the physically handicapped. 
E.  The following landscape standards for design and maintenance shall apply to all parcels within the ST combining district: 
1.  When a parcel is undeveloped at the time landscaping requirements are imposed upon the parcel, landscaped yards and areas shall be provided and maintained at the time a main building is constructed and occupied or when any open use, other than agricultural, occurs on the parcel. All unpaved areas shall be landscaped with ground cover and/or shrub plant material and undeveloped areas proposed for future expansion shall be landscaped with appropriate ornamentals, to include ground cover, shrubs and/or trees; 
2.  No artificial or nonliving materials may be used in place of vegetation. All required landscaping is vegetation except for fences, walls, fountains, lighting, sculpture, ornamental paving and similar items; 
3.  All trees planted adjacent to a street shall be of a minimum fifteen-gallon size; all others shall be a minimum five-gallon size; 
4.  All plants shall be planted with spacings and locations (given the plant types and character, type of soil, availability of or likelihood of watering regularity and similar considerations) so that the plantings will achieve their purpose within a reasonable time; 
5.  Landscaping required as a screening device shall be of a type which provides a year-round barrier and shall be of trees and/or shrubs spaced so that any view of objects on the opposite side (at ground level) is effectively screened. A fence or wall required as a screening device shall be of solid board fencing or masonry, so constructed as to effectively eliminate any view of objects on the opposite side below the maximum height of the required fence or wall. Fences and walls shall be landscaped and modulated to provide visual relief from continuous wall or fence surfaces; 
6.  All shrubs used for screening purposes shall be of a minimum five-gallon size; 
7.  Areas utilized for parking, storage or loading shall be effectively screened, modulated or integrated from view of access streets, freeways or adjacent properties (at ground level). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16.135, § 2, 11-5-2014)  
Chapter 17.38 - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.38.010 - Planned development district. 
A.  The planned development district is hereby established as a city zoning district classification. It may be referred to as planned development zone, planned development district or as PD district or PD zone. 
B.  Every PD district shall, in all cases, be combined with an alternative base zoning district or districts. Any zoning district set forth in Section 17.06.010 may be utilized as a base district. Prior to development, the zone shall be referred to by the symbol for its base district followed by its planned district designation (e.g., R-1 (PD)). 
C.  The PD district shall be individually designed to meet the needs of the property so zoned. It shall be adopted by a zoning ordinance which incorporates by reference a general development plan for the entirety of the subject property. The general development plan shall include drawings and text as specified by Section 17.38.020. 
D.  Development of the subject property can hereafter occur only pursuant to an effective PD permit issued in strict conformity with the adopted general development plan or alternatively, in accordance with requirements for the base district. 
E.  Under no circumstances shall the city ever be required to issue a PD permit. The discretion to grant or deny such permit is absolute and nothing contained in this title shall be deemed or construed to limit this discretion in any way whatsoever. Unless and until a PD permit has been issued and becomes effective, the subject territory may be used only as allowed in the base district alone.  
17.38.020 - General development plan. 
A.  The PD planned development district shall be individually designed to meet the needs of the property so zoned. It shall be reflected in the general development plan which is adopted as part of any planned development zoning ordinance. The general development plan shall include: 
1.  All public and private use areas appropriately mapped, clearly identified and shaded, including: 
a.  All permitted residential land uses, including size and unit type (single-family detached, single- family attached, multiple-family, etc.), 
b.  All permitted commercial and industrial land uses, including size and type (retail commercial, office, manufacturing, etc.), 
c.  Landscape areas, common open space, private open space, and public open space, 
d.  All public streets, private streets and driveways within the proposed PD zone, labeled "public street," "private street" or "driveway" with total right-of-way width dimensioned, 
e.  All public and private streets adjacent or within one hundred feet of the proposed PD zone, labeled "public" or "private" and showing dimension from street centerline to ultimate right-of-way edge; 
2.  A use table which identifies each permitted use and the area of each use and includes a statement of the standards of residential, commercial and/or industrial density, and building, parking, vehicular circulation and landscaping intensity; 
3.  Notes which specify: 
a.  Development standards, including: 
i.  All setbacks, 
ii.  Building heights (stories and feet), 
iii.  Parking (number of spaces and ratios), and 
iv.  Minimum lot size and dimensions, if applicable, 
b.  Where landscaping is to serve a particular function, such as a screen or buffer of something specific, or as a focal point or frame, the particular function and landscape concept shall be identified. Where landscaping is proposed in the public right-of-way, the maintenance responsibility shall be specified, 
c.  Clear descriptions of any required off-site work, including street and infrastructure improvements, 
d.  Noise attenuation requirements, if any, and 
e.  Any other matters specified by the city council; 
4.  Additional graphic (i.e. mapped) information as applicable, including: 
a.  The location of the closest buildings, both existing and approved, on adjacent properties, 
b.  All existing structures which are to be retained, 
c.  All significant existing natural features, or within fifty feet of the planned development zoning district, including: 
i.  Protected trees (twenty-four inches diameter or larger) and any smaller trees which are significant by virtue of their species, location and/or significance to the site due to the limited amount of existing vegetation, 
ii.  Creeks and waterways, and 
iii.  Rock outcroppings, 
d.  The location and required height of sound walls, 
e.  Topography contours, sufficient to describe terrain, where site is adjacent to creek or has an existing overall slope of more than two percent, and 
f.  Proposed grading if any cut or fill slope exceeds eighteen inches; 
5.  Building elevations which illustrate the intended architectural style and character and the size, materials and general detailing of buildings. Building design will be finalized at PD permit stage. 
B.  At the time of submittal of an application for PD zoning, the director may expressly exempt the applicant from submitting information specified above where such information is deemed by the director not to be applicable to the project during the general development phase. 
C.  Nothing herein shall preclude the director, the planning commission or the city council from requiring any additional information to be shown on the general development plan. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.030 - General provisions. 
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered, or demolished in any planned development district, except in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.040 - PD district effective. 
A.  The PD district becomes effective if any of the following occur: 
1.  A valid tentative map in compliance with the PD district is approved; 
2.  A building permit is issued in compliance with a duly issued PD permit; or 
3.  Institution of a use consistent with a duly issued PD permit. 
B.  If the tentative map expires without a final map having been recorded, or if the building permit expires without construction having commenced, and if no use consistent with the PD permit has been instituted, the PD district shall not be deemed to be effective. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.050 - Uses. 
The use regulations for property located in a planned development district shall be as follows: 
A.  Unless and until a planned development permit has been issued and is in effect, property in the district may be used only in a manner consistent with its base district. 
B.  If a planned development permit is effective, no use other than the particular uses specified in the permit, shall be permitted and then only in compliance with all terms, provisions and conditions of said permit. Each permitted use shall be confined and limited to the particular location designated in said permit. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.060 - Development regulations. 
A.  Except where a planned development permit has been implemented, the regulations for development, advertising devices, off-street parking and off-street loading as provided in the base district zoning shall apply to all property located in territory located in the planned development district. 
B.  Where a PD permit is in effect in a planned development district, the provisions of such permit shall prevail over the regulations of the base district zoning of the property. No structure, facility, improvement or advertising device of any kind shall be constructed upon such property except in strict compliance with all provisions of the PD permit. In particular: 
1.  No structure, facility, improvement or advertising device shall be constructed except the particular structures, facilities, improvements, and advertising devices specified in such permit; 
2.  Each structure, facility, improvement or advertising device shall have the exact height, floor area and dimensions specified for it in such permit; 
3.  Each structure or facility used for off-street parking and off-street loading shall have the exact number of off-street parking and off-street loading spaces, and other areas, specified for it in such permit; 
4.  Each structure, facility, improvement or advertising device shall be constructed at the particular location and cover the exact surface area designated for it in such permit; and 
5.  Each structure, facility, improvement and advertising device shall be constructed and maintained in strict compliance with all conditions of the PD permit. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.070 - Proceedings to zone PD. 
A.  Proceedings to zone property to a planned development district may be initiated by the city council, by the planning commission or by application joined in by all of the owners of the territory covered by the application. 
B.  The provisions of Chapters 17.38 and 17.39 shall be applicable to planned development zonings and shall prevail over conflicting provisions of Title 17. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.080 - Planning commission recommendations. 
A.  Within a reasonable time after its hearing on such proceedings, the planning commission shall submit to the city council a written report of its recommendation on the matter. The commission may: 
1.  Recommend that the property be zoned to the planned development district as proposed; 
2.  Recommend that the property be zoned to the planned development district and recommend such changes to the proposed zoning as it deems appropriate. Without limiting the generality of the proceeding sentence, the commission may recommend that the city council: 
a.  Zone all or only part of the property to the planned development district; 
b.  Provide a base district zoning which differs substantially from the proposed base district zoning; and 
c.  Include a general development plan which differs substantially from the proposed general development plan. 
B.  The commission shall set forth the reasons for whatever recommendations it makes. The recommendations of the commission shall be advisory only and shall not be binding upon the city council in any way whatsoever. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
17.38.090 - Council determination. 
A.  Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of its hearing on the matter, the city council shall take action on the application and the recommendations of the commission. The council may: 
1.  Approve the proposed zoning to the planned development district; 
2.  Deny the proposed zoning to the planned development district; 
3.  Adopt an ordinance changing the proposed zoning in whatever way it deems appropriate regardless of how substantially this may differ from the proposed zoning. Without limiting the generality of the preceding sentence, such ordinance may: 
a.  Zone all or only part of the subject territory to the planned development district, 
b.  Provide a base district zoning which differs substantially from the proposed base district zoning, and 
c.  Include a general development plan which differs substantially from the proposed general development plan. 
B.  Failure of the city council to take any action within sixty days after the close of its hearing on the matter shall constitute a denial of any such zoning for the subject territory. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 17.39 - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
17.39.010 - Overview. 
For purposes of this chapter, planned development permits are development permits. Different or additional permits may be required for particular uses. It can be determined whether such other permits are required by reference to the zoning district provisions applicable to the subject property. 
Planned development permits run with the land, and all persons who, at any time, use or have an interest in the subject property are bound to comply with all requirements, conditions, and obligations of such permits. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.020 - Applications. 
A.  Applications for planned development permits, approvals or appeals filed pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the director of planning. The form of such application and the information and data required to be set forth thereon shall be as prescribed by the director. 
B.  A separate application shall be filed for each site. Each application shall be signed by all owners of the real property included in the site or by a person having the lawful power of attorney. The application may designate an agent who has full authority to act on behalf of the applicant, except that the agent may not sign the application, acceptance or withdrawal. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.030 - Environmental review. 
Every application, other than for an appeal, shall be subject to the environmental review process of the city. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.040 - Application received. 
No application shall be deemed received until the following have been provided: 
A.  All fees for the application as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the council have been paid. No fee shall be deemed paid until any negotiable instrument has been cleared and funds received on the city's account. 
B.  All documents specified as part of the application in this chapter or specified on the application form have been filed. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.050 - Determination of incompleteness. 
A.  No later than thirty calendar days after the application has been received, (in accordance with Section 17.39.040 above) by the planning department, the director shall notify the applicant if it is determined that the application is not complete. Said determination shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and thorough description of specific information needed to complete the application. 
B.  No later than thirty calendar days after the submittal of additional information in response to notification pursuant to subsection A above, the director shall notify the applicant if it is determined that the application is still not complete. Said determination shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete including a list and thorough description of specific information needed to complete the application. 
C.  If the determination, pursuant to subsections A and B above, is not made within the thirty calendar-day period, the application, together with the submitted materials, will be deemed complete and the application shall be eligible for hearing on the merits. Nothing herein shall preclude the director, design review board, the planning commission or the city council from denying the application on the grounds that the information provided is inadequate to demonstrate that the application should be approved in accordance with this title. 
D.  Nothing herein precludes an applicant from waiving the right to a determination of incompleteness or from extending the period of time for a determination of completeness. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.060 - Appeal of determination of incompleteness. 
A.  The determination of incompleteness by the director may be appealed in writing to the planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission shall review the submitted documents at a public hearing and shall issue a final written determination not later than sixty days after the receipt of the written appeal, unless the applicant agrees to extend the time period. 
C.  If the determination, pursuant to this section, is not made within the sixty-calendar-day period, the application together with the submitted materials will be deemed complete and the application shall be eligible for hearing on the merits. Nothing herein shall preclude the director, design review board, the planning commission or the city council from denying the application, on the grounds that the information provided is inadequate to demonstrate that the application should be approved in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.070 - Notice. 
Whenever the director of planning, the planning commission or the city council holds a public hearing under this chapter, notice shall be given in accordance with Section 17.50.090 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.090 - Amendment or withdrawal of applications. 
A.  The application may be amended only with the consent of the decision maker (the director, the planning commission or the city council) before whom the matter is pending except where: 
1.  A change in boundaries would result in a change in the requirements for notice pursuant to Section 17.39- .070; or 
2.  A change is determined by the director not to be covered by the environmental review prepared for the application. 
B.  The applicant may withdraw the application only with the consent of the decision maker before whom the matter is pending. When the application is withdrawn, the proceeding thereon shall terminate. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.100 - Conditions in planned development permits. 
A.  The director, design review board, planning commission or the city council in granting any planned development permit pursuant to this chapter, may issue it subject to such conditions as they may deem reasonably necessary to secure the general purposes of this title. Without limiting the generality of the preceding sentence, such conditions may include modifications to the elevations, locations, and orientation of structures and other site elements proposed in the application, limitations on use, time limitations on the commencement and completion of the work covered by the planned development permit, public facilities dedications and improvements. 
B.  Certain conditions may be imposed by the director, design review board the planning commission or the city council as conditions prior to release of permit. Such conditions are conditions precedent to the effectiveness of the permit. In such cases, the director shall receive the acceptance as set forth in Section 17.39.210, but shall maintain custody of the permit and no certificate of permit shall be recorded until said condition has been satisfied. 
C.  Each planned development permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to revocation for violation of any of its provisions or conditions. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.110 - Planned development plan requirements. 
A.  If a planned development permit is issued, irrespective of whether it is issued by the director, the planning commission, or the city council, it shall contain among its terms, provisions, and conditions, a permit development plan for the use and development of the property covered thereby and, unless expressly exempted by the director, such permit development plan shall set forth and delineate: 
1.  The location and dimensions of the property included in the application, 
2.  The location and dimensions of all things which comprise the permit development plan including all existing and proposed subdivisions of land; all public and private uses, all things to be constructed or planted, all paving, and all things which will be situated or done on the property including, but not limited to, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
a.  All lots, 
b.  All buildings and other structures, 
c.  All public open space and all common private open space, 
d.  Each different public or private use and the location and dimensions of the area to be devoted to each such use, provided that if an area is to be devoted to more than one use, each separate use of such area shall be shown and if a specific portion of such area is to be used for a particular use (or uses) such particular use (or uses) and the specific portion of the area to be devoted thereto shall be shown, the percent of the total area for each use, including public and private uses, 
e.  All freeways, all public and private streets, pedestrian ways, utility, flood, drainage and sewer easements and right-of-way, and all other public or private easements and rights-of-way of any kind, 
f.  All off-street parking, driveways, and off- street loading areas, including surface cross-section drawings, 
g.  A landscaping and irrigation plan for all open space, 
h.  The grades and locations of all on-site drainage facilities, and 
i.  Any previously issued and effective planned development permit, 
j.  Grading plan, 
k.  Lighting plan, 
l.  Planned sign program (if applicable); 
3.  The use which will be made of each building and each other structure—except buildings or other structures which may be built by city on public space—to be constructed on the property, provided that if the entire building or other structure is not to be devoted to a single use, then each different use and the location and dimensions of the portion of the building or other structure to be devoted to each such use shall be set forth and delineated; 
4.  The location, size, shape, total floor area, elevations, materials, color, and architectural character of each structure, including but not limited to fences, enclosures, and patios, which will be situated or constructed on the property; 
5.  A statement of the total area of the property expressed in acres and in square feet; 
6.  Tables showing: 
a.  The total number of each type of dwelling unit, and 
b.  The total amount of space for multiple residential use and for each separate nonresidential use; 
7.  A statement of the number of regular, compact and handicapped off-street parking spaces for each separate use; 
8.  A development schedule setting forth any phasing of construction; 
9.  A plan indicating the location and type of fixtures for exterior lighting; 
10.  Uses adjacent to the site; 
11.  Vertical scale of proposed development; 
12.  All setbacks; and 
13.  Such other things as the director, the design review board, the planning commission or the city council issuing the permit may require. 
B.  Any existing use, structure, sign, ingress or egress not specifically delineated on the plan shall not be allowed after the development permit has been effectuated. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.120 - Appeal. 
The approval, denial or any condition placed upon the approval of any planned development permit may be appealed in accordance with Section 17.50.060. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.130 - Failure to install public improvements. 
It shall be a violation of this title for any person who has signed the acceptance of a planned development permit issued pursuant to this chapter to fail to secure any public improvements required by said permit within the time period specified in the permit. If no time period is specified therein, the time period for completion of improvements shall be deemed to be one year from the issuance of a building permit unless an extension has been granted in writing by the director of planning or, if no building permit is required, one year from the issuance of the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.140 - Construction clean up. 
It is a violation of this title for any person responsible for construction, including, but not limited to the permit holder and any contractor thereof, to fail to keep the public right-of-way free from construction dirt and debris. All on-site construction debris shall be removed at least weekly. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.150 - Maintenance of landscape. 
It is a violation of this title for any property owner or other person in control of any lot to fail to maintain any landscaping required by a planned development permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Any vegetation required by a planned development permit which is dead or dying shall be replaced as required by the city. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.160 - Notice of noncompliance. 
The director may issue a notice of noncompliance for any failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter or any condition of a planned development permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners and to any agent or real party in interest at the address shown for such parties on the permit. In addition, a notice will be sent to any successor in interest to the real property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll adopted by the county. If the noncompliance is not abated, corrected, or rectified within the time specified by the director in said notice, the director may issue an order to show cause why such development permit shall not be revoked, suspended or modified. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.170 - Hearing on an order to show cause. 
At the time specified in the order to show cause, or at such later time to which the matter is continued, the planning commission shall hold a hearing to determine if the planned development permit shall be revoked. The procedures set forth in this chapter for the processing of an application for a planned development permit shall equally apply to a hearing on an order to show cause except as hereinafter expressly set forth. The planning commission may revoke, modify or amend any planned development permit for noncompliance. The decision of the planning commission shall be final for all planned development permits. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.180 - Effect of revocation. 
A.  When a determination to revoke a planned development permit has become final, the city shall file a revocation certificate with the county recorder. 
B.  Any building or structure built under a planned development permit which is later revoked shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and this title as if no such planned development permit had ever been issued. 
C.  Irrespective of prior permits issued, it shall be a violation of this code to utilize any property for which planned development permit has been revoked, for any purpose which requires a planned development permit under this title, without obtaining a new planned development permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.190 - Amendments. 
Any planned development permit holder may, at any time, file an application form for a permit amendment with the director. An amendment shall mean any addition, deletion, or modification of any condition in the planned development permit or the permit development plan upon which the permit is based, provided that such amendment does not alter the general character, use, or intensity of the development permit to be amended. 
The procedures set forth in this chapter for the processing of and application for a planned development permit shall equally apply to an application for amendment except as hereinafter expressly set forth. The review of the application for an amendment shall be limited to consideration of those conditions or specifications proposed to be amended in the application. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.200 - Adjustments. 
A.  The director of planning may, at his sole discretion, approve adjustments for the following: 
1.  Changes to an approved planned development permit but only for minor modification of architectural elements or landscape details, (including but not limited to minor storefront alterations, relocations of doors, equipment screening, minor landscape furniture and structures, benches, small trellises, and planters) which do not affect the use, intensity, general character, architectural style, circulation or other site function of the project; 
2.  Signs which conform to an approved sign program, minor changes to approved sign programs and simple sign programs when such approval is required as a condition of a planned development permit;3.For planned development residential projects only: single-family residences, additions, accessory buildings or such minor structures as trellises, patio covers, swimming pools and decks where such structures are permitted by an existing effective planned development permit. 
B.  An application for an adjustment must be filed on the form provided by the director and accompanied by the fees as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council. The director, in his discretion, may refer any adjustment required to the design review board for input and recommendation prior to a final decision on the adjustment. The decision to grant, deny or condition an adjustment is an administrative determination and requires no hearing or notice. The action of the director shall be final. 
However, nothing herein shall preclude the applicant from thereafter filing an application for an amendment pursuant to Section 17.39.190. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.210 - Acceptance. 
A.  After the time for any appeal has expired and before the expiration of thirty days after the issuance of a planned development permit, all owners or tenant applicants of the property covered thereby, in writing, on a form provided by the city, must accept the planned development permit and agree to be bound by, comply with, and do all things required of them by all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and title applicable to such planned development permits. 
B.  No planned development permit shall have any force or effect prior to the time that such fully signed acceptance has been submitted to the director of planning and a certificate recorded pursuant to Section 17.39.220. If such acceptance is not submitted before the expiration of said thirty-day period, it shall not thereafter be accepted and the permit shall thereupon lapse and be null and void. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.220 - Recordation. 
Upon acceptance, in accordance with Section 17.39.210, fulfillment of all conditions set forth in Section 17.39.100 and the payment of recordation fees, a certificate identifying the development permit shall be recorded by the city. The permit shall become effective upon recordation and the rights and restrictions shall run with the land. 
If any planned development permit is revoked, a certificate of revocation shall be recorded with the county recorder's office. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.230 - Compliance. 
No person shall use, maintain, or suffer the use or maintenance of any real property which is the subject of a valid PD permit, except in full and complete compliance with this chapter and in precise conformity to all the requirements and conditions of any planned development permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.240 - Nonexclusivity of remedy. 
No remedy provided in this chapter shall preclude limit or supersede the ability of the city or any member of the public to seek any other remedy otherwise available at law for any such violation of the chapter or for any nuisance created by any use subject to a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.250 - Definition of a nuisance. 
For purposes of this chapter, a nuisance shall mean any act or omission which obstructs or causes substantial inconvenience or damage to the public or any member thereof, in the course of, or by the manner of, the exercise of rights created by the grant of the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.260 - Fees. 
The filing fees charged to defray the city's costs and the expense of conducting the proceedings under this chapter shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
Article II. - Planned Development Permits 
 
17.39.800 - Applicability of part. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to and govern the issuance of planned development permits, commonly referred to as "PD permits" for planned developments in combined base and planned development districts, hereinafter also referred to in this article as "combined districts" or "planned development zonings." A planned development permit is a use permit as well as a permit which addresses aesthetic and functional aspects of development. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.810 - Planned development permit required. 
Unless the base zone is being utilized: 
A.  No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, placed or installed or moved onto any site nor shall there be any exterior alteration of any structure which is in a planned development district, and no building permit or installation permit shall be issued for such work, except pursuant to and in accordance with a planned development permit. 
B.  No use shall be added, changed, modified, enlarged or altered on any site which is in a planned development district except pursuant to and in accordance with a planned development permit. 
C.  A planned development permit may be issued for all or any part of the property located in a planned development district. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.820 - When applications may be filed. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit shall be filed only when the property covered thereby is located in planned development zoning district. 
B.  An application for a planned development permit may be filed at any time after the city council has adopted a planned development zoning ordinance on which the application for the planned development permit is based. 
However, no hearing may be held on such application until the zoning ordinance has become effective. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.830 - No right to issuance. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this article, the director, or the planning commission on appeal from the director's action, may issue planned development permits. Under no circumstances shall any applicant have the right to have a planned development permit issued for any property in a planned development district and nothing contained in this article shall, in any event or under any circumstances, be deemed or construed to confer on any applicant the right to have a planned development permit issued for any property. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.840 - Action by director. 
A.  Upon finding an application for a planned development permit complete pursuant to Article I of this chapter, the director shall review the application and shall set a public hearing on the application. 
B.  The director shall cause notice of the time and place at which all persons may appear before the director and be heard to be given in accordance with Section 17.39.070. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.850 - Findings required for issuance. 
A.  The director or the planning commission on appeal, may issue a planned development permit only if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The planned development permit, as issued, furthers the policies of the general plan; 
2.  The planned development permit, as issued, conforms in all respects to the planned development zoning of the property; 
3.  The interrelationship between the orientation, location, mass and scale of building volumes, and elevations of proposed buildings, structures and other uses on-site are appropriate, compatible and aesthetically harmonious; 
4.  The environmental impacts of the project have been reviewed and considered. 
B.  The planning commission or the city council shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at the public hearing fails to satisfactorily substantiate such findings. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.860 - Appeal. 
Any action taken by the director under this article may be appealed to the planning commission by filing, with the director of planning, a written notice of appeal as provided in Section 17.50.060. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.870 - Revocation findings. 
After a hearing on an order to show cause pursuant to Section 17.39.170, the commission at its discretion may revoke, suspend, or modify any planned development permit upon finding that: 
A.  A violation of any condition of the planned development permit was not abated, corrected or rectified within the time specified on the notice of violation; or 
B.  A violation of any city ordinance or state law was not abated, corrected or rectified within the time specified on the notice of violation; or 
C.  A use as presently conducted creates a nuisance. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.880 - Amendment findings. 
Amendment may be granted at the discretion of the director or planning commission on appeal upon a finding that the amendment does not negate any findings required by Section 17.39.850. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude the director or planning commission from making reasonable modifications, additions or deletions to any condition in order to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.890 - Public open space—City council approval. 
The director shall not issue a planned development permit providing for public open space, and no planned development permit issued by the director which provides for public open space shall be valid, unless before the issuance of such permit, the city council shall have approved the provisions of such public open space and the size, shape, location, and dimensions thereof. 
As used in this article, "public open space" means public park or playground land which shall be owned in fee by the city. 
The city's title to and ownership of public open space shall be vested and complete as soon as such public open space shall have been conveyed to city pursuant to the provisions of any planned development permit, and immediately upon such conveyance city shall have exclusive right to the possession and use of such public open space for public park or playground purposes, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the right to construct buildings or structures thereon for such purposes; and nothing contained in this article or in any other title, chapter or section of this code, shall be construed to defeat the title or ownership of city to any public open space which shall have been conveyed to city, nor to deny city such right of possession and use. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.900 - Conduct of use. 
Any use permitted by this article shall be conducted in full compliance with all local and state laws. Any permit hereunder is subject to revocation if it is conducted in such a manner as to cause a nuisance as defined by Section 17.39.250 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
17.39.910 - Conditions in planned development permits involving building relocations. 
In addition to conditions as set forth in Section 17.39.100, a planned development permit for the relocation of a building or part thereof may be conditioned upon the applicant providing a cash deposit, letter of deposit, or some equivalent satisfactory to the director of planning, ensuring that all work permitted and/or required by the planned development permit be completed in a timely manner. The permit shall include time limitations on the commencement and completion of the relocation, and on the commencement and completion of any required architectural and other required improvements. 
(Ord. 16.83 § 2 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 17.40 - HR HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS, INCLUDING ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS WITH GREATER THAN TEN PERCENT SLOPE 
 
17.40.010 - Description and purpose. 
The HR district is a combining district and is intended to apply to all residential land and parcels in (or within) the city with an average slope greater than ten percent, as determined by the formula in Section 17.40.020 of this chapter. The HR district is designed to provide for an orderly, harmonious development of the foothills and mountains, resulting in a minimum amount of disturbance of the natural slope; to encourage and provide incentives for excellence in design principles and engineering techniques; and to provide for a variety of dwelling types where consolidation of parcels and unified development are most appropriate. Development shall be sensitive to the steepness of the terrain in order to minimize grading, removal of vegetation, run-off erosion, geologic hazards and fire hazards, and to help ensure utilization of land in balance with its natural capabilities to support development. The intent of this chapter is that grading be limited to that which is necessary to accommodate buildings, roadways, utilities, drainage systems and driveways and that plans be stepped to minimize grading. Furthermore, the HR combining district is established in order to implement the open space element of the General Plan and is directed to the preservation and conservation of natural vegetative and topographic features and open space. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.40.020 - Determination of slope. 
The average slope(s) of the parcel being considered shall be determined by applying the following formula: 
S = .00229 IL / A 
Where: 
S 	= 	Average slope in percent, rounded to the nearest whole percentage, 
I 	= 	Contour interval in feet, 
L 	= 	Combined length of contour lines in scale feet, and 
A 	= 	Gross area in acres of the total parcel being developed. 
 
The formula may be applied to the net site area. "Net site area" excludes stream channels and adjacent areas where no construction can occur. If net site area is to be used, the area to be excluded shall be shown on a site plan and permanently restricted from construction pursuant to Section 17.46.150 of this title. 
The following illustrations present examples of slopes. 
A Comparative Definition of Slope 
(Percent Slope vs. Degree of Slope) 
As defined in the General Plan, "slope" is the natural or artificial incline of ground, with the degree of incline numerically expressed as "percent of slope," or the vertical rise divided by the horizontal run. 
Percent of Slope 	Degree of Slope 
100% 	45  degrees 
 50% 	26.6 degrees 
 45% 	24.2 degrees 
 40% 	21.8 degrees 
 35% 	19.3 degrees 
 30% 	16.7 degrees 
 25% 	14  degrees 
 20% 	11.3 degrees 
 15% 	 8.5 degrees 
 10% 	 5.7 degrees 
  5% 	 2.9 degrees 
 
  
Figure 17.40.020A Slope Example A 
  
Figure 17.40.020B Slope Example B  
17.40.030 - Review required. 
No development proposal shall be approved and no grading or tree removal in connection with such development shall take place until plans thereof have been approved by the city. Except, as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the standards and requirements set forth herein shall be considered and applied by the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, in considering development proposals in the HR district. These standards and requirements shall apply in addition to and not in lieu of, the standards and requirements of the base zoning district; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict, the standards and requirements of this chapter shall prevail. The design and siting of buildings and structures shall be compatible with the natural landscape. Site layout and preparation for the building, structures, driveways and roads shall be designed so as not to substantially disrupt the natural silhouette of prominent ridges, ridge lines or surrounding terrain. The planning department shall consider, as part of its review, measures to mitigate the impact of the issues noted above, including, but not limited to, lot configuration, erosion control measures; landscaping, berms and other screening methods; retaining walls to reduce graded slopes; and lowering of building profiles. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.40.040 - Submittal requirements for subdivision of hillside residential property. 
In connection with the subdivision of any parcel(s) in an HR district, the following submittals shall be required in addition to, and not in lieu of, any and all other development criteria and submittals prescribed in Title 16 of this code: 
A.  A site development plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the planning department and shall contain: 
1.  The exact location of each use and structure (existing and proposed); 
2.  Topographic data, including contours, tree locations, sizes and varieties (including trees to be removed and trees in and adjacent to areas to be graded), natural drainage areas and all graded slopes; 
3.  Provisions for the retention of existing vegetation and land forms, including erosion control measures; 
4.  Grading information illustrating the extent of all graded slopes (cut and fill). Graded slopes shall be representative of adjacent topography and shall, insofar as is reasonably practical, be an extension of the natural contours, designed to minimize cuts and fills and to avoid erosion, flooding, slides and other hazards; 
5.  Location of existing and proposed easements for water, sewer and other utility services; the location of existing and proposed streets; and the location of other access routes which traverse the parcel which shall be engineered to eliminate the risk of failure or collapse, shall be set back from hazard areas and shall be in accord with the geologic and soils investigation report and recommendations; 
6.  Cross-section showing maximum proposed cut and fill for all proposed streets; 
7.  Such other information as the planning department may require. 
B.  A preliminary geologic and soils investigation report prepared by a registered engineering geologist certified by the state or by a registered civil engineer qualified in soils mechanics by the state, shall be filed in conjunction with the site development plan and shall fully and clearly present all of the following, unless the planning director determines that existing information pertinent to the subdivision makes the preliminary analysis or any part thereof unnecessary: 
1.  All pertinent data, interpretations and evaluations based on the most current professionally recognized soils and geologic base data pertaining to the subject site; 
2.  The significance of the data, interpretations and evaluations with respect to the actual development or implementation of the intended land use through the identification of any significant geologic problems, critically expansive soils, or other unstable soil conditions which, if not corrected, might lead to structural damage or aggravation of future geologic problems, both on and off the site; 
3.  Recommendations for corrective or mitigation measures deemed necessary to prevent or significantly mitigate potential damage to the proposed project and adjacent properties or to otherwise insure safe development of the parcel; and 
4.  Recommendations for additional investigations that should be made to insure safe development of the parcel. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.40.050 - Development standards. 
A.  Mandatory Conditions for the Creation of New Building Sites. 
1.  No new lots shall be created with an average slope of forty percent or more. 
2.  No new lots shall be created with an average slope of the building envelope exceeding twenty-five percent unless an engineering geology report finds the site to be suitable for such construction. 
3.  Grade of access road and driveway: No private access roadway to or on any site exceeding one hundred fifty feet in length shall exceed a grade of fifteen percent along the length of the pavement without specific approval of the planning commission. 
B.  Mandatory Conditions for Existing Lots of Record. 
1.  No structures or driveways shall be proposed on building pads with an average slope of forty percent or more. 
2.  Building sites with an average slope exceeding twenty-five percent shall have an engineering geology report prepared. Said report must find the site to be suitable for all construction proposed. 
3.  No driveway to or on any building site shall exceed a grade of fifteen percent along the length of the pavement without specific approval of the planning commission. 
C.  Clustering of Dwelling Units. Dwelling units may be clustered pursuant to the regulations for a planned unit development (Chapter 17.38 of this code). Such approval shall be based upon a finding that the clustering of dwelling units will significantly promote the purposes of this chapter while allowing reasonable use and enjoyment of the site, in addition to other findings required in connection with a PUD permit. 
D.  Grading Standards. Grading standards contained in this section shall apply to existing lots or building sites as well as to the creation of new building sites. All grading shall be in conformance with these standards. These standards are in addition to, and not in lieu of, standards and regulations set forth in Section 15.04.080(G) of this code. 
1.  Grading shall be limited to the minimum necessary for development of roads, building sites, utilities and driveways. Portions of a site exceeding thirty percent slope shall not be graded without approval by the planning commission. Mass grading which would unreasonably affect the natural character of the area shall not be permitted. 
2.  Visible cut or fill slopes shall not exceed three horizontal to one vertical (3:1); provided, however, that slopes as steep as two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) may be approved by the planning commission upon a finding that the appearance or stability of the completed project will be superior to the result that would be obtained by adhering to the three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) standard. 
3.  Grading shall not be allowed in creek and drainage areas without first referring the grading application to the Department of Fish and Game, as required by law. An easement over natural drainage channels may be required to be designated for open space purposes and a storm drainage easement with respect thereto may be required, as the same are deemed necessary and appropriate for the protection of natural drainage channels as well as for protection of surrounding areas from erosion and diversion of stream channels and the like. 
4.  In addition to the variances that may be granted pursuant to Section 17.50.010 of this title, the planning commission shall have authority to grant variances from the grading regulations contained in this section. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.40.060 - Construction criteria on a hillside lot. 
Each application for a building permit shall, in addition to all other applicable rules, regulations and processes, be subject to the development standards of the underlying zoning district in which the lot is located. In addition, the following regulations apply: 
A.  Each application for a building permit shall be reviewed by the planning director and a determination made as to conformance with the following criteria: 
1.  Avoid Unreasonable Interference With Views and Privacy. The height, elevations and placement on the site of the proposed main or accessory structure, when considered with reference to the nature and location of residential structures on adjacent lots, will avoid unreasonable interference with views and privacy; 
2.  Preserve Natural Landscape. The natural landscape will be preserved insofar as practicable by designing structures to follow the natural contours of the site and minimizing tree and soil removal; grade changes will be minimized and will be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas; 
3.  Minimize Perception of Excessive Bulk. The proposed main or accessory structure in relation to the immediate neighborhood will minimize the perception of excessive bulk; 
4.  Compatible Bulk and Height. The proposed main or accessory structure will be compatible in terms of bulk and height with existing residential structures within the immediate neighborhood and within the same zoning district, and shall not unreasonably impair the light and air of adjacent properties nor unreasonably impair the ability of adjacent properties to utilize solar energy; 
5.  Current Grading and Erosion Control Standards. The proposed site development or grading plan incorporates current grading and erosion control standards used by the city; 
6.  Increased Setbacks and Height. One foot shall be added to each side yard for each one foot of height above which the top plate line exceeds fifteen feet in height; 
7.  Subfloors Clearance. All new main structures and accessory structures or additions thereto, shall be designed to follow the slope of the site so as to reduce the clearance between ground floor levels and finish grade to not more than four feet. Five feet is permitted if a landscape and irrigation plan which will screen the subfloor area is submitted with the application for a building permit and landscaping is installed prior to final inspection of the structure. 
8.  Residential Design Handbook. All projects for the construction or expansion of a single-family main structure or an accessory structure in the hillside residential combining district shall be consistent with the policies described in the Residential Design Handbook, as adopted by resolution of the city council, and as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter. Such handbook embodies and illustrates the intent of the construction criteria provisions prescribed in Section 17.40.060. 
B.  Additional recommendations: The planning director may refer the application to another department, commission or qualified professional for a report and recommendation. 
C.  Decision by planning director: The planning director shall render his decision within thirty days after the building official has accepted the application as complete. The planning director may determine that the application conforms to the criteria set forth in subsection A of this section, or may determine to impose reasonable conditions on the application to ensure such conformance, in which case the application shall be as conditioned. In the event the planning director determines that the application does not conform and cannot be conditioned to conform no building permit shall be issued. 
D.  Appeals: Any person objecting to a decision by the planning director made pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the planning commission by filing an appeal application with the secretary of the planning department, in accordance with Section 17.50.060 of this title. 
E.  The regulations and determinations contained in this section with respect to a building permit application are supplemental to and not in lieu of any regulations, approvals, processes and reviews required under any applicable ordinance law or code, including but not limited to the rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 15.04 of this code and the approval of the building official. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.78 § 1, 1990)  
17.40.070 - Variances. 
A.  The planning commission may grant a variance to the regulations prescribed herein pursuant to Section 17.50.010 of this code. In addition to the findings required by Section 17.50.010(E), the planning commission must find that the variance is required in order to further the purpose of the hillside overlay zone and to achieve compliance with one or more of the following guidelines and criteria: 
1.  To preserve trees and tree clusters; 
2.  To minimize grading; 
3.  To minimize site disruption; 
4.  To minimize the distance from public services; 
5.  To maximize access; 
6.  To minimize paving and other erosion-producing activities; 
7.  To avoid hazardous and sensitive areas; 
8.  To protect critical features of the natural landscape; 
9.  To protect the existing topographic character of a parcel or area; and 
10.  To protect the view of and from the steeper slopes in the city. 
B.  In granting a variance to the regulations of this chapter, the planning commission may find it necessary to require a change to a lot size or to the density allowed by the zoning district. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.41 - SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS AND GUESTHOUSES  
[Article I. - General Provisions] 
 
17.41.010 - Statement of findings. 
The city recognizes that some of its existing housing resources could provide a cost-effective solution for current housing needs by allowing secondary dwelling units as defined elsewhere in this title. However, there are environmental and service constraints the city faces, which limit the addition of second dwelling units. In particular, such units may not be appropriate on hillside lots because of environmental constraints. The addition of a second dwelling unit is limited by urban service capacity, public safety standards, traffic conditions, fire hazards, privacy impacts and compatibility with neighboring uses and structures. This chapter addresses these limitations. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5 (part), 1999)  
17.41.020 - Building permit required. 
A secondary dwelling unit may be created or occupied only if the unit meets all of the restrictions and standards set out in Section 17.41.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16.115, § 12, 6-4-2003)  
17.41.030 - Restrictions and standards. 
The plans for secondary dwelling units shall comply with all of the following standards before a building permit may be granted: 
A.  The lot upon which the secondary dwelling unit will be created shall be located in a residential zoning district (R) and must be a minimum of ten thousand square feet in size, excluding all rights-of-way; 
B.  The building site upon which the secondary dwelling unit will be constructed shall not have an average slope in excess of twenty percent; 
C.  The size of the secondary dwelling unit shall be no larger than eight hundred square feet of habitable living space (excluding garages, decks and porches); 
D.  Secondary dwelling units shall comply with applicable building, health and fire codes; 
E.  Secondary dwelling units shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations (including, but not limited to required setbacks and height limits); 
F.  A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bedroom shown on the plans for the secondary dwelling unit in addition to the off-street parking spaces required for the main dwelling. Such parking space(s) shall be located in close proximity to the secondary dwelling unit so as to provide convenient access for the tenant; 
G.  Secondary dwelling units shall conform to all requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Fire District Codes, and Santa Cruz County Environmental Health Services Department. Secondary dwelling units may be served by an existing or new septic system when the subject property is located more than 200 feet from an existing sewer main; all other secondary dwelling units shall be served by sanitary sewer. 
H.  Secondary dwelling unit shall be served by the same driveway access to the street as the existing main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
I.  Secondary dwelling units shall be attached to or detached from the main dwelling. If the secondary dwelling unit is attached to the main dwelling, each shall be served by separate outside entrances. The interior wall(s) of an attached unit which separate it from the main unit shall not be connected by a doorway or opening to the main dwelling; 
J.  Secondary dwelling units shall be located to the side or at the rear of the main dwelling, if possible, and must be clearly secondary and incidental to the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
K.  No more than one secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse shall be allowed on any lot located in a R-1 Single-family Residential Zoning District, R-R-2.5 Residential-Rural Zoning District, and R-MT-5 Residential-Mountain Zoning District. 
L.  The roof forms and pitches of secondary dwelling units shall be architecturally compatible with those of the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
M.  The exterior building materials and colors of secondary dwelling units shall be architecturally compatible those of the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
N.  The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with existing three (3) or six (6) feet reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) into a secondary dwelling unit is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than three (3) but less than the required yard setbacks for the main dwelling, into a secondary dwelling unit, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
O.  The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be 18 feet. 
P.  Vehicles of any kind, with or without wheels, and trailers are prohibited as secondary dwelling units. 
Q.  Secondary dwelling units shall conform to all requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Fire District Codes, and Santa Cruz County Environmental Health Services Department. Secondary dwelling units may be served by an existing or new well when the subject property is located more than 200 feet from an existing water main; all other secondary dwelling units shall be served by municipal water. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16-113 § 7, 2002; Ord. 16.115, § 13, 6-4-2003; Ord. No. 16.120, § 2, 9-21-2005)  
17.41.040 - Inspection. 
A.  During review of the submittal of a building permit application for a secondary dwelling unit, an inspection of the property shall be conducted to determine that the proposed secondary unit will comply with all applicable building, health, fire and zoning codes. Such inspection(s) shall be performed by the city or by an independent contractor retained by the city for such purpose and the cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant. 
B.  The inspections to be conducted pursuant to this section shall not constitute an assumption by the city, or by anyone acting in its behalf, of any liability with respect to the physical condition of the property. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16.115, § 14, 6-4-2003)  
17.41.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16.115, § 18, adopted June 4, 2003, repealed § 17.41.050 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to findings required for issuance of use permit as enacted by Ord. 16.109 § 5 (part), 1999.  
17.41.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16.115, § 19, adopted June 4, 2003, repealed § 17.41.060 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to conditional use permit for second dwelling unit as enacted by Ord. 16.109 § 5 (part), 1999.  
17.41.070 - Legalization of existing secondary dwelling units. 
A.  The owner of any lot containing a secondary dwelling unit shall either discontinue such use or apply for a building permit pursuant to this title. If such application is filed, the normal building permit plancheck deposit fee shall be charged. An application shall be deemed "filed" when the same is submitted to the community development director and accepted by the community development director as being complete and all required fees have been paid. 
B.  Whenever in this section, the legalization of an existing secondary dwelling unit or the occupancy thereof depends upon the establishment of any event occurring on or before a specified date, the burden of proof justifying the legalization and impact fees charged shall be upon the applicant. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16.115, § 15, 6-4-2003)  
17.41.080 - Illegal secondary dwelling unit. 
The establishment or continuance of a secondary dwelling unit without a building permit or contrary to the provisions of this article is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16.115, § 16, 6-4-2003)  
17.41.090 - State law applicable. 
The provisions of this article shall be subordinate to and superseded by the controlling provisions(s) of any applicable state law or laws. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999)  
Article II. - Guesthouses 
 
17.41.100 - Guesthouses. 
Guesthouses, whenever permitted in the zoning district, shall be subject to the regulations of this article. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5 (part), 1999)  
17.41.110 - Restrictions and standards. 
Guesthouses shall comply with all of the following standards: 
A.  For purposes of this section, the building site upon which a guesthouse is to be constructed shall not have an average slope in excess of twenty percent (20%). 
B.  The guesthouse shall not exceed six hundred square feet. 
C.  The guesthouse is subject to all applicable building, health and fire codes. 
D.  The guesthouse shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations (including, but not limited to, lot coverage, required setbacks and height limits). 
E.  Guesthouses shall conform to all requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Fire District Codes, and Santa Cruz County Environmental Health Services Department. Guesthouses may be served by an existing or new septic system when the subject property is located more than 200 feet from an existing sewer main; all other guesthouses shall be served by sanitary sewer. 
F.  The guesthouse shall be served by the same driveway access to the street as the existing main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
G.  The guesthouse may be attached to or detached from the main dwelling. If the guesthouse is attached to the main dwelling, each residential unit shall be served by separate outside entrances. The interior wall(s) of an attached unit which separate it from the main unit shall have no connecting doorway or opening to the main dwelling. 
H.  The guesthouse should be located on the side or at the rear of the main dwelling, if possible, and must be clearly secondary and incidental to the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
I.  No more than one guesthouse or one secondary dwelling unit shall be allowed on any parcel. 
J.  The guesthouse shall be compatible with the exterior appearance and character of the existing neighborhood, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
K.  The guesthouse shall be compatible with the existing main dwelling in terms of architectural style, bulk, height, materials, colors and landscaping. The roof forms and pitches and exterior building materials and colors of guesthouses shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling, to the extent practical and feasible as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
L.  The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with existing three (3) or six (6) feet reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) into a guesthouse is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than three (3) but less than the required setbacks for the main dwelling, into a guesthouse, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
M.  The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be 18 feet. 
N.  Vehicles of any kind, with or without wheels, and trailers are prohibited as guesthouses. 
O.  Guest houses shall conform to all requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Fire District Codes, and Santa Cruz County Environmental Health Services Department. Guesthouses may be served by an existing or new well when the subject property is located more than 200 feet from an existing water main; all other guest houses shall be served by municipal water. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999; Ord. 16.115, § 17, 6-4-2003; Ord. No. 16.120, § 3, 9-21-2005)  
17.41.120 - Recordation of agreement prohibiting a secondary dwelling unit. 
An agreement between the City of Scotts Valley and the owner of the property shall be required and shall be recorded as a covenant running with the land in the office of the county recorder prohibiting the use of the guesthouse as a second dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 16.109 § 5(part), 1999)  
Chapter 17.42 - FW FLOODWAY COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
17.42.010 - Description and purpose. 
The FW combining district is intended to apply to all lands designated on the federal flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) (effective October 18, 1983) as being within the one-hundred-year flood zone (an area of special flood hazard). It is the purpose of this district to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by establishing provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that a parcel is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
G.  Ensure that those who occupy areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.42.020 - Definitions. 
All terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in Chapter 15.16 of this code. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.42.030 - Establishment and designation. 
A.  The FW district shall consist of the special flood hazard area, as defined and set forth in Chapter 15.16 of this code. 
B.  The FW district is established only in conjunction with other districts. The FW district designation shall be combined with whatever other district designation is applicable to the area in which the FW district is established. 
C.  FW districts shall only be applied in areas of the city which are delineated as special flood hazard areas on the FIRM map for the city, referenced in Chapter 15.16 of this code. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.42.040 - Development standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, as defined above, the provisions of Chapter 15.16 of this code (which are hereby incorporated herein by reference) as the same presently exist or may hereafter be amended shall apply to all development and construction. The provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provision of this title shall apply to the FW combining district, including regulations applicable to the particular district with which the FW district is combined; provided, that where a conflict occurs between the regulations and provisions of this chapter and those elsewhere set forth in this title, the provisions and regulations of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.43 - TIMBERLAND PRESERVE ZONE DISTRICT 
 
17.43.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The creation of the timberland preserve zone (TPZ) district is necessary to protect and maintain the timberland of the city through regulation of timberland use. To establish a zone district consistent with the mandates of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976 and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall be defined consistent with the Forest Taxation Act of 1976. 
A.  "Other forest products" means logs, poles, posts, pilings, split products, chips, fuelwood and other solid products. 
B.  "Timber" means trees of any species maintained for eventual harvest for forest products purposes, whether planted or of natural growth, standing or down, on privately owned land, including Christmas trees, but does not mean nursery stock. 
C.  "Timberland" means privately owned land, or land acquired for state forest purposes, which is devoted to and used for growing and harvesting timber, or for growing and harvesting timber and compatible uses, and which is capable of growing an average annual volume of wood fiber of at least fifteen cubic feet per acre. 
D.  "Timber management plan" means a written plan for development and utilization of timber resources and compatible uses which assures the continued viability of the timberland, and which includes reasonable rotation and cutting cycle data. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in a timberland preserve zone (TPZ): 
A.  The growing and harvesting of timber and other forest products, including Christmas trees, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Watershed management; 
C.  Fish and wildlife habitat; 
D.  Grazing and other agricultural uses on that portion of the land not under timber production; 
E.  One single-family dwelling, with accessory structures and utilities, on a separate legal parcel with a minimum of forty acres. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.040 - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses may be permitted in a TPZ upon the granting of the appropriate use permit. 
A.  Erection, construction, alteration and maintenance of gas, electric, water or communications facilities; 
B.  Outdoor recreation, educational or religious activities, in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30 (REC recreation districts) of this title; 
C.  Conversion to agricultural uses not exceeding ten percent of the total of the timber area on the parcel; 
D.  One or more single-family dwellings, with accessory structures, at a density in conformance with the General Plan but not to exceed one dwelling unit per ten acres; if more than two new dwellings are involved, the development proposal must be clustered and in conformance with an approved P.U.D. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.050 - Required special findings for conditional uses. 
The following special findings shall be made in addition to the findings required by Section 17.43.040 of this chapter: 
That the proposed conditional uses would be consistent with the purposes of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976, the purposes of this chapter, and that the proposed conditional use is supported by a timber management plan submitted as a part of the application for such proposed conditional use, and which timber management has been approved as submitted, or as amended by the city, as a condition upon any use permit granted. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.060 - Zoning procedures. 
An owner may make application to zone his or her land as timberland preserve. The city council by ordinance, after the advice of the planning commission pursuant to Section 51110.2, Public Resources Code, and after public hearings, shall zone as timberland preserve all parcels submitted to it by petition pursuant to subsection B of Section 17.43.080. 
A.  A map shall be submitted with the legal description or assessor's parcel number of the property desired to be zoned. 
B.  A timber management plan for the property shall be submitted, which timber management plan shall have been prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester. Such plan shall provide for the eventual harvest of timber within a reasonable period of time. The timber management plan shall be approved as submitted, or as amended by the city, and prior to rezoning of the property to TPZ the property owner shall bind himself and his successors in interest to carry out the approved timber management plan. 
C.  The parcel shall currently meet the timber stocking standards as set forth in Section 4561 of the Public Resources Code and the Forest Practice Rules adopted by the State Board of Forestry for the district in which the parcel is located, or the owner must sign an agreement with the city council to meet such stocking standards and forest practice rules by the fifth anniversary of the signing of such agreement. If the parcel is subsequently zoned as timberland preserve, failure to meet such stocking standards and forest practice rules within this time period provides the city council with grounds for rezoning the parcel. 
D.  The parcel shall be timberland. 
E.  The parcel shall be in compliance with the timberland preserve zone uses set forth in Section 17.43.030. 
F.  The land area concerned shall be in the ownership of one person, as defined in Section 38106 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and shall be comprised of single or continuous parcels consisting of at least five acres in area. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.070 - Rezoning from timberland preserve to an alternative zone district. 
Rezoning of the land from timberland preserve (TPZ) to another zoning district shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Forest Taxation Reform Act of 1976, in addition to any other applicable rezoning requirements. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
17.43.080 - Land divisions of TPZ parcels. 
A.  Parcels zoned as timberland preserve under this chapter may not be divided into parcels containing less than one hundred sixty acres unless the owners of resulting parcels submit a joint timber management plan prepared or approved as to content by a registered professional forester and such owners enter into a binding contract with the city council to manage and harvest timber on the timberland jointly, and are bound by the provisions of such management plan for a minimum period of twenty years. Any such divisions shall require approval by a four-fifths vote of the city council; and 
B.  Any land division pursuant to subsection A of this section shall not create parcels smaller than forty acres, except pursuant to an approved planned unit development that conforms to the conditional densities and special findings required by Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1980)  
Chapter 17.44 - GENERAL AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.44.020 - Commercial and industrial performance standards. 
A.  Specific Purposes. The performance standards established in this section apply in all commercial and industrial zones. These standards are intended to assure that all commercial and industrial operations carried out in the city are conducted in such a manner so as to avoid any nuisance, hazard or commonly recognized offensive condition or characteristic adverse to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Prohibition of Dangerous or Objectionable Elements. No land or building shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable explosive or other hazard. Nor shall any use create noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness; electrical or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition or element in such a manner or in such amount as to unreasonably adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. 
C.  Performance Standards. The following performance standards shall apply to all uses of property in the commercial and industrial zoning districts specified in Chapters 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.26 and 17.28 of this title. 
1.  Fire and Explosive Hazards. All activities involving storage of flammable or explosive materials shall comply with applicable Uniform Fire Codes and Chapter 13.12 of this code. 
2.  Radioactive or Electrical Disturbance. No activities shall be permitted which utilize fissionable or radioactive materials. Activities shall not be permitted which emit electrical disturbance affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
3.  Noise. At the lot line of all uses specified in Chapters 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.26 and 17.28 of this title, the maximum sound generated by any user shall not exceed seventy-five dbA when adjacent users are industrial or wholesale users. When adjacent to offices or retail, the sound level shall be limited to seventy dbA. When users are adjacent or contiguous to residential, park or institutional uses, the maximum sound level shall not exceed sixty dbA. Excluded from these standards are occasional noises which are specifically exempted under Section 5.17.030. 
4.  Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the lot line of the establishment or use. 
5.  Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point, from any chimney or otherwise, of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power's Micro Ringelmann Chart, published by McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
6.  Odors, Flying Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution. All uses shall conform with applicable standards established by the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (AMBAG), adopted herein by reference. 
7.  Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, shall emanate from any establishment or use so as to be visible at a distance of five hundred feet from said establishment or use. 
8.  Liquid or Solid Wastes. All liquid and solid waste discharge shall be in compliance with Chapter 13.04 of this code. 
9.  Traffic. No use shall generate vehicular traffic which would cause an adjacent arterial or collector road to exceed a traffic-carrying capacity of Level of Service C without providing appropriate mitigation measures in the form of roadway improvements, traffic-control devices, restrictions on hours of operation or staggered work hours. Traffic-generating potential shall be determined by use of Caltrans trip-generation studies or other information acceptable to the director of public works. In the event an adjacent arterial or collector is already below Level of Service C, appropriate mitigations shall offset any significant impact on the traffic-carrying capacity of the road. 
10.  Trash Collection and Other Service Areas. Trash containers and service loading docks should be conveniently located and sized but must not interfere with other circulation or parking on the site. Trash containers should be located away from public streets and store entrances and should be completely screened with materials similar to or compatible with buildings located on the same site, or as otherwise provided in the district regulations. If required as part of a discretionary permit process, all outdoor refuse collection areas shall be enclosed per city-approved standard details as illustrated in Figure 17.44.020 unless an enclosure is in use on June 1, 1996, which meets the approval of the disposal company servicing the business, does not violate health and safety, and has been previously approved by the city. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.96 § 1, 1996; Ord. 174, § 3(part), 2-4-2004) 
Figure 17.44.020 Standard Trash Enclosure*
   
17.44.030 - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
A.  Purposes. These parking and loading requirements are intended to prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards in the city and to add to the safety and convenience of its citizens by incorporating adequate, attractively designed and functional facilities for off-street parking as an integral part of every land use in the city. Off-street parking and loading facilities are required to be provided incidental to new land uses and major alterations and enlargements of existing land uses. The number of parking spaces and the number of loading areas prescribed in this section or to be prescribed by the planning commission shall be in proportion to the need for such facilities created by the particular type of land use. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be designed in a manner which will ensure their usefulness, protect the public safety and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from their impact. 
B.  Definitions: 
1.  "Driveway" means a roadway or access way connecting a public or private street with the required parking space(s), dwelling or other structure of an individual parcel. 
2.  Garage, Private. "Private garage" means an accessory structure or a portion of a main structure designed for the storage of motor vehicles, boats or trailers, having permanent roof and designed to be enclosed on all sides. The minimum size of a private garage shall be twenty-two feet by twenty-two for two cars and twenty-two feet by twelve feet for one car. 
3.  Garage, Public. "Public garage" means a structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles or trailers. 
4.  "Off-street loading facilities" means a site or a portion of a site devoted to loading or unloading motor vehicles, trucks or tractor-trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
5.  "Off-street parking facilities" means a site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
6.  "Parking space" means an area reserved for parking a motor vehicle, trailer, mobile home, airplane or boat, while it is not in use. The area must be accessible from a driveway. The size of the area must be suitable for the vehicle served but not less than eight and one-half feet wide by eighteen feet long. 
C.  Off-Street Parking Facilities Required. 
1.  In all districts, for every use, parking shall be provided at the time of initial occupancy of a site. When structures in any district are reconstructed, enlarged, structurally altered, changed in occupancy to a more intensive use category or otherwise increased in capacity, such off-street parking facilities shall be provided only for that portion of the structure constituting the increase in capacity. The exception to this requirement is when the pre-existing number of parking spaces is greater than the number prescribed in this section, in which instance the number in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in calculating the number provided to serve the major alteration or enlargement, as defined in subdivision 3 of this subsection. 
2.  If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half or more and no parking space shall be required for a fraction less than one-half. 
3.  If more than one use is located on a site, the number of parking spaces required shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in this section for each use or major alteration or enlargement. For the purposes of this section, the term "major alteration or enlargement" means a change of use or an addition which would increase the number of parking spaces required by more than ten percent of the total number required. The number of parking spaces provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration, subject to subdivision 1 of this subsection, unless otherwise modified by the planning commission. 
4.  The off-street parking facility requirements of this section shall be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the prescribed number of spaces for each use in a common parking facility; provided, that the total number of spaces shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements and provided further, that an easement for parking facility is filed with the Santa Cruz County recorder prior to application for a building permit. 
5.  In any commercial or industrial district, the off-street parking and loading regulations may be modified by the planning commission upon approval of a use permit if the site has a width of sixty feet or less and has existing structures on the site. 
D.  Variances to Off-Street Parking Space Requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.50.010 of this title, a variance to the off-street parking requirements prescribed in this section may be granted for nonresidential developments in order that some or all of the required parking spaces be located off-site, including locations in other jurisdictions, or that in-lieu fees or facilities be provided instead of the required parking spaces, if both of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The variance will be an incentive to and a benefit for the nonresidential development. 
2.  The variance will facilitate access to the nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities, particularly guideway facilities. 
E.  Use for Advertising Prohibited. 
1.  No off-street parking or loading facility related to any commercial or industrial use in any zoning district shall be used for the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of advertising or displaying such vehicle for sale. 
2.  In residential districts, no off-street parking space, driveway or front yard shall be used for the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of advertising or displaying such vehicle for sale; except, that the occupant of said property may park one vehicle owned by such occupant, displayed for sale and bearing a sign not exceeding two square feet in area restricted to the sale of the vehicle upon which it is posted. 
F.  Schedule of Off-Street Parking Space Requirements. 
USE 	PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 
Single-family dwellings 	Each dwelling unit shall have a two-car garage, plus one additional covered or uncovered parking space (a minimum of three parking spaces). 
Multi-family dwellings 	Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit; plus one additional parking space for every five units, or fraction thereof. 
Business, professional modified and trade schools and colleges, and crafts, music and dancing schools 	Two spaces for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area unless approved by the planning commission. 
Commercial service modified enterprises, repair shops, wholesale establishments and retail stores which handle only bulky merchandise such as furniture and household appliances 	One space for each five hundred square feet of gross floor unless approved by the planning commission. 
Automotive repair and related services 	One space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
Business and professional officers area 	One space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
Medical and dental officer/clinic 	Five spaces for each doctor/dentist or one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus additional spaces as may be required for employees and/or conference activities. 
Motels, hotels, lodging houses, bed and breakfast establishments, and private clubs providing sleeping accommodations 	One space for each living unit or bedroom, whichever is greater, plus one space for each six hundred square feet of office and storage. 
Restaurants, bars, soda fountains, cocktail lounges, cafes, night clubs, cafeterias and similar establishments serving food 	One space for each sixty square feet of floor area for public accommodation plus one space for each two hundred fifty square of non public accommodation floor area 
Research and development, including computer assembly, circuit board assembly and related activities 	One space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area to be provided with initial construction. An additional number of spaces shall be provided so that the total number of spaces is equal to one space per each one hundred square of gross floor area. The additional parking will be parking at a later when needed. 
Mini Storage 	Four spaces plus additional spaces as may be required by the planning commission. 
Churches, theaters, assembly halls, convention centers, auditoriums, dance halls, lodges, social halls, mortuaries and funeral homes 	One space per each three and one half fixed seats or one space per fifty square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
Warehouses, storage buildings and storage facilities that must be combined with commercial or industrial uses 	One space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area. 
Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes and charitable and religious institutions providing sleeping accommodations 	One space for each three beds. Where needed, additional spaces for employee parking may be required by the planning commission. 
Libraries, museums, art galleries and similar uses 	One space for each employee plus additional number of space as may be prescribed by the planning commission. 
Open air commercial uses, nurseries, motor vehicle sales lots 	One space per one thousand square feet of lot area devoted to sales. 
Day care center 	One space for each three hundred square feet of gross floor area. 
Public and private elementary and junior high schools 	Ten spaces plus one space per classroom, plus sufficient space for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. Where needed, additional spaces for student parking may be prescribed by the planning commission. 
Public or private high schools or colleges 	One space per ten students plus one per classroom. One space per one employee, including teachers and administrators, plus sufficient space for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
Retail sales uses 	One space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
Other uses not specified 	The number of parking spaces required for any use not specified shall be determined by the planning commission. 
 
If it can be shown that a use does not expect to utilize the required number of spaces and assurance is given by recorded instrument or by other means that the required number of spaces will be provided when the use or circumstances of occupancy change, then a conditional use permit may be granted by the planning commission, pursuant to Section 17.50.020 of this title, allowing for a reduction in the number of required parking spaces. The use permit shall be conditioned on the necessary number of spaces being provided when the use or circumstances of occupancy change and on the giving of a recorded instrument to that effect which shall be recorded at the Santa Cruz County recorder's office. 
G.  Standards of Commercial Off-Street Parking Facilities. For further clarification of parking standards and requirements, please refer to Figures 17.44.030A and B. For existing parking lots which do not conform to the compact parking standards, see Section 17.48.080. 
1.  Each full-sized parking space shall not be less than twenty feet in length and nine feet in width, exclusive of aisles and access drives. When the overhang is provided, the parking stall shall be seventeen feet, plus a three-foot overhang area, which shall be paved, rock lined, concrete or landscaped with low growing plants or ground covers. The overhang area shall be edged with continuous cubing of six inches in height. No light standards or fixed objects are allowed in this overhang area. A three-foot overhang and a four-foot-wide sidewalk is required if the parking space is adjacent to a building. 
2.  Each compact parking space shall not be less than nine feet in width and sixteen feet in length, exclusive of aisles and access drives. When an overhang is provided, the parking stall shall be thirteen feet, plus a three footed paved, rock-lined, or concrete overhang area, which may be landscaped with low growing plants or ground covers. The overhang shall be edged with continuous cubing of six inches in height. No light standards or fixed objects are allowed in this overhang area. A three-foot overhang and a four-foot-wide sidewalk is required if the parking space is adjacent to a building. 
3.  Entrances and exits to parking facilities shall be provided at locations approved by the city engineer. 
4.  The parking area, aisles and access drives shall be treated so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water. 
5.  Six-inch high concrete curbs, or other material approved by the city engineer, shall separate all paved and landscaped areas. 
6.  Ten percent of the required parking area shall be landscaped; the landscaping shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and adjacent to buildings. Minimum planter width shall be five feet. 
7.  Landscaped areas within or adjacent to the parking area shall provide for a minimum of one shade tree for every four parking stalls. Depending on the parking dimensions, layout type and size of shade tree, this requirement may be modified by the planning director. 
8.  Concrete curbing shall be used as wheel stops. The use of bumper blocks is discouraged and can be approved only by the planning commission after findings of unusual circumstances which warrant their use. 
9.  If the parking area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from any abutting residential sites. Parking lot lighting should be low profile, with standards of anodized bronze aluminum or other material approved by the design review board. 
10.  In any commercial or industrial district where a parking area is located across a street or alley from or immediately adjacent to, a residential district, a landscape strip not less than five feet in depth shall be planted and permanently maintained along the abutting property line of the parking area. 
11.  Twenty percent of the spaces for off-street parking may be compact spaces. This section shall be applicable only if ten or more spaces are required. 
12.  Each compact space shall be marked in accordance with the following standard: The word "COMPACT" shall be placed in a permanent manner on the pavement at the center of the entrance to each designated space. The letters shall be white in color and eight inches or more in height on the pavement. 
13.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided as specified in state law. 
14.  Parking lot design shall conform to the current edition of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) "Single Unit Demand Design Criteria" and to the current edition of the Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook (Institute of Transportation Engineers). 
15.  All striping shall be a minimum of four inches in width. Signing and striping shall conform to state standards. All parking spaces in parking lots shall be striped. 
H.  Parking Lot Design. Figures 17.44.030A and B provided in this section shall be used as guides in the development and arrangement of parking spaces and parking areas. 
I.  Location of Off-Street Parking Facilities. In all residential and open-space districts, off-street parking facilities prescribed in this section shall be located on the same site as the use for which the spaces are required or on an adjoining site or a site separated only by an alley from the use for which the spaces are required. 
  
Figure 17.44.030A Parking Stall Geometrics 
  
Figure 17.44.030B Parking Lot Layout 
In all commercial and industrial districts where on-site location cannot be provided, off-street parking facilities prescribed in this section shall be located within three hundred feet of the use for which the spaces are required, measured by the shortest route of pedestrian access. 
J.  Standards for Residential Parking Facilities. 
1.  Parking of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, boats or airplanes in front yards of any lot or exterior side yards of corner lots, shall be restricted to driveways and parking spaces. 
2.  Driveways and parking spaces in any residential zone district shall not proportionately occupy more than three hundred square feet per each ten feet of required setback. 
3.  In any residential district, it is unlawful to park more than five motor vehicles, mobile homes, trailers, airplanes or boats or any combination thereof exceeding five, for a period of time in excess of twenty-four hours in front yards of any lots or exterior side yard of corner lots whether or not located in a required setback, when visible from a public or private street. 
4.  One uncovered required parking space may be provided in a tandem arrangement for a single-family dwelling. A tandem space shall not obstruct access to more than one of the required spaces. 
L.  Off-Street Loading Required. 
1.  All multifamily dwellings containing fifty or more rental units shall provide one off-street loading space. Each such space shall be at least forty-five feet long and twelve feet wide, exclusive of necessary area for maneuvering, ingress and egress. 
2.  All retail business uses, wholesale or warehouse establishments and industrial uses containing less than ten thousand square feet of gross floor area shall provide one off-street loading space. Each such space shall be at least thirty feet long and twelve feet wide, exclusive of necessary area for maneuvering, ingress and egress. 
3.  All retail business uses, wholesale or warehouse establishments and industrial uses containing ten thousand or more square feet of gross floor area shall provide the number of off-street loading spaces specified below. Each such space shall be at least forty-five feet long and twelve feet wide, exclusive of necessary area for maneuvering, ingress and egress. 
Square Feet in Gross Floor Area 	Number of Spaces 
10,000 up to and including 50,000 	1 
50,001 up to and including 200,000 	2 
200,001 up to and including 300,000 	3 
 
One additional space shall be required for each additional one hundred thousand square feet above three hundred thousand square feet of gross floor area. 
M.  Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities. Off-street loading facilities provided in compliance with subsection L of this section shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Each loading space shall be at least thirty feet long or forty-five feet long as provided in subsection L and twelve feet wide, exclusive of necessary area for maneuvering, ingress and egress. 
2.  Sufficient distances for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on the site. 
3.  Each loading area shall be accessible from a street or alley. 
4.  Entrances and exits shall be provided at locations approved by the city engineer. 
5.  The loading area, aisles and access drives shall be paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water. 
6.  A loading area shall not be located in a required front or side yard, nor shall it be visible from a public street or private residential property from ground level adjacent to the site of the loading facility. 
7.  Off-street loading facilities prescribed in Section 17.46.080 shall be located on the same site with the use for which the areas are required or on an adjoining site. 
N.  Existing Uses. No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities prescribed in this section, provided, that facilities being used for off-street parking and loading shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of spaces or loading areas prescribed in this section or reduced in area to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this section. 
O.  Designation of Off-Street Parking and Loading. When off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities are provided, in compliance with the requirements of this section, on a site other than the site on which the use or structure to be served by the parking and loading facilities is located, an agreement shall be recorded in the Santa Cruz County recorder's office designating the off-street parking or the off-street loading and the use or structure to be served, with legal descriptions of both sites, and certifying that the off-street parking facility or the off-street loading facility shall not be used for any other purpose unless the restriction is removed by resolution of the planning commission. No building permit shall be issued until an attested copy of the recorded agreement has been filed with the building inspector. Upon submission of satisfactory evidence that other off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities have been provided in compliance with the requirements of this section, or that the use has ceased or the structure has been removed or altered so as no longer to require the off-street parking or off-street loading facility, the planning commission shall by resolution remove the restriction. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 2, 1991; Ord. 16-113 § 4, 2002; Ord. 16.116, § 2, 3-4-2004; Ord. 16.123, §§ 51, 52, 9-5-2007)  
17.44.040 - Prezoning of unincorporated territory. 
The city may prezone unincorporated territory adjoining the city for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the city. The method of accomplishing such prezoning shall be as provided by Chapter 17.52 of this title, for zoning within the city. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.050 - Underground utilities. 
A.  Undergrounding of Utilities Required. 
1.  All electrical transmission and/or distribution lines, communication lines and appurtenances, including all public utility systems and service facilities therefor, and also all telegraph and cable television (CATV) distribution or transmission facilities, shall be located and installed underground on all lands and zoning districts within the city, except as hereinafter specifically permitted. 
2.  No person shall directly or indirectly erect, construct or fabricate any building or structure, or install any pole or poles, for the purpose of operating or maintaining any overhead electric transmission and/or distribution line or lines, and/or any overhead communication line or lines, or any appurtenant structure or part thereof, except as follows: 
a.  Existing overhead electric and communication lines, poles and transformers destroyed by fire, flood, wind, falling trees or similar events may be replaced overhead. 
b.  Temporary electric and communication lines, poles and transformers may be erected to serve construction projects or emergency situations for periods not to exceed six months, unless such time is extended by the chief building inspector. 
c.  Overhead electric distribution lines, communication lines, poles and transformers may be replaced at the same location with facilities of greater capacity where such facilities are not already included in an existing conversion program adopted by the city. 
d.  Pad-mounted transformers, service pedestals, meter cabinets, surface-mounted switches and concealed ducts may be installed, so long as they are used solely in connection with, and as appurtenances to, an underground distribution system or facilities. 
e.  Poles supporting electric transmission lines, and the electric transmission lines supported by such poles, may be erected where the voltage carried by such lines is more than 34.5 kV. 
f.  Poles supporting street lights and the electric lines within said poles may be erected. 
3.  No use shall be made of any land, building or structure in the city, or in any zoning district or area thereof, for any electric transmission or distribution lines, or communication lines and appurtenances, except as set forth in this section. 
B.  Exceptions. Variances to the regulations set forth in this section governing the undergrounding of public utilities may be granted by the planning commission in accordance with Section 17.50.010 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.060 - Condominium conversions and condominiums. 
A.  Intent. Residential condominiums provide for individual ownership of separate dwelling units which usually are proximate to one another. The area surrounding the dwelling units is a common area that is managed and maintained by the individual owners of dwelling units in accordance with the rules of an associated agreement. This mix of individual and common ownership is different from detached single-family residences and apartment house use; in single-family homes the dwelling is physically separate and the yard areas are under the more or less complete control of the owner; in conventional apartments there is an implied guarantee of continuous and effective management of the project. The occupant is not the owner of the unit and does not have the financial commitment or problems of use, maintenance or resale associated with ownership. The unique nature of condominium projects tends to magnify the effects associated with higher urban densities to the point where they may have deleterious effects upon the occupant, seller and buyer, who often do not appreciate the implications of condominium living and ownership; this may lead to conditions of mismanagement, neglect and blight that affect the public health, safety, welfare and economic prosperity of the larger community. To ensure that such problems are avoided in both the short and long term, it is the express intent of the city to treat such projects differently from other multiple-family dwelling developments of other structures which are not residential condominium projects. It is found that the implementation of this section requires adoption of special requirements contained in this section for new condominium developments and the conversion of existing community apartment projects to residential condominiums. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: 
1.  Establish requirements and procedures to be followed for the review and approval or disapproval of: 
a.  New condominium project development, and 
b.  The conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to residential condominiums; 
2.  Establish criteria for new condominium developments and condominium conversion projects by requiring conformance to the city's building code and other development standards set forth in this section; 
3.  Ensure that the developer of the project provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage and parking space, open space and other amenities; 
4.  Provide for planning, unforeseen change and compliance with the city's General Plan and housing element; 
5.  Provide: 
a.  A desirable balance of rental and ownership housing within the city, and 
b.  A variety of individual choice of tenure, type, price and location of housing; 
6.  Ensure that the project sponsor is attentive to the performance characteristics of the structure and mitigates such problems as vibration and noise transmission which may not be apparent to the buyer without living in the unit but which, if not adequately attenuated, may nevertheless render the living environment within the project insufferable and the transfer of unit ownership difficult; 
7.  Ensure that the project sponsor uses contemporary and environmentally sensitive concepts of site planning and architectural design in the construction of a new condominium project and ensure that the project, once completed, maintains its integrity, not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner but to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for the owner long into the future. 
C.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth in this subsection unless it is apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended. 
1.  "Association" means an organization composed of persons who own a condominium unit(s) or right of exclusive occupancy in a community apartment, and who are organized to operate and maintain common areas for condominiums. 
2.  "Common area" means the area that is available to the common use of unit owners in an entire project, excepting the individual units therein. 
3.  "Community apartment" means one residential unit within a community apartment project. For the purposes of this section "community apartment" means the same thing and shall be treated in the same manner as a unit as defined in subdivision 17 of this subsection. 
4.  "Community apartment project," as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Profession Code, means a development of real property in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of a designated residential unit located thereon or therein. For the purposes of this title, "community apartment" means the same thing and shall be treated the same way as a residential condominium, as defined in subdivision 14 of this subsection. 
5.  "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
6.  "Condominium documents" means the covenants, conditions and restrictions, the description of the project elements and any other documents establishing a plan for condominium ownership. 
7.  "Conversion" means a change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of real property, together with the existing attached structures, to that defined as a condominium development or a community apartment project regardless of the present or prior use of such land and structures and whether substantial improvements have been made or are to be made to such structures. 
8.  "Covenants, conditions and restrictions" means a written declaration relating to the maintenance, operation, duties and responsibilities of the common owners of the project and may include, but is not limited to those restrictions provided for in Section 1355 of the California Civil Code and as such may hereafter be amended. 
9.  "Developer" means the owner or subdivider of real property with a controlling proprietary interest in the proposed project. 
10.  "Open space" means open space on the project (exclusive of the required front setback area) which is to be used exclusively for leisure and recreational purposes, for the use and enjoyment of occupants of units on the project and to which such occupants shall have the exclusive right of use and enjoyment. Accessory structures such as swimming pools, recreational buildings and landscaped areas may be included as open space. 
11.  "Owner" means the owner of a residential condominium unit. 
12.  "Project" means the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums, including all structures thereon. 
13.  "Project elements" means condominium units which are to be conveyed, the areas and spaces which are to be assigned to such units and the common areas (including improvements) which are to be shared by the owners of all units. 
14.  "Residential condominium" means a condominium for residential purposes. 
15.  "Subdivision Map Act" means Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 et seq. and as may hereafter be amended. 
16.  "Subdivision ordinances" means those ordinances contained in Title 16 of this code and as may hereafter be amended. 
17.  "Unit" means the element of a residential condominium project which is not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project or is an apartment in a community apartment project to which an owner of an undivided interest in common in a community apartment project has a right of exclusive occupancy. 
D.  General Provisions. The following provisions shall apply to all condominium developments: 
1.  A condominium development may be located in any zoning district upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
2.  A condominium development shall include only uses which are either permitted or conditional uses in the zoning district in which the development is located. 
3.  In residential condominium developments, the density may not exceed the density prescribed for the zoning district in which the development is located. 
E.  Use Permit Application Required. The developer of a new condominium project or a developer who desires to convert an existing multiple-family rental housing or a nonresidential structure to a residential condominium shall first submit an application for a use permit to the planning department. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Written authorization from all owners of parcels within the boundaries of the development; 
2.  A complete legal description of the property, including a delineation of the project boundary and a tabulation of gross and net land area, including a title report. The project boundary map should show the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements. Significant surface features within the development area, including but not limited to natural ground cover, trees more than six inches in diameter (trunk diameter, variety and size), water courses, rock outcroppings and soil cover, should be included in the description. In addition, the description should include the proposed circulation system, showing the location of all streets (public and private), pedestrian pathways and other circulation facilities; 
3.  A detailed grading plan, including a transverse and longitudinal section showing natural and proposed grades, including all cut-and-fill slopes and the location of retaining walls, and methods of erosion control; 
4.  Proposed land uses, including building locations and types, floor plans, number of units, building elevations (all sides), open space, recreation area, off-street parking, loading and service areas, a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole, a lighting plan, the approximate number and characteristics of the population anticipated and the relationship of the project to surrounding land uses; 
5.  A data table showing how the project compares to the minimum standard for the residential district in which it would be located; 
6.  Typical detailed sections of the types of wall, floor and ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the condominium project, including either published data from a recognized and approved testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer or the city building official as to sound transmission control ("STC," as defined in Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code); 
7.  A statement of special or unusual seismic, soil or geologic conditions within the development area, if applicable; 
8.  A development schedule indicating anticipated dates of construction, including any proposed project phasing; 
9.  Any additional information as required by the planning director or planning commission. 
F.  Modification of Requirements. Recognizing that the conversion of existing multiple-family residential structures to condominium usage presents unique problems with respect to the requirements of this section, the planning commission is empowered to vary any and all requirements contained herein, provided, that said modifications are consistent with the public health, safety and welfare and will not contravene the purposes and intent of this section. Project characteristics of critical importance in making this determination are the structure(s) and the degree to which the proposal varies from the required standards for the following: parking, private open space, storage space, sound transmission characteristics, fire protection and development criteria. 
The planning commission is also empowered to impose conditions on any approval which would require that specified changes designed to bring a structure into compliance with the condominium development standards contained herein be made to the structure proposed for conversion. 
Requirement for subdivision application for construction or conversion of a condominium project shall be accompanied by a tentative map application pursuant to Title 16 of this code, unless waived pursuant to Government Code Section 66428. 
G.  Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all condominium development unless otherwise modified by the planning commission: 
1.  Parking: All condominium developments shall conform to the parking requirements of this title. 
2.  Open space: Each unit within the project shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet. Such space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit owner, shall have at least two weatherproofed electrical convenience outlets and shall have a shape and size that would allow for optimum usable space. Such space shall be at the same level as and immediately accessible from, a room within the unit. The planning commission may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
3.  Storage space: In addition to guest, linen, food pantry and clothes closets customarily provided, each unit within the project shall have at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproofed and lockable private storage space. The location and design of such space shall be approved by the planning commission and shall not be divided into two or more locations. If such space is located within a common area within the project, the association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the project. 
4.  Sound transmission: All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which is determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official. Common walls and floors between units shall comply with the city's ordinances governing noise resistance for newly constructed common walls and floors. 
5.  Fire prevention: Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a smoke detector conforming to Uniform Building Code standards. The detector shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level, the detector shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the stairway. All detectors shall be located within twelve inches of the ceiling. When activated, the detector shall provide an alarm in the dwelling unit. Draft stops shall be placed in all attics that are determined to be accessible by the building official. 
6.  Condition of equipment and appliances: Regarding conversion, the developer shall provide a one-year warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow on any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided. At such time as the homeowners' association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide a one-year warranty to the association that any pool and pool equipment and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association are in operable working condition. 
7.  Condition of paved areas: Regarding conversion, the developer will make any repairs needed so that the public works department can determine that any paved areas are in satisfactory condition. 
8.  Condominium development criteria: The following criteria shall be considered in reviewing the overall design and site layout of the project: 
a.  The project should have a comprehensive and integrated design, providing its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and areas for automobiles. 
b.  Architectural unity and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that it does not constitute an adverse disruption to the established fabric of the community. 
c.  The layout of structures and other facilities should minimize street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Additionally, structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources, either directly or indirectly, e.g., gas, water and electricity. 
9.  Other facilities: Consideration shall be given by the planning commission to the inclusion of the following facilities in the project: 
a.  A laundry area shall be provided in each unit or if common laundry facilities are provided, then such facilities shall be subject to the review of the planning commission as to their adequacy. 
b.  In addition to any other parking requirements, at least one space per five units shall be provided for the enclosed storage of recreational vehicles and boats in new construction only. If the requirement cannot be met, a provision shall be placed in the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) precluding the parking of recreational vehicles and boats on the site. Such parking area shall be enclosed. 
H.  Approval of Tentative and Final Map. Pursuant to Section 66427 of the Government Code, the city council or planning commission shall not refuse approval of the tentative or final map of a condominium conversion project because of design or location of the buildings shown on the map or plan which are in conformance with the provisions of this section, or because of the manner in which the airspace is to be divided in conveying units within the condominium. 
I.  Approval of Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) and Project Elements. To achieve the purpose of this section, the planning commission shall require that a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) and project elements relating to the management of the common area and facilities be approved by the planning department and city attorney prior to the approval of the final map. In addition to such covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate of the State of California pursuant to Section 1350, et seq. of the California Civil Code or other state laws or policies, such declaration shall be subject to recording and shall provide for the following, none of which, when approved by the planning department or city attorney, shall be amended, modified or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the planning department and city attorney and all of which shall contain a statement to that effect. 
1.  Conveyance of private open space: The surface area and appurtenant airspace of private open-space areas, including but not limited to the private patio, deck, balcony, solarium or atrium required by this section, and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be described and conveyed in the grant deed as an integral part of the unit. 
2.  Conveyance of private storage areas: The surface and appurtenant airspace of private storage spaces required by this section shall be described and conveyed in the deed as an integral part of the unit. 
3.  Assignment of off-street parking: Required off- street parking spaces shall be permanently, irrevocably and specifically assigned to particular units within the project on the basis of the parking spaces required per unit pursuant to Section 17.44.030 of this chapter. To the maximum practicable extent, the spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private storage area of one unit overhang or take its access from the required off-street parking space of another unit. All studio and one-bedroom units shall be assigned one parking space and may rent additional spaces from the association as available. All occupants of a unit with two or more bedrooms may rent one parking space back to the association. All parking spaces, except those specifically designated for parking recreational vehicles, shall be used solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles and shall not be used for trailers, unmounted campers or similar recreational vehicles. 
4.  Right of public entry to common area: Officers, agents and employees of the city, the county, the state and the Government of the United States and any department, bureau or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all common areas of the project at all times for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety and welfare, except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit. 
5.  Maintenance of common areas: In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provision shall be made for annual assessments for capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which special assessments may be levied for the construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a monthly basis. The remedies which the association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include penalties for late payment. 
6.  Utility easements over private streets and other areas: If the condominium project contains private streets, paths or roadways, provision shall be made for public utility easements over the entire private street, path or roadway network. The planning commission may also require public utility easements adjacent to public streets or over other portions of the project to accommodate fire hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, electrical lines and similar public improvements and utilities. The planning commission may also require access routes necessary to assure that fire-fighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project. 
7.  Access for construction, maintenance or repairs: Each owner and the association shall have an easement for entry upon any privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of the units in common. 
8.  Contract termination right: Unless otherwise prohibited by law or any local, state or federal regulation, the association shall have the right to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform management or maintenance duties three months after the association assumes control of the project, or at that time to renegotiate any such contracts. 
9.  Provision for equity in sales: The conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall contain a provision that the sale of any unit shall not be prevented because of the age, sex or family composition of any potential buyer. 
J.  Additional Requirements. In addition to the requirements for a major subdivision, the application for the subdivision of existing multiple-family rental housing as a condominium conversion shall be subject to the additional requirements set forth in subsections K through O of this section. 
K.  Code Inspection, Compliance and Disclosure. All units to be under separate ownership or lease after conversion shall be inspected by the city prior to city approval of the final map. Separate ownership shall mean a condominium unit where the entire fee is in one entity, whether individually, in joint tenancy or as tenants in common. All units shall be brought into compliance with the Uniform Building Code effective at the time the units were first constructed. A form containing pertinent information regarding the project, including age and physical and spatial amenities within and in proximity to the condominium complex, shall be filed with and approved by the planning director and shall be provided to prospective condominium buyers. 
L.  Utilities. All units to be subdivided shall be provided with separate gas and electric meters and provision shall be made for individual shutoff valves. All units shall also be provided with separate water meters and shutoff valves or with separate shutoff valves for all fixtures in each unit. If it is not possible to have separate water meters, provision shall be made for the equitable sharing of water costs. 
M.  Public Report Application. A copy of the proposed application submitted by the applicant to the Department of Real Estate of the state for a subdivision public report on the current forms required by the Department of Real Estate shall be submitted to the city planning department, together with the submittal of the tentative map. Such application need not contain exhibits regarding the availability of utility services or the organizational documents of the project. However, the application for the final subdivision map shall include a full and complete copy of all information submitted to the department of real estate by the applicant. 
N.  Notification to Tenants. 
1.  Developers of condominium conversions shall submit to the planning department the following: 
a.  With the use permit application, a list of the names and addresses of the residents of each unit in the conversion project, certified as to accuracy by the developer as of the date of the application. The developer shall immediately notify the city of any change in the names or addresses on the list as they occur; 
b.  Prior to filing a tentative subdivision map, certification that all notices required to be given to and received prior to the filing of such map have been given in the manner and within the time limits specified or referenced in Government Code Section 66427.1 and all other notification requirements of the Subdivision Map Act as amended from time to time. 
c.  Prior to approval of a final subdivision map, certification that all notices specified or referenced in Government Code Section 66427.1 in connection with approval of such map have been given to the persons in the manner and within the time limits specified or referenced therein. 
2.  The city shall provide notification of the public hearing before the planning commission on the use permit and subdivision applications to the tenants of the units in the conversion project pursuant to Section 17.50.090 of this title, as well as to all other persons therein prescribed. 
3.  A copy of the written staff report shall be delivered to the subdivider and to each tenant of the subject property at least three days prior to any hearing on the tentative map. 
O.  Pest Infestation and Dry Rot Report. The developer shall, prior to approval of the final map, submit to the planning department a copy of the structural pest infestation and dry rot report for all buildings within the proposed project. This report shall be made available to all prospective buyers by the developer. 
Any and all actual structural damage shall be repaired or financial provision made for appropriate repair within a specific time period, prior to the approval of final map or properly bonded under the Subdivision Map Act. 
P.  Effect On Housing Stock. In reviewing requests for conversion of existing apartment buildings to condominiums, the city shall consider the following: 
1.  Whether the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants would be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community; 
2.  The role that the apartment structure plays in the existing rental housing market; 
3.  The effect of the conversion on the need and demand for low-cost housing (both rental and ownership housing). 
In no case shall apartment conversions be allowed if the rental vacancy rate is below four percent, as determined by the planning department. 
Q.  Advertising. The developer shall make no advertising use of any city approval of use, subdivision or occupancy for the project. 
R.  Required Findings. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.1 as it presently exists or may hereafter be amended, approval of the final map of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project shall be withheld unless the city council makes all findings required by that section and further finds that: 
1.  The proposed conversion will not have an adverse effect on the diversity of housing types available in the city. 
2.  The proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage of tenants and deplete low-income and moderate- income rental units from the city's housing stock at a time when no equivalent condominium housing is readily available in the city. 
3.  The proposed conversion would not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community and is consistent with the city's General Plan, particularly the housing element. 
4.  The overall design and construction of the development meets the standards outlined herein. 
S.  Appeals. Any person who is dissatisfied with any decision made by the planning commission may appeal the same in accordance with the procedures established in Section 17.50.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 3, 1991)  
17.44.070 - Mobile home park conversion regulations. 
A.  Purpose and Findings. The city council finds, determines and declares that: 
1.  Chapter 9.16 (Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization) of this code was enacted to protect the owners of mobile homes who reside in mobile home parks from unreasonable and excessive space rent increases and/or assessments, while at the same time providing owners of mobile home parks with a just and reasonable return on their investment. The findings, determinations and declarations contained in Chapter 9.16 are incorporated herein and made a part of this section. 
2.  This section is intended as the logical extension of the purpose and findings contained in Chapter 9.16 in that the unrestricted conversion of such mobile home parks to other uses can further diminish the availability of mobile home parks and space rentals, can interfere with existing tenants' quiet enjoyment of their mobile homes and can subject such tenants to the costs and inconvenience of relocation. 
3.  The protection of mobile home park stock, mobile home residents and potential purchasers of mobile homes warrants the implementation of the safeguards contained in this section. Such safeguards are permissible pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4 and California Civil Code Section 798.56(f). 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words are defined as follows: 
1.  "Conversion" means the change in use from a mobile home park to any other use (including, without limitation, those uses described in California Civil Code Section 798.10) or the closure of a mobile home park or the cessation of the use of the land as a mobile home park. 
2.  "Owner" means the owner, lessor or designated agent of a park. 
3.  "Park" means a mobile home park which rents spaces for mobile home dwelling units. 
4.  "Reasonable costs of relocation" means the costs involved in the relocation of each resident from a mobile home park which is being converted pursuant to this section. 
5.  "Resident" means the owner of a mobile home dwelling unit who is renting space from the owner of a park. 
C.  Applications for Mobile Home Park Conversions. 
1.  The use of property as a mobile home park shall not be changed for the purpose of conversion to any other land use until application for a mobile home park conversion has been approved by the planning commission or by the city council following an appeal. 
2.  No building permit shall be issued on property occupied by a mobile home park or any portion thereof, for any other use that would constitute a conversion as defined in this section until approval for mobile home park conversion has been obtained pursuant to this section. 
3.  Applications for a mobile home park conversion shall be made to the planning director with the filing fee prescribed by resolution of the city council. The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Plans indicating the use for which an application for conversion is made; 
b.  The timetable for conversion of the park; 
c.  The total number of spaces within the park, the number of spaces occupied, the length of time each space has been occupied by the present tenant and the monthly rent currently charged; 
d.  The names and current addresses of each park resident; 
e.  The report regarding the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park to be converted or closed which is required by Government Code Section 65863.7 (attached to the application); 
f.  The report regarding the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park to be converted or closed which is required by Government Code Section 66427.4 (attached to the application); 
g.  A statement indicating whether there has been an adjudication of bankruptcy involving the park and, if so, whether the closure of the mobile home park or cessation of use of the land as a mobile home park results therefrom and the specific information supporting any such assertion(s) or conclusion(s). 
4.  An application for a mobile home park conversion shall be subject to all other applicable laws, rules and/or regulations of the city and the state, including, but not limited to, Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4 and the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code section 21000, et seq.). This section is intended to be no more stringent or exacting than allowed by applicable state law. In the event that any provision of this section is determined to be in conflict with an applicable state law, such state law shall be controlling. 
5.  At least thirty days prior to a hearing or any other action on the application, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the provisions of Civil Code Sections 798.55 and 798.56, Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, and all applicable state and local requirements which impose upon the applicant the duty to notify residents of the mobile home park of the proposed change in use and shall specify in said notice the manner in which the applicant shall verify that residents have been so notified of the proposed change in use. Neither a hearing on the application nor any other action thereon shall be taken by the city before the applicant has satisfactorily verified that the residents of the park have been so notified in the manner prescribed by said city notice. 
D.  Procedures for Review. 
1.  After receiving the city notice described in subsection C5 of this section, the applicant shall be responsible for providing all required reports, notices and the like to the residents as may be required by law, including, without limitation, the reports and notices required by California Civil Code Sections 798.55 and 798.56 and Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4. 
2.  Within sixty days following the submission of all required information in connection with an application for a mobile home park conversion, including the notices and verifications of notice required by subsection C5 of this section, the application shall be set for public hearing before the planning commission. The public hearing shall be opened, conducted and closed within that sixty day period. However, an extension or extensions cumulatively totaling no more than sixty additional days may be granted if mutually agreed to by the planning commission and the applicant. 
3.  The planning commission shall, within thirty days after the close of the public hearing, take final action on the application. 
4.  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a conversion application involving a proposed change of use (other than the simple closure of the mobile home park or cessation of the use of the land as a mobile home park) pursuant to its inherent implied and express local land use authority under both state and local law. The planning commission shall not deny but shall approve or conditionally approve (pursuant to subsection F of this section) a conversion application involving the simple closure of the mobile home park or cessation of the use of the land as a mobile home park, with no intended new use other than the closure or cessation; provided that the applicant has properly complied with the requirements of this section. 
5.  Any applicant, or any other person aggrieved, or any other person whose interests are adversely affected by any act or determination of the planning commission may appeal the act or determination to the city council in accordance with Section 17.50.060 of this title. For this purpose, the procedures therein set forth are incorporated herein and made a part of this section. 
E.  Findings. The planning commission, in considering an application for a conversion permit, shall accept and hear evidence, shall consider such evidence, and shall make written findings based on such evidence regarding each of the following factors (and any other factors as it deems appropriate): 
1.  Whether the reports submitted with the conversion application (pursuant to subsection C of this section) have been properly completed, and whether those reports evidence an adverse impact upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park which will be caused by the proposed conversion; 
2.  Whether there will exist at the time of conversion sufficient mobile home space availability within the city and/or surrounding areas to accommodate the mobile homes to be displaced by reason of the conversion; 
3.  Whether the age, type and style of mobile homes within the park proposed for conversion are such that the mobile homes are able to be moved and accepted into other parks within the city or surrounding areas if such relocation of individual mobile homes is anticipated; 
4.  If the proposed conversion is to another residential use, whether the residents of the mobile home park will have first opportunity to purchase, if for sale, or occupy the new units and whether the construction schedule will result in unreasonably long term displacements; 
5.  Whether closure of the mobile home park or cessation of the use of the land as a mobile home park results from an adjudication of bankruptcy and the evidence supporting each finding; 
6.  Whether the proposed conversion is consistent with the city's General Plan, specific plan and/or zoning ordinance; 
7.  Whether the proposed conversion will be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare; 
8.  Whether all reports and notices required by law have been properly prepared and properly served. 
Any proposed conversion of a mobile home park shall be consistent with and in conformance with, the city's General Plan, applicable specific plan and/or zoning ordinance, as well as all other applicable state and local regulations. 
F.  Conditions. In approving a mobile home park conversion, the city may attach reasonable conditions in order to mitigate the impacts associated with the conversion. However, such conditions shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation. Such conditions may include, without limitation, the following: 
1.  An effective date of the approval of the conversion of not less than six months from the date of the conversion application approval (as required by California Civil Code Section 798.56(f)) so as to provide sufficient time for the relocation of the mobile homes to other parks; 
2.  Full payment by the owner to each mobile home park resident of the resident's reasonable costs of relocation related to the conversion of the park; 
3.  In order to facilitate the intentions of the residents and owners with regard to a proposed conversion, the parties may agree to mutually satisfactory conditions. To be valid, however, such an agreement shall be in writing, shall include a provision stating that the resident is aware of the provisions of this section, shall include a copy of this section as an attachment and shall include a provision in at least ten point type which clearly informs the resident that he has the right to seek the advice of an attorney of his choice prior to signing the agreement with regard to his rights under such agreement and shall be drafted in the form and content otherwise required by applicable state law. 
G.  Application. The provisions of this section shall not apply if it is finally determined that the closure of a mobile home park or cessation of the use of the land as a mobile home park results from an adjudication of bankruptcy. 
H.  Prohibition of Waiver of Rights—Sanctions. It shall be unlawful for an owner to require that any resident or prospective resident, waive his or her rights under this section as a condition of tenancy. Any owner who wilfully and knowingly violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.080 - Tree protection regulations. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The city is forested with several varieties of native and significant trees which contribute greatly to the value of the land in the city and the preservation of which is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. It is the intent of this section to: (1) regulate the removal of protected trees within the city in order to preserve scenic beauty, and a diverse ecosystem, prevent erosion of topsoil, protect against flood hazard and risks of land slides, counteract pollutants in the area, maintain the climatic balance, decrease wind velocities; (2) retain as many trees as possible consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of private property. (3) preserve significant, healthy trees when development of property is proposed; and, (4) protect trees designated for preservation during the construction of new development projects. 
B.  Definitions. The terms used herein have the following meanings: 
1.  "Certified arborist" means an arborist who has experience in the Santa Cruz County area in preparing tree reports and has valid certification credentials. A list of certified arborists who meet these criteria shall be maintained by the planning department. 
2.  "City arborist" means a certified arborist retained by the City of Scotts Valley to provide professional arboricultural services to the city. 
3.  "Damage" means any action undertaken which may cause the death or significant injury, or which places a protected tree in a hazardous condition or in an irreversible state of decline. This includes but is not limited to tree cutting, excessive foliar crown removal, topping, girdling, or poisoning, or trenching, compacting or excavating within a tree's root zone. 
4.  "Drip line" means a line which may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips and which identifies that location where rainwater tends to drop from the tree. 
5.  "Foliar crown" means the leaves and branches of a tree; the upper portion of a tree from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top of the tree. 
6.  "Heritage trees" means trees which have been identified because of unique quality and/or size as the most significant and noteworthy in the city and which have been listed in an adopted resolution of the city council as to common name, location and the reason for listing. 
7.  "Protected tree" means a standing or upright tree meeting any one of the following: 
a.  Any tree having a main stem or trunk which measures twenty-five inches or greater in circumference (eight 8 inches in diameter, approximately) measured fifty-four inches above natural grade, located in a hillside residential zone where the slope of the area within twenty feet of where the tree is located exceeds twenty percent; 
b.  Any tree which existed at the time of any approval granted under any zoning ordinance in effect prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title and which was required to the preserved as part of such approval; 
c.  Any tree required to be planted as condition of any approval under this title; 
d.  Any tree that was or is required to be planted as a replacement for any unlawfully removed tree; 
e.  Any oak tree having a main stem or trunk which measures twenty-five inches or greater in circumference (eight inches diameter, approximately) measure fifty-four inches above natural grade. Any multi-trunk oak with an individual trunk of over twelve inches in circumference (four inches diameter, approximately) measured fifty-four inches above the natural grade; 
f.  Any street tree, as defined in subsection B.9, regardless of size; 
g.  Heritage tree, as adopted in a resolution approved by the city council and shown on the map on file in the planning department; 
h.  All trees which have a forty-inch or greater circumference of any trunk measured fifty-four inches above the natural grade or, in the case of multi-trunk tress, a total of above the natural grade. This provision shall not apply to the following trees: eucalyptus (blue gum), fruit trees and acacias. It also shall not apply to any bat laurel below and located within the drip line of any established oak tree. 
8.  "Pruning or trimming" means the removal of superfluous parts, branches or shoots from a plant or tree for better shaped or more fruitful growth. 
9.  "Street tree" means any tree within five feet of public or private street or right-of-way. 
10.  "Tree" means a woody perennial plant characterized by having a main stem or trunk or a multi-stemmed trunk system with more or less definitely formed crown, usually over ten feet high at maturity. This definition shall not include trees planted, grown and held for sale by licensed nurseries or the first removal or transplanting of such trees pursuant to and as part of the operation of a licensed nursery business. 
11.  "Tree removal" means the killing of a tree by any means. 
12.  "Tree root zone" means an area extending five feet beyond the tree's drip line. 
C.  Protection of Trees. No person shall willfully cause or permit any condition which may damage a protected tree, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Maintenance of a tree irretrievably infested or infected with insects or disease that could be detrimental to the health of any adjacent protected tree. 
2.  Alteration of natural grade around any protected tree that impacts the flow of air, moisture or nutrients, or degrades the function of feeding or structural roots of a protected tree. This regulation does not include landscaping improvements which were approved by the city with an original development approval. Landscaping projects which are not subject to city review for existing development are not subject to this requirement unless a project was approved with conditions regarding location of landscaping or protection of trees. 
3.  Storage of building materials or parking of vehicles or equipment within the root zone of a protected tree during development, unless specifically authorized by the city and under the direction of a certified arborist. 
4.  Application of any substance which might be detrimental to the health of any protected tree. 
5.  Driving metal stakes into tree trunks or stems or the root zone for any purpose other than to support a protected tree. 
6.  Open flames within fifteen feet of the foliar canopy or trunk of a protected tree. 
D.  Tree Removals Subject to Obtaining a Permit. Except as otherwise provided in subsection E, it is unlawful for any person to damage, destroy or remove, or cause to be damaged, destroyed or removed, any protected tree defined in subsection B.7, upon any private or public property in the city without first having obtained a permit to do so issued pursuant to this chapter. Exceptions to obtaining a permit provided in subsection E. 
E.  Exceptions. The permit requirement set forth in subsection D shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Emergencies. If the condition of a tree presents an immediate hazard to life or property, or if the city has determined that a tree is a hazard to other protected trees via in infestation or disease which presents an imminent hazard to other protected trees in the vicinity, it may be removed without a permit on order of the city manager, the city engineer, building inspector, community development director, a peace officer employed by the Scotts Valley police department, or an employee of the Scotts Valley Fire Protection District acting in the course and within the scope of employment. The community development director shall require a written determination from a certified arborist to confirm the immediate or imminent hazard of the tree when the situation warrants such confirmation. 
2.  City Employees. Employees of the city may without a permit take such action with regard to trees on city-owned property as may be necessary to maintain safety unless such trees are designated as Heritage trees. If a Heritage tree is to be removed, a tree removal permit is required pursuant to subsection D and G unless an emergency exists pursuant to subsection E.1. 
3.  Public Utilities. Public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the state public utilities commission may without a permit take such action as may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of the public utilities commission and as may be necessary to maintain a safe operation of their facilities. 
4.  Project Approval. Where removal of a tree has been specifically authorized as part of any development application approved by the planning commission or city council under any other provision of this title, no additional permit shall be required for removal of such tree. Tree removal request shall be included as part of the development application, including an arborist's report, and shall be approved by the planning commission or city council. The development review process shall include a review of the information and requirements set forth below for the purpose of preserving healthy trees, trees that contribute to the overall aesthetic quality of an area, and to preserve significantly sized trees that are important to the overall landscape of an area. The development application shall the following information, and prior to deeming an application complete, shall be subject to the following process for review: 
a.  All development plans, and landscaping and irrigation plans shall show all trees and indicate size and species with locations, drip lines and tree root zones properly surveyed. 
b.  The city arborist shall perform a resource evaluation, tree survey, and/or impact report using the plans provided by the applicant. The city arborist shall make recommendations for trees requiring removal or appropriate for preservation. The report shall include procedures for pre-construction treatment and alternative construction methods. In addition, requirements for Preservation and Maintenance, contained in sub-section I shall be considered and appropriate conditions for long term maintenance of preserved trees shall be evaluated. 
c.  Tree preservation measures shall be incorporated as conditions of permit approval. 
d.  The city arborist shall place a monetary value on trees preserved on development sites and a surety bond in an amount equal to the value of the preserved trees shall be deposited with the city. If damaged occurs to the preserved trees during development and/or construction, funds will be drawn from the deposited amount. Funds remaining in the account will be returned to the applicant upon final inspection of the project. 
e.  During the pre-construction phase of development the city arborist shall inspect tree protection fencing and the completion of pre-construction treatments. This inspection shall be completed prior to the issuance of any grading or building permits. 
f.  The city arborist shall routinely inspect the development site through the term of the project. 
g.  The cost of the city arborist review and implementation of conditions, site inspection and related work shall be borne by the applicant. 
F.  City-Required Removal of Trees. On order of the city manager, city engineer, building inspector, community development director, peace officer employed by the City of Scotts Valley police department or an employee of the fire district, a dead or diseased non-heritage tree may be required to be removed if it is determined to be a potential threat or if its removal is determined to be beneficial to the health and safety of surrounding vegetation or property. 
G.  Applications. Application for a tree removal permit for any tree protected in this section shall be filed with the city planning department on forms prescribed by the community development director, and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. The application shall contain the number and location of each tree to be removed, the type and approximate size of the tree, the reason for removal, and such additional information as the community development director may require. The city shall mail notices to at least the five closest neighboring property owners, the Scotts Valley planning commissioners and others deemed necessary by the community development director. The planning staff will determine who will receive the notice. 
H.  Processing of and Determinations on Tree Removal Permits. 
1.  Permit. Applications for removal of all protected trees except Heritage trees shall be reviewed and determined by the planning director. Permit application for removal of Heritage trees shall be reviewed and determined by the planning commission. 
2.  Criteria. Each application for a tree removal permit shall be reviewed and a decision rendered on approval or denial (in whole or in part) on the basis of following criteria: 
a.  The condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures, and interference with existing utility services; 
b.  The topography of the land and the effect of the tree removal upon erosion, soil retention and the diversion or increased flow of surface waters; 
c.  The number, species, size and location of existing trees in the area and the effect the removal would have upon shade, sunlight, privacy, scenic beauty, wildlife, noise, air quality, wind, health, safety, prosperity, historic values and general welfare of the area and the city as a whole. 
3.  Additional Recommendations. The community development director or planning commission may refer the application to another department, commission or person for a report and recommendation. They may also require the applicant to furnish a written report from a certified arborist as identified on the list maintained by the planning department, such report to be obtained at the expense of the applicant. 
4.  Dead or Diseased Tree(s). 
a.  If a property owner is required to presents a written report from a certified arborist, which identifies a tree(s) as dead or diseased and recommends removal, no fee shall be charged if such disease is considered terminal or can be spread to other trees causing further damage, disease or death. 
b.  If a property owner has been directed by city staff to remove a potentially destructive, dead or diseased tree, no tree removal permit shall be required. 
c.  If a request is filed to remove a dead tree, such tree shall be inspected by the community development director, and if determined to be dead, no fee for a permit to remove such tree shall be required nor shall any of the procedures for dead trees shall be processed within three (3) business days. Failure to process the permit within three (3) days results in approval of the permit and the tree can be removed. 
5.  Decision by Community Development Director of Planning Commission on Permits and Replacement Tree(s) Requirements. 
a.  The community development director shall render a decision on the permit in accordance with the adopted processing schedule maintained by the planning department. The director may grant or deny the application or grant the same with conditions, including, but not limited to, the condition that one or more replacement trees be planted of a species and size, at on or off site location(s) as designated by the community development director. Any such replacement trees shall be planted and maintained on the same site at the expense of the applicant. When a site is not of a sufficient size or other factors determined by the community development director warrant placement of trees off-site, such replacement tree(s) shall be substituted by payment of a fee to the city's tree replacement fund. When a permit is granted, denied or conditions attached, the community development director shall provide the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for said grant, denial or conditions based on the criteria of this subsection. 
b.  [Reserved.] 
c.  The planning commission may request a tree removal permit to be reviewed by the planning commission during the initial notice period or by an appeal of the community development director's decision on a tree removal permit. If such request is made during the initial notice period, the community development director shall place such permit on the next available planning commission agenda. No action on the permit can be taken until the permit is reviewed and an action is taken by the planning commission. Action by the planning commission shall be in accordance with the criteria for approval of a tree removal permit as contained subsection H.2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the decision of the planning commission on any tree removal permit shall be final. 
d.  An application to remove any heritage tree shall be considered by the planning commission at a public hearing schedule for the next available planning commission meeting from the date the permit is filed. Notice of the public hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 17.50.090 of this title. The planning commission may grant or deny the application or grant the same with conditions, including, but not limited to, the condition that one or more replacement trees be planted of a species and size and at locations as designated by the planning commission. Any such replacement trees shall be obtained and planted at the expense of the applicant. When a permit is granted, denied or conditions attached, the planning commission shall provide the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for said grant, denial or conditions based on the criteria of this subsection. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
e.  Notice of the community development director's or planning commission's decision on any application for a tree removal permit shall be made by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owners of the five closest neighboring properties, or others as required in subsection G and to any other person who has filed with the community development director a written request for such notice. 
6.  Denial of Tree Removal Permits. If a tree removal permit is denied by the community development director or planning commission, a re-application for removal of the tree(s) may be made at any time if conditions change or significant new information becomes available. 
I.  Preservation and Maintenance. 
1.  The existing ground surface in the tree zone of any protected trees shall not be cut, filled, compacted or paved as a part of any new development project unless specifically recommended by a certified arborist. Specific attention to paving or covering soil within the tree zone of the any protected trees shall be evaluated to ensure the long term health of the tree(s). All cut fill, compaction and paving within the tree root zone of any protected tree shall be reviewed by a certified arborist and appropriate recommendations made based upon the conditions relative to the particular site and the condition and type of tree being affected. When conditions are applied to new development projects for preservation of specific tree(s), such conditions shall be applied to the future preservation and maintenance of the tree(s) after construction is complete. 
2.  When a proposed development complies with subsection E.4 and still encroaches into the tree root zone of any protected tree, special construction techniques shall be employed to permit the roots to remain undisturbed. The special construction techniques, as recommended by a certified arborist, may be required to be submitted with the application for building permits. 
3.  Excavation adjacent to any protected tree shall not be permitted where material damage to the root system will result. In questionable situations, the applicant shall provide substantiated documentation acceptable and satisfactory to the certified arborist and the community development director showing that the trees will be properly protected. Posting of a bond to insure tree protection may be required at the discretion of the community development director. 
4.  Chain link fencing with posts sunk in the ground or other fencing method approved by the city arborist shall be installed in locations surrounding tree(s) to be preserved during all construction activities on site. The location of the fencing shall be as determined by the certified arborist and community development director. Such fencing shall be installed by the applicant and inspected prior to issuance of a grading and building permit. 
5.  Landscaping and irrigation plans within the tree root zone of any protected tree(s) shall be reviewed and recommended by a certified arborist. 
J.  Appeal. 
1.  The applicant or any other interested person may appeal the decision of the community development director to the planning commission whose decision shall be final. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner as notice in subsection G. Notice of the planning commission's decision shall be forwarded to applicant within twenty-one days of the date of the decision. 
2.  Where an application for a tree removal permit has been granted and the community development director determines that the tree in question presents a clear and immediate threat of causing injury to persons or property, the community development director may issue the tree removal permit prior to expiration of the appeal period. 
K.  Designation of Heritage Trees. Any member of the public may petition the city council in writing to designate a tree or group of trees of the heritage tree inventory and the city council shall consider the request. A tree or group of trees may be designated as heritage tree(s) by resolution of the city council upon their finding that the tree(s) is/are of outstanding value because of any of the following reasons: age, size, aesthetics, history, uniqueness, tradition, or location. Trees designated as heritage trees shall be included in the heritage tree inventory. 
L.  Removal from Heritage Tree Inventory. A tree or trees shall be removed from the heritage tree inventory upon adoption of a resolution by the city council based on findings of the city arborist that: 
1.  The tree or trees is/are dead, or 
2.  The tree or trees is/are irreparably damaged so that they will not survive, or 
3.  The tree or trees is/are damaged, diseased, infested or infected so that they are a hazard to public health and safety or to other trees, or 
4.  The tree or trees has/have been removed with the required tree removal permit for one of the above reasons, or 
5.  The tree or trees longer retain or hold the value for which they were placed upon the heritage tree list. 
M.  No Liability Upon City. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe condition any trees and shrubs upon his property or upon a public right-of-way over his property. 
N.  Enforcement. The community development director of the city, and his/her duly authorized representatives, are authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Whenever activity is being done in violation of this chapter, the community development director may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in such activity and such persons shall stop immediately until authorized by the community development director to proceed with such activity. 
O.  Violations—Penalties. The violation of any provision contained in this chapter is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance, subject to the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code. Such penalties may be waged also against a certified arborist or contractor who performed work in violation of this section. In addition thereto, any person unlawfully removing, destroying or damaging any protected tree shall be penalized as follows: 
1.  Replacing the unlawfully removed tree with one or more new trees which, in the opinion of the community development director or planning commission, will provide equivalent aesthetic quality in terms of size, height, location, appearance, age and other characteristics of the unlawfully removed tree. Such trees may be required to be located either on or off of the site where the tree was removed. 
2.  Where similar replacement trees will not provide reasonably equivalent aesthetic quality because of the size, height, location, appearance, age and other characteristics of the unlawfully removed or damaged tree, the community development director shall calculate the value of the removed tree in accordance with the latest edition of the Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants, as prepared by the council of tree and landscape appraisers. Upon the determination of such value, the community development director may require either a cash payment to the city, and/or the planting of replacement trees as designated by the community development director, or any combination thereof, in accordance with the following: 
a.  To the extent that a cash payment is required for any portion or all of the value of the removed tree, and 
b.  To the extent that the planting of replacement trees is required, the retail costs of such trees, as shown by documentary evidence satisfactory to the community development director, shall be offset against the value of the removed or damaged tree, but no credit shall be given for transportation, installation, maintenance and other costs incidental to the planting and care of the replacement trees. 
3.  Where a violation(s) of this section has previously occurred with the same property owner, agent, certified arborist or contractor or advance knowledge of the requirements of this section have been provided to the property owner, agent or certified or contractor, the community development director or planning commission, at their discretion, shall require payment of a penalty fee pursuant to sub-section O.2. 
4.  In the event a violation is performed under the direction of a certified arborist, the certified arborist shall be removed from the city's list for a minimum of one year. If the certified arborist wishes to be placed back on the list after one year, a written confirmation of agreement to abide by the these regulations shall be submitted and approved by the community development director. Repeat violations of these regulations by a certified arborist is basis to permanently remove the certified arborist from the City's lists. 
5.  All applications and permit fees paid to the city shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. 16.94 § 1; Ord. 16.104 § 2, 1998; Ord. 16-114 § 4, 2002; Ord. 16.123, § 54, 9-5-2007)  
17.44.100 - Congregate senior housing facilities. 
A.  Applicability. A congregate senior housing facility may be established on any site that is within the planning area of the General Plan designated for medium high density (or greater) residential use and which the General Plan further designates as a "special consideration area" for a congregate senior housing facility upon securing a conditional use permit therefor from the planning commission, provided the project consists of five or more dwelling units. 
B.  Definition. "Congregate senior housing facilities" means a housing project or portion thereof, designed to serve the housing needs of a particular segment or group of elderly persons. Such projects frequently include nonresidential facilities such as stores, garages, dining rooms, recreation facilities, chapels, health and related services and functions to provide for the needs of the residents. 
C.  Provisions For Density Bonuses. In evaluating any use permit application for congregate facilities, the planning commission shall allow a density bonus for any such project in accordance with the formula established below, where the developer agrees to construct at least twenty five percent of the total units for persons and families of low or moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, or ten percent of the total units for lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or fifty percent of the total units for "qualifying residents" as defined in Section 51.2 of the Civil Code. The planning commission shall determine the size of the density bonus based on the size of the project and its location. 
1.  No density bonus shall be less than twenty five percent of the maximum allowable residential density otherwise permitted under the applicable zoning district regulations and land use element of the General Plan. 
2.  The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to ten or twenty five or fifty percent of the total units referenced above. 
3.  Subject to the provisions of subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection a density bonus of up to seven units for every unit to be constructed and committed for one or more of the income groups referenced above shall be allowed subject to a maximum density bonus equivalent to 2.5 times the maximum number of units otherwise permitted under the applicable zoning district regulations and land use element of the General Plan, provided that the maximum density, including density bonuses in any General Plan designation area, shall be no greater than thirty-five units per acre. 
4.  Within the parameters specified in subdivision 3 of this subsection, the planning commission shall determine the density bonus to be allowed by giving due consideration to the size of the site, the character of the surrounding area and uses located therein, the proximity of the site to shopping centers and major arterials, the accessibility of the site, the proximity of the site to recreational areas and medical facilities, the topography of the site and any other factors that may be pertinent to a proper evaluation of the density bonus to be allowed. 
D.  Design Criteria and Performance Standards. Design criteria and performance standards for the zoning district regulations applicable to the site shall be satisfied, except as modified herein. 
1.  Minimum unit size: 
a.  Studio, 400 square feet, 
b.  One bedroom, 600 square feet, 
c.  Two bedroom, 800 square feet; 
2.  All units shall consist of studios and/or one- bedroom or two bedroom dwelling units; 
3.  Kitchen facilities. Minimum kitchen facilities shall contain a small one basin sink, a half size (nine cubic foot) refrigerator and two burner stove top; 
4.  Individual bathrooms shall be required for all units and shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Handrail shall be provided in bathroom, 
b.  Nonskid surfaces shall be installed for floors, tubs and showers, 
c.  Each bathroom shall be equipped with a tub or shower, 
d.  All showers shall contain a built in seat with grab bars for safety purposes; 
5.  Each unit shall be equipped with an intercom system that will allow for two way communication with the central management area; 
6.  Handrails shall be provided the full length of all hallways on both sides, with occasional seating if hallway length exceeds fifty feet; 
7.  Transportation services. Van services shall be provided in accordance with a program designed and maintained to meet the reasonable transportation needs of the residents of the project. The planning commission shall approve the transportation services plan proposed for the congregate senior housing facility; 
8.  Adequate organized physical activity or activities shall be provided on site; 
9.  Peepholes shall be required in all unit entryway doors; 
10.  Twenty four hour security staff shall be provided for the site; 
11.  All building exteriors and exterior walkways shall be well lit, but glare shall not be directed onto adjacent properties or streets; 
12.  A minimum of two emergency pull cords or buttons shall be provided for each unit, one of which shall be located in the bathroom near the toilet, tub or shower; 
13.  Management must possess a thorough knowledge of the needs of the elderly as well as expertise in property management; 
14.  A central management area shall be provided in the facility. This area shall be equipped to handle communications from residents on a twenty four hour per day basis; 
15.  A minimum of two hot meals per day shall be provided; 
16.  A snack bar shall be located in or adjacent to the central dining area where sandwiches, fruit, soft drinks and assorted items can be purchased; 
17.  An area shall be located on the premises where sundry items such as soap, toilet paper, paper towels, toothpaste and similar items can be purchased; 
18.  Areas of a room must be provided for group meetings, social interaction, exercising and/or other activities; 
19.  All entrances and exits, including to and from dwelling units, shall be wheelchair accessible from outside and inside the building; 
20.  Parking for residential, staff and visitor purposes shall be in the ratio of one space for every three units with sufficient space set aside to increase parking to a ratio of one space per two units; 
21.  All units shall be wheelchair adaptable; 
22.  All services, amenities and other features of the facility, in addition to rent levels, shall be disclosed in writing to a prospective tenant prior to the execution of any rental or lease agreement; 
23.  All units shall be available for rental congregate senior housing only. 
E.  Agreement Required. Prior to the issuance of any building or grading permit for the project, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city: 
1.  Whereby the requisite number of units to be committed to the purposes specified in subsection C of this section shall be committed indefinitely; 
2.  Which requires the applicant to pay for the cost of an appropriate rental and monitoring program that will ensure that the requisite number of units to be committed for the applicable purposes specified in subsection C of this section are utilized appropriately; 
3.  Whereby the rental and monitoring program referenced in subdivision 2 of this subsection shall be satisfied, at the option of the city, by the execution of an agreement between the city and the Santa Cruz County housing authority (or similar public housing agency) for the institution and maintenance of a rental processing and monitoring program, with the applicant being required to enter into appropriate agreements with the Santa Cruz County housing authority (or similar housing agency) consistent and in accordance therewith; 
4.  Which requires that the provisions of any agreement specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection shall be treated as conditions running with the land, shall be binding on and inure to the benefit of any successor(s) in interest of the parties thereto, shall be referenced in any deed or other document whereby the land or any interest, right and/or title therein is transferred or otherwise conveyed to any other person and shall be recorded in the Santa Cruz County recorder's office; 
5.  Which contains appropriate provisions relating to enforcement of the terms and conditions thereof by the city and/or the Santa Cruz County housing authority (or similar public housing agency). 
Any such agreements shall be approved by the city attorney and city council. 
F.  Other Requirements. 
1.  The design criteria and performance standards specified in subsection D of this section are intended to and shall apply to all congregate senior housing facilities except to the extent that such criteria and standards are preempted now or in the future by applicable provisions contained in any statute, rule or regulation of the state of California, including without limitation any such provisions set forth in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. The design criteria and performance standards set forth in subsection D of this section are intended to and shall supplement the provisions of any state or local statute ordinance, rule or regulation otherwise applicable to congregate senior housing facilities. 
2.  The provisions of any use permit issued hereunder shall be considered to constitute covenants and/or conditions running with the land and the use permit shall be recorded at the Santa Cruz County recorder's office prior to issuance of any building or grading permit. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.110 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide operational and management standards for emergency shelters. The regulations contained herein are intended to establish compatibility with surrounding uses. 
B.  Operational standards and management standards for emergency shelters. Emergency shelters shall be subject to and comply with the following standards and regulations: 
1.  Limited terms of stay. The facility shall operate on a first come, first serve basis with clients only permitted on-site and admitted to the facility between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (PDT), and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (PST). Clients must vacate the facility by 8:00 a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. A curfew of 10:00 p.m. (or earlier) shall be established and strictly enforced. Clients shall not be admitted after the curfew. 
2.  Siting. To avoid over concentration of emergency shelter facilities, a minimum distance of three hundred feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter, as measured from the property line. 
3.  Restroom Facilities. Service providers shall provide sufficient numbers of male and female toilets/restrooms for clients and prospective clients to have access to use on a twenty-four-hour basis. For group housing and other similar shelter programs, adequate private male and female showers shall be provided along with lockers for clients to temporarily store their belongings. 
4.  Outdoor Storage. Any outdoor storage, including but not limited to, items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot tall decorative wall or fence. Shopping carts are not permitted on site. 
5.  Waiting Areas. Adequate waiting areas must be provided within the premises for clients and prospective clients including ten square feet per bed, minimum one hundred square feet to ensure that public sidewalks or private walkways are not used as queuing or waiting areas. Facility improvements shall comply with the Scotts Valley Municipal Code and the most current adopted Building and Safety Code, specific to the establishment of dormitories. 
6.  Off-Street Parking. An emergency shelter facility shall provide off-street parking at the ratio of one space per three beds, and/or 1.0 per bedroom designated as a family unit with children, plus one space per staff member. Service providers are responsible to provide and maintain adequate parking and freight loading facilities for employees, clients, and other visitors who drive to the premises. 
7.  Bicycle Parking. Secure bicycle rack parking shall be provided at the facility at a rate of one space per three beds. 
8.  Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
9.  Additional Service Areas. The facility may provide the following services in a designated area separate from sleeping areas: 
a.  A recreation area inside the shelter or in an outdoor area visually separated from public view by a minimum six-foot tall visually screening decorative wall or fence. 
b.  A counseling center for job placement, education, health care, legal services, or mental health services. 
c.  Kitchen and dining area. 
d.  Client storage area. 
10.  Outdoor Activity. For the purpose of noise abatement, organized outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. (PDT and PST) 
11.  Refuse. Emergency shelters shall provide a refuse storage area that is in accordance with the requirements of the public works department. 
12.  Business License. Emergency shelter operators shall obtain a city business license. 
13.  Shelter Management Plan. A shelter management plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application, which addresses all the following: 
a.  All graffiti on the premises shall be removed by the shelter operator within twenty-four hours. 
b.  Installation of anti-loitering signs. 
c.  Service providers shall maintain sufficient monetary resources to enable them to operate the facility per the shelter management plan, and shall demonstrate to the city prior to approval of the permit application that such funds shall be available for use upon first occupancy of the proposed shelter and shall reasonably be expected to be available for the life of the project. 
d.  A minimum one staff member per fifteen beds shall be awake and on-duty when the facility is open. Facility staff shall be trained in operating procedures, safety plans, and assisting clients. The facility shall not employ staff members who have been convicted of a felony or who are required to register as a sex registrant under Penal Code 290. 
e.  Service providers shall maintain up-to-date information and referral sheets to give clients and other persons who, for any reason, cannot be served by the emergency shelter. 
f.  Service providers shall provide criteria to screen clients for admittance eligibility, with the objective to provide first service to individuals with connections to Scotts Valley. 
g.  Service providers shall continuously monitor waiting areas to inform prospective clients whether they can be served within a reasonable time. If they cannot be served by the provider because of time or resource constraints, the monitor shall inform the client of alternative programs and locations where he or she may seek similar service. 
h.  Service providers will educate on-site staff to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income, including referrals to outside assistance agencies. An annual report on this activity will be provided to the city. 
i.  Service providers shall provide the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility every twenty-four-hour period. 
j.  Service providers will maintain good communication and have procedures in place to respond to operational issues which may arise from the neighborhood, city staff, or the general public. 
k.  Service providers shall establish standards for responding to emergencies and incidents expelling clients from the facility. Re-admittance policies for clients who have previously been expelled from the facility shall be established. 
l.  Alcohol and illegal drug use is prohibited on-site. Service providers shall expel clients from the facility if found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs. 
m.  The facility shall implement other conditions and/or measures as determined by the city, in consultation with other city/county agencies necessary to ensure that management and/or clients of the emergency shelter maintain the quiet, safety, and cleanliness of the premises and the vicinity of the use. 
14.  The facility shall comply with all other laws, rules, and regulations that apply including, but not limited to, building and fire codes. The facility shall be subject to city inspections prior to the commencement of operation. In addition, the city may inspect the facility at any time for compliance with the facility's management plan and other applicable laws and standards. 
(Ord. No. 16-138, § 4, 7-15-2015)  
17.44.120 - Cultural resource preservation commission. 
A.  Establishment of the Commission. For the protection of cultural resources, both historic and prehistoric, the city shall establish a cultural resource preservation commission (CRPC). It shall be responsible for safeguarding the city's prehistory and history in accordance with Sections 17.44.130 and 17.44.140 of this chapter. 
B.  Membership of the Commission. This commission shall have seven members who shall be the five members of the city's planning commission and two cultural members who shall be residents of the planning area of Scotts Valley and have exceptional knowledge of the history or prehistory of the area. One of the two cultural members shall be nominated for appointment by the Santa Cruz Archaeological Society and one member shall be nominated for appointment from the Scotts Valley Historical Society. They shall each be confirmed or denied appointment by the city council. If denied appointment, the nominating agency may propose another candidate until someone is properly selected. 
C.  Powers and Duties. When the CRPC meets, it shall have the same powers to condition a project as the planning commission within those matters prescribed in Sections 17.44.130 and 17.44.140. Conditions on projects determined by the seven-member CRPC cannot be altered by the planning commission later meeting on the same project as the planning commission, but the planning commission may reconvene the CRPC for further discussion of any project, prior to final approval. 
D.  Terms. Each member of the CRPC shall be appointed to a four-year term. From the effective date of this chapter the first term of the member from the Scotts Valley Historical Society shall be two years. 
E.  Vacancies. A vacant position will be filled for the remainder of the original term in the same manner as a regular nomination. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.101 § 1, 1996)  
17.44.130 - Cultural resource preservation. 
A.  Policy and Purposes. Pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, it is incumbent upon the city as a public agency to protect the interest of the public by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of archaeological resources and sites within the city that reflect special elements of the city's prehistoric and historic archaeological heritage. The city council finds and declares that the sites of these resources (hereinafter alternatively referred to as "cultural resources" and "cultural resource sites") are unique, nonrenewable, irreplaceable and significant areas containing evidence of past human activity; and that such sites constitute a precious prehistoric and historic heritage, which is (or is in danger of) rapidly disappearing as a result of public and private land development and/or modification activities. It is the policy of the city to preserve and protect these resources because of their cultural, educational and scientific values; and to recognize that these resources are rightfully the legacy of future generations. 
1.  The city council, concurring with the State Legislature, finds and declares that: 
a.  The safeguarding of the city's heritage as embodied and reflected in such resources is a matter of city- wide concern. 
b.  It is the intent of the city council to encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the city's past. 
c.  There is a need to foster civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity based on the recognition and use of cultural resources. 
d.  It is necessary to promote the enjoyment and use of cultural resources appropriate for the education and recreation of the people of the city. 
e.  There is a need to enhance property values and to increase economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants. 
f.  It is necessary to protect and enhance the city's attraction to tourists and visitors (thereby stimulating business and industry). 
g.  There is a need to identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses. 
h.  Every citizen has a right and a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of our cultural heritage. 
i.  It is the intent of the city council that the city regulate activities of private individuals, corporations and public agencies which are found to affect the purposes of this section so that major consideration is given to preventing damage to cultural resources. 
2.  The city council, concurring with the State Legislature, further finds and declares that it is the policy of the city to: 
a.  Integrate the preservation of archaeological resources and the extraction of relevant data from such resources into public and private land-management and development processes; 
b.  Develop and maintain a cultural resource conservation and protection environment now and in the future and take all actions necessary to protect and enhance the cultural resource heritage of the city; 
c.  Ensure that the long-term protection of the cultural resource heritage shall guide public decision; 
d.  Require consideration of protection of cultural resources as well as economic and technical factors and long-term benefits and costs in addition to short-term benefits and costs; and consider alternatives to proposed actions affecting the cultural resource heritage of the city in land-use management and development activities. 
3.  Nothing contained herein shall supersede the powers of other local legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any person of responsibility for complying with the requirements of any other state statutes or municipal ordinances or regulations. 
B.  Scope of Application—Construction—Limitation. This section shall apply to archaeological resources and sites only, both historic and prehistoric, as defined and referenced herein and shall have no application to historic landmarks (which are the subject of separate treatment and regulation pursuant to Section 17.44.140 of this chapter). 
This section shall be construed and applied in a manner designed to achieve its purposes, subject to the limitation that it shall not be construed or applied in any manner or fashion that is violative of or contrary to or be held to demand requirements or conditions or the expenditure of funds in excess of or contrary to, the provisions of controlling state law, including without limitation, and where applicable, the provisions of Section 21083.2 of the Public Resources Code. 
C.  Definitions. Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation of this section: 
1.  "Alteration" means any change, modification, alteration, disruption or disturbance of land or earth materials, such as rock or soil, involving the movement or removal of more than four cubic yards, including but not limited to excavation, filling, grading, surface grading, land clearing, topsoil removal, trenching, construction or other ground disturbance, through public or private action, resulting in an impact, either direct or indirect, on a cultural resource. 
2.  "Archaeological excavation" means removal of the soil from its matrix in order to discover and retrieve archaeological data from beneath the ground, thereby revealing a three-dimensional structure of the data and matrix, both vertically and horizontally. 
3.  "Archaeological resource" means cultural resource. 
4.  Archaeological Resource Site. See "Designated cultural resource site." 
5.  "Artifact" means material remains which provide evidence of the activities of prehistoric culture or historic occupation. 
6.  "Burial" means the process of placement of human remains in a grave inside or outside of a burial park, or the results of such process. 
7.  "City" means the City of Scotts Valley. 
8.  "Commission" means the Cultural Resource Preservation Commission of the City of Scotts Valley. 
9.  "Cultural resource" means any material remains of past human life or activities which are of historic or prehistoric value or interest. Cultural resources remain from the prehistoric and historic periods and occur either below or above the ground. 
a.  "Historic cultural resource(s)" means any archaeological site, including but not limited to, structural ruins, roadways, trails or transportation networks, cemeteries, artifact caches, bones, ceramics or other physical manifestations significant to an understanding of historic settlement and development, which has existed from or after the beginning of written recorded history for the area (which is generally considered to be circa 1750). 
b.  "Prehistoric cultural resource(s)" means any archaeological site, including but not limited to any mound, midden, cave, place of settlement, burial ground, ceremonial site, mine, trail, rock art or other feature or location of prehistoric native Californians. The material remains of prehistoric cultures include, but are not limited to, stone tools, weapons, human skeletal materials, graves, walls and other natural or manmade objects or features significant to the area's prehistoric past. "Prehistoric" refers to anything which existed before the beginning of written recorded history for the area. 
10.  "Cultural resource alteration permit" means a permit required before alterations to known cultural resources can be undertaken or when potentially significant resources are in danger of being affected by human activity. The permit establishes conditions which shall be met before project development may be undertaken or resumed. 
11.  "Cultural resource consultant" means an appropriately qualified archaeologist or historic archaeologist who has appropriate expertise in field research and management of cultural resources as herein defined and in other pertinent disciplines and who has a demonstrable familiarity with the prehistory and history of the city and region. This person shall be qualified to undertake specialized archival research, field identification and scientific exploration of cultural resources. The consultant shall be qualified to make appropriate management recommendations based on the provisions of this section and other applicable local, state and/or federal laws, rules and/or regulations. 
12.  "Cultural resources inventory" means a regularly updated listing of parcels identified by current Assessor's Parcel Number that are located within five hundred feet of a known archaeological site. The cultural resource preservation commission is responsible for the maintenance of such inventory. In conformance with the State Attorney General's advisement to the State Historic Preservation Officer regarding protection of fragile cultural resources from vandalism, the identification listing is made available to the public only on a need-to-know basis. 
13.  "Cultural resource report" means the types of cultural resource reports which can be prepared as part of the cultural resource evaluation process and includes: 
a.  "Preliminary cultural resource report" means and includes an archival search in the state records on file with the California Archaeological Inventory and a surface reconnaissance of property under review. The work is conducted by or under the supervision of a qualified cultural resource consultant to determine the presence or absence of cultural resources on the property under review. This report is a prerequisite to issuing a cultural resource alteration permit. 
b.  "Comprehensive cultural resource report" means comprehensive investigation of cultural resources following a positive preliminary cultural resource report. It is a prerequisite to issuing a cultural resource alteration permit. The purpose of this report is to further define the cultural resource as to physical extent, age, significance and the like and to outline mitigation measures which avoid or minimize adverse impacts on the cultural resource. This report shall include an inventory and recommendations for long-term storage. 
14.  "Cultural resources sensitivity area" means areas of the city where cultural resources are known and/or predicted. Cultural resources sensitivity areas are designated on a regularly updated map. Such updating is done in consultation with a cultural resource consultant. This map is on file in the planning department; the city is constrained from allowing the sensitivity map to enter the public domain. The cultural resource preservation commission is responsible for the maintenance of this map. 
15.  Cultural Significance. 
a.  A cultural resource may be deemed to be significant if it has identification or association with persons, eras or events that have contributed to local, regional, state or national history or prehistory in a distinctive or important way; or if it has yielded or is substantially likely to yield information of value about history, technology, architecture, culture or aesthetics; or if it provides for existing and future generations an example of the physical surroundings in which past generations worked. 
b.  The factor of age alone does not necessarily confer archaeological value or interest upon a resource. However, age may have such effect if a more distinctive or important example thereof no longer exists. 
16.  "Designated cultural resource site" means a parcel or part thereof which contains a cultural resource and any abutting parcel or part thereof constituting part of the premises which contains the cultural resource and which has been designated as a designated cultural resource site pursuant to this section. 
17.  "Discovered cultural resource" means any artifact or other evidence of a cultural resource, including human remains, which reasonably appears to exceed fifty years of age that is discovered at any time during preparation for or during the process of excavation or during natural erosion processes or other ground disturbance. 
18.  "Excavation" means the removal of soil from its matrix. 
19.  Excavation Plan. As defined by the Resources Agency of the State of California in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Appendix K, Archaeological Impacts (effective August 1, 1983), an excavation plan may: 
a.  List and briefly discuss the important information the archaeological resources contain or are likely to contain; 
b.  Explain how the information should be recovered to be useful in addressing scientifically valid research questions and other concerns dealing with significant cultural objects; 
c.  Explain the methods of analysis and, if feasible, the proposed manner of display of excavated materials; 
d.  Provide for final report preparation and distribution; and 
e.  Explain the estimated cost and time required to complete all activities undertaken under the plan. 
20.  Ground Disturbance. See "Alteration." 
21.  "Human remains" means the body or any part thereof, of a deceased human being in any stage of decomposition. 
22.  "Improvement" means any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment. 
23.  Interment. See "Burial." 
24.  "Knowingly" means a person who disturbs, excavates or causes to be disturbed or excavated a cultural resource shall be deemed to have done so "knowingly" if the person knew or reasonably should have known, that the area contained artifacts, remains or other evidence of a cultural resource. The city shall institute procedures for notifying property owners of the presence of cultural resources. 
25.  "Land clearing" means the removal of vegetation down to duff or bare soil by any method. 
26.  "Local interest group" means any organized body of persons who have a recognized interest in the cultural resources within the city. These groups include, but are not limited to, the Scotts Valley Historical Society, the Santa Cruz Archaeological Society, the Society for California Archaeology, and Native American groups as defined in California Senate Bill 297 and others who identify their interest in a particular resource or project. 
27.  "Preservation" means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of cultural resources intended to maintain and perpetuate existing cultural resources for the benefit of future generations carried out in conformance with current state and federal historic preservation practices. 
28.  "Property owner" means the owner, builder, developer or lessee or any agent thereof, of property on which a cultural resource is located. 
29.  "Protection" means the introduction of measures intended to arrest natural and man-induced processes of destruction or decay of existing cultural resources carried out in conformance with current state and federal historic preservation practices. 
30.  "Recorded cultural resource" means a cultural resource which has been officially recorded on the California Archaeological Inventory or which has been designated as a designated cultural resource site pursuant to this section. 
31.  "Structure" means an object directly or indirectly fixed or attached to the ground which is built or constructed by man. A structure includes, but is not limited to, buildings, edifices, bridges, signs, fences, foundations, walks, kiosks, arches, fountains, walls and building appendages, such as marquees, awnings, canopies and lighting fixtures. 
D.  Powers and Duties of the Cultural Resource Preservation Commission. The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Undertake to establish and maintain a list of sites having a special archaeological interest or value. This list may include single sites, portions of sites or groups of sites; 
2.  Adopt specific guidelines for evaluating the designation of cultural resources; 
3.  Review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement and other types of planning and programs undertaken by the city or state, as they affect the significant and unique cultural resources of the city; 
4.  Adopt prescriptive standards to be used by the cultural resource preservation commission in reviewing applications for permits to construct, change, alter, modify, remove or significantly affect any cultural resource; 
5.  Recommend to the city council the purchase of fee or less-than-fee interests in property for the purposes of cultural resources preservation; 
6.  Investigate and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote cultural resource preservation in the city; 
7.  Review preliminary cultural resource reports and applications for cultural resource alteration permits. Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, applications for permits pursuant to the provisions set forth in Subsections J and K of this section; 
8.  Review all applications for permits, environmental assessments, environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements and other similar documents which affect cultural resources. The commission shall forward its comments, as appropriate, to the decision-making body; 
9.  Inspect sites of discovered cultural resources upon notification by the planning director and/or review the recommendations of the cultural resource consultant regarding the management of discovered cultural resource sites; 
10.  Cooperate with local, county, state and federal governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation; 
11.  Adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions of this section; 
12.  Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall constitute public records, except that in conformance with the policies of the State Historic Preservation Office referring to protection of cultural resources from vandalism, the exact location of an archaeological resource will not be identified in any reports made available for general public review; 
13.  Render advice and guidance, upon the request of the property owner or occupant, on the restoration, alteration, landscaping or maintenance of any cultural resource; 
14.  Participate in, promote and conduct public informational, educational and interpretive programs pertaining to cultural resources; 
15.  Recommend established significant cultural resources for inclusion as amendments to the city's General Plan; 
16.  Adopt specific guidelines for the selection of cultural resource consultants; 
All guidelines and rules of procedure adopted by the cultural resource preservation commission shall be approved by resolution of the city council prior to their effectiveness. All guidelines, rules of procedure and other matters adopted by the commission under the same provision of Ordinance No. 16.70 and in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall continue in full force and effect until amended, modified or repealed hereafter. 
E.  Cultural Resource Site Designation Procedures. Designated cultural resource sites shall be established in the following manner: 
1.  Any person or group may request the designation of an area or place as a designated cultural resource site by submitting an application for such designation to the cultural resource preservation commission. The commission may also initiate such proceedings on its own motion. An application shall contain the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant, property owner and occupant, as appropriate, as well as such information as is required by the commission in order to enable it to conduct an informed initial study. 
2.  The cultural resource preservation commission shall conduct an initial study of the proposed designation and make a preliminary determination, based on such documentation as it has, as to its appropriateness for consideration. If the commission determines that the application merits consideration, but only if it so determines, it shall schedule a public hearing to be held within thirty-five days of the date of its determination. 
3.  The cultural resource preservation commission's decision to schedule or not to schedule a public hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk. Notice of a decision not to schedule a public hearing shall be given by mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
4.  In the case of a determination to schedule a public hearing, notice of the proposed designation and hearing shall be given in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.50.090 of this title. 
5.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than thirty days from the date set for the commencement thereof, the cultural resource preservation commission shall approve in whole or in part, or disapprove in whole or in part, the application in writing. 
6.  Within ten days after approval of such designation, the cultural resource preservation commission shall cause to be sent to the applicant, owner and/or occupant, as appropriate, of the property so designated, by registered or certified mail, a copy of the designation and a letter outlining the basis for such designation and the obligations and restrictions which result from such designation. These documents shall also be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk within said period. 
Within ten days after the disapproval of such application, the cultural resource preservation commission shall cause to be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk, and to be sent to the applicant, owner and/or occupant, as appropriate, of the property proposed for designation, notice of denial of cultural resource site designation. 
7.  All notices required herein shall be addressed to an applicant, property owner or occupant as his or her name and address appear on the application. In the case of a property owner, notice shall also be sent to him or her as his or her name and address appear on the latest equalized assessment roll of the Santa Cruz County assessor's office where they are different from the name and address shown on the application, unless the property owner has signed the application. All notices to such persons shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid. The notification requirements in this subdivision are supplemental to any other applicable provisions herein. 
8.  Failure to send any notice to any owner of property proposed for designation, where the address of such owner is not a matter of public record and failure to send any notice to any other person shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. The cultural resource preservation commission may also give such other additional notice as it may deem desirable and practicable. 
9.  Further, as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible, the cultural resource preservation commission shall notify the planning department, the building official and the city clerk of the official designation and shall also file with the recorder of deeds of Santa Cruz County a certified copy of the designation and a summary of the effect such designation will have. 
10.  Once a public hearing has been scheduled by the cultural resource preservation commission to consider the designation of a proposed designated cultural resource site, no building, alteration, demolition or removal permits shall be issued for and no construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or removal activity shall take place with respect to, the site proposed for designation pending a final determination of the matter by the commission or pending final determination by the city council of any appeal therefrom. 
F.  Cultural Resource Reports Required. 
1.  Preliminary cultural resource report. In accordance with guidelines adopted by the cultural resource preservation commission and as supervised by a cultural resource consultant, a preliminary cultural resource report shall be prepared for any private or public project which is located within a mapped cultural resources sensitivity area. This report shall be required by the planning department prior to any determination of environmental impact. Upon completion of this report, the planning director shall cause it to be submitted to the commission for its review and approval. The review and approval of this report shall occur within thirty days of its submission to the commission by the planning director. 
In the event the approved report contains positive findings indicating the presence of a potentially significant cultural resource, the commission shall require the preparation of a comprehensive cultural resource report. 
In the event the approved report indicates that the site does not contain a potentially significant cultural resource, the project shall be allowed to proceed without further application of the provisions of this section. 
2.  Comprehensive Cultural Resource Report. In accordance with guidelines adopted by the cultural resource preservation commission and as supervised by a cultural resource consultant, a comprehensive cultural resource report shall be prepared prior to the issuance of any private or public project permits when a project site contains a potentially significant cultural resource, as indicated by inclusion to the cultural resources inventory and/or current inventories of recorded cultural resources, or based upon a positive preliminary cultural resource report. 
G.  Cost of Reports. The costs of any preliminary or comprehensive cultural resource report shall be borne by the developer, who shall enter into an appropriate agreement with a cultural resource consultant to be selected by the city (consistent with guidelines adopted by the cultural resource preservation commission) with respect to the preparation of any such reports. The agreement shall recognize that the consultant is to be hired by the city but paid by the developer only. 
H.  Project Approval. The city shall not approve projects as proposed if there are feasible alternatives or feasible mitigation measures available which would substantially lessen the significant impacts on cultural resources. The city shall require the mitigation or avoidance of significant effects on cultural resources of projects it approves or carries out where this is feasible. 
The procedures required by this section are intended to assist the city in systematically identifying both the significant effects of proposed projects and the feasible alternatives or feasible mitigation measures which will avoid or substantially lessen such significant effects. 
City agencies shall integrate the requirements of this section with planning and environmental review procedures otherwise required by law or local practice so that all such procedures, to the maximum feasible extent, run concurrently rather than consecutively. 
Whenever a significant cultural resource is discovered during the planning process, the planning department shall ensure that the permits subsequently issued shall contain whatever conditions are necessary to promote the purposes of this section, as determined by the cultural resource preservation commission in accordance with the provisions hereof. The planning department shall encourage developers to design their projects in a manner consistent with the purposes and intent of this section and in accordance with mitigation measures and conditions previously approved by the commission for projects on similar sites, where appropriate. In order to assist the city in carrying out the intent and purposes of this section, all development permits issued by the city for projects located in a mapped sensitivity area which involve ground disturbance activity shall include a provision that if previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during the course of excavation or development, all applicable provisions of this section shall be followed. 
I.  Cultural Resource Alteration Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to demolish, alter, remove or relocate any recorded cultural resource, designated cultural resource site or discovered cultural resource, or any portion thereof, or to alter any area which has been identified in any preliminary or comprehensive cultural resource report as containing a potentially significant cultural resource without first obtaining written approval to do so in the manner provided in this section, nor shall the building official or planning commission grant any permit to carry out such work without the prior written approval of the commission first being given. It shall also be unlawful for any person to violate, allow or cause the violation of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
A cultural resource alteration permit shall be required for relocation, removal, alteration or demolition of any recorded cultural resource, designated cultural resource site or area which has been identified in any preliminary or comprehensive cultural resource report as containing a potentially significant cultural resource. 
J.  Procedure for Permit Issuance. The following procedures shall apply in processing applications for approval of work covered by this section: 
1.  An application for a cultural resource alteration permit for approval of any work covered by this section, on a form approved by the cultural resource preservation commission, shall be filed with the planning director. 
2.  The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and the property owner (if different from the applicant), shall specify the Santa Cruz County Assessor's Parcel Number of the property involved and shall contain a clear statement of the work proposed to be done and shall contain such other information as may be required by the cultural resource preservation commission in order to enable it to properly process the permit. 
3.  The application shall also include a copy of the preliminary and comprehensive cultural resource reports. In addition, it shall include a written excavation plan if impact on potentially significant cultural resources is deemed unavoidable. 
4.  In conformance with the policies of the State Historic Preservation Office referring to protection of cultural resources from vandalism, city staff shall not identify the exact location of an archaeological resource in any reports made available for general public review. Such information provided by the applicant or others involved with a permit will be marked "Not For Public Review" and kept for use only by staff and others having a bona fide need for the information, as determined by the planning director. 
5.  Upon receipt of the application, the cultural resource preservation commission shall set the matter for public hearing within thirty-five days. The commission shall provide notice of the hearing consistent with the requirements for notice specified and referenced in subsections E4 and E7 and of this section. 
6.  At the conclusion of the hearing, but in no event more than thirty days from the date set for the commencement thereof, the cultural resource preservation commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application with specification as to the reasons and findings therefor. If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the commission shall issue the cultural resource alteration permit and specify thereon any conditions imposed. 
7.  Conditions that may be imposed by the cultural resource preservation commission include, but are not limited to, preservation of the surface or subsurface resource through project design or restrictions on use and/or grading, such as restricting improvement and grading activities to portions of the parcel not containing the resource or covering the resource with earthfill where appropriate, to such a depth that the resource will not be disturbed by development. 
K.  Cultural Resource Alteration Permit—Findings Required. Prior to approval or conditional approval of an application for a cultural resource alteration permit, the cultural resource preservation commission shall find that: 
1.  The action proposed is consistent with the purposes of cultural resource preservation as set forth in this title; and 
2.  The action proposed retains the archaeological value and significance of the cultural resource. 
L.  Revocation of Permit. 
1.  Violation of any of the conditions of a cultural resource alteration permit committed, allowed or caused by the person to whom it is issued shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension thereof, or other appropriate action as herein set forth. 
2.  In the event any of the conditions of a cultural resource alteration permit are violated or allowed or caused to be violated by the person to whom it is issued, the planning director may issue a cease and desist order directing that all activities for which the permit was issued shall be discontinued immediately. 
3.  The planning director shall thereupon schedule a public hearing before the cultural resource preservation commission for consideration of revocation of the permit or other appropriate action with respect thereto. 
4.  The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days of issuance of the cease and desist order. Notice of the hearing shall be given consistent with the requirements for notices referenced in subsection J5 of this section. 
5.  At the hearing, the cultural resource preservation commission shall consider whether any violation of the conditions of the permit occurred and, if so, the extent of any damage that may have been caused to the cultural resource. The commission may also consider any report and recommendations of a cultural resource consultant as to the necessity and type of corrective action to be taken to mitigate the effects of any damage to the cultural resource. 
6.  At the conclusion of the hearing, which shall occur not later than thirty days after its commencement, the cultural resource preservation commission shall determine whether a violation occurred and, if so, the appropriate corrective measures to be undertaken by the permittee. The commission shall further determine whether to revoke or suspend the permit or impose additional conditions thereon, as appropriate. The commission shall adopt findings in support of its decision. 
M.  Discovered Cultural Resources. 
1.  In the event bones or other human remains or artifacts clearly associated with a human interment are discovered, the person making the discovery shall immediately notify the Santa Cruz County sheriff-coroner. Any person who under any circumstances discovers any human remains and/or artifacts or other evidence of a cultural resource site which reasonably appears to exceed fifty years of age shall notify the planning department immediately. 
2.  Upon notification of the discovery, the planning director shall immediately notifying the property owner that no alteration or ground-disturbance activity (or no further activity of such nature) may take place on the site of the discovery for a period of forty-five days, unless sooner notified to the contrary. The planning director shall arrange for a personal inspection of the property with a cultural resource consultant. This inspection shall take place within five working days after the planning director has been notified of the discovery. The planning director shall notify both the property owner and the members of the cultural resource preservation commission of the date and time of the inspection. Members of the commission may accompany the planning director and the cultural resource consultant on the property. The purpose of the inspection shall be to determine whether the discovery is a potentially significant cultural resource. The cultural resource consultant shall prepare a preliminary cultural resource report indicating appropriate findings and submit it to the planning director. 
3.  The preliminary cultural resource report shall be submitted to the cultural resource preservation commission for its review and approval, disapproval or modification in the same manner and subject to the same time limitations as specified in subsection F of this section; provided, however, that if there is a current and lawful development activity in progress on the site of the discovery that is being delayed by the restriction hereunder on further activity, the planning director and the commission shall undertake diligent efforts to secure and complete review of the preliminary cultural resource report in as short a period of time as is reasonably possible. (This provision shall be considered directory only.) 
4.  In the event the preliminary cultural resource report, as approved by the cultural resource preservation commission, declares that the discovery is not a potentially significant cultural resource, the planning director shall immediately notify the property owner of such determination and all restrictions theretofore imposed shall be removed. 
5.  If the preliminary cultural resource report, as approved by the cultural resource preservation commission, declares that the discovery is a potentially significant cultural resource, the director shall immediately notify the property owner of this determination and that no alteration or ground-disturbance activity (or no further activity of such nature) may take place except as authorized by a cultural resource alteration permit (which may be issued, as appropriate, only after preparation of a comprehensive cultural resource report). 
6.  All notices referenced in this section shall be in writing and copies shall be given to the cultural resource preservation commission. 
7.  Should the discovery be of potential importance to living Native Americans, a representative of the local Native American community shall be given an opportunity to inspect the find and submit comments regarding its disposition. 
N.  Unsafe or Dangerous Conditions. None of the provisions of this section shall be construed to prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal, demolition or relocation necessary to correct any unsafe or dangerous condition of any property or part thereof, when the building official certifies to the commission that such action is required for public safety purposes. To the extent reasonably feasible, however, any such action shall adhere to the requirements and intent of the provisions of this section. 
O.  Notification by Building Official. The building official shall report to the planning director any application for a permit to work on any designated cultural resource site or on any other area referenced in subsection I of this section. 
P.  Ordinary Agricultural or Gardening Activity Excepted. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent ordinary agricultural or gardening activity. 
Q.  Fraudulent Transfer. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, install, plant or otherwise transfer to any property any artifacts, remains or other evidence, whether real or manufactured, of a cultural resource for the purpose of requiring the property owner to comply with the provisions of this section. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any property any artifacts, remains or other evidence of a cultural resource for the purpose of avoiding compliance with the provisions of this section. This prohibition shall be considered as supplementary to all other prohibitions of this section. 
R.  Appeals. The following actions of the commission may be appealed by any interested party to the city council, pursuant to Section 17.50.060 of this title, by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days following the date of the action to be appealed: 
1.  The commission's decision not to hold a public hearing on an application for designation of a designated cultural resource site; 
2.  A determination made after a public hearing to designate or not to designate a designated cultural resource site; 
3.  The commission's decision to grant, deny, revoke, suspend or otherwise deal with a permit; 
4.  Any other decision or determination made by the commission. 
S.  Integration with Other Processes, Procedures and Requirements. Procedures and processes required by this section are supplemental to any other requirements, processes and procedures prescribed by any other local, state and/or federal law, rule or regulation. The requirements, procedures and processes established by this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be integrated with all others that may be applicable in order that they may run concurrently, rather than consecutively. 
T.  Fees and Cost. Fees and/or costs deemed necessary for the administration and implementation of this section shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
U.  Enforcement and Penalties. 
1.  Enforcement. In addition to remedies provided by any other provisions of law, the planning director shall have the authority to implement the enforcement of the provisions of this section by any of the following means: 
a.  Serving notice requiring the correction of any violation of this section upon the owner agent, occupant or tenant of the improvement, building, structure or land; 
b.  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section, and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; 
c.  Calling upon the chief of police and officers of the police department to assist in the enforcement of this section. 
In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this section. 
2.  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be fined in an amount not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment of not more than six months or both. Each day in which a violation of any provision of this section occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.140 - Historic landmark preservation. 
A.  Purpose. It is found that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements, buildings, structures, signs, objects and features of historic, architectural, artistic, cultural, engineering, aesthetic, political, social and other significance located within the city are of cultural and aesthetic benefit to the community. It is further found that the economic, cultural and aesthetic standing of this city will be enhanced by respecting the heritage of the city. The purposes of the provisions in this section are to: 
1.  Designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those historic structures and sites, places and/or improvements contributing to the cultural and aesthetic benefit of the city, the county, the state or the nation; 
2.  Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; 
3.  Stabilize and improve the economic value of certain historic structures and neighborhoods in which they are located; 
4.  Protect and enhance the city's cultural and aesthetic heritage; 
5.  Promote and encourage continued private ownership and use of such buildings and other structures now so owned and used, to the extent that the objectives listed above can be obtained; 
6.  Promote the enjoyment and use of cultural resources appropriate for the education and recreation of the people of the city; 
7.  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to tourists and visitors (thereby stimulating business and industry); 
8.  Preserve diverse and harmonious architectural styles and design preferences reflecting phases of the city's history. 
B.  Scope of Application. This section shall apply to all historic landmarks within the city that are designated pursuant to the provisions hereof. This section shall not apply, however, to archaeological resources (which are dealt with separately in Section 17.44.130 of this chapter). 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  "Alteration" means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, of any historic landmark, including but not limited to exterior changes to or modifications of structures, architectural details or visual characteristics such as paint color and surface texture, grading, surface paving, construction of new structures and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, walls, fences, steps and the like affecting the exterior visual qualities of the property. 
2.  "Commission" means the cultural resource preservation commission of the City of Scotts Valley. 
3.  "Consultant" means an appropriately qualified person (architect, architectural historian, historian, archaeologist, historic archaeologist, engineer and the like) who has appropriate expertise in historic landmark designation and/or preservation and/or other disciplines that may be pertinent to the subject matter. 
4.  "Exterior architectural feature" means architectural elements embodying style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of an improvement, including but not limited to the kind, color and texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement. 
5.  "Historic landmark" means an improvement, building structure, sign, feature, site, place, area or other object of special historical, cultural, architectural or engineering character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or history of the city, the county, the state or the nation (excluding archaeological resources, which are recognized as a distinct cultural resource pursuant to Section 17.44.130 of this chapter and separately dealt with and treated therein) and which has been designated as such pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
6.  "Improvement" means any building, structure, sign, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment. 
7.  "Object" means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, educational, historical, architectural, symbolic or scientific value which is usually, by design or nature, movable. 
8.  "Preservation" means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of historic landmarks. 
9.  "Structure" means an object directly or indirectly fixed or attached to the ground which is built or constructed by man. A structure includes, but is not limited to, buildings, edifices, bridges, signs, fences, foundations, walks, kiosks, arches, fountains, walls and building appendages, such as marquees, awnings, canopies and lighting fixtures. 
D.  Powers and Duties of the Cultural Resource Preservation Commission. The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Establish criteria and conduct or cause to be conducted a comprehensive survey of properties within the boundaries of the city that may contain potential historic landmarks. Publicize and periodically update survey results; 
2.  Adopt specific guidelines for designation of historic landmarks; 
3.  Maintain a local register of historic landmarks within the city; 
4.  Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, applications for historic landmark designation pursuant to subsections E and F of this section; 
5.  Review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement and other types of planning and programs undertaken by any agency of the city, county, state or federal government as they relate to historic landmarks within the city; 
6.  Adopt prescriptive standards for the use of the cultural resource preservation commission in reviewing applications for permits to change, alter, modify, remodel, remove or significantly affect any historic landmark, and determine the presence of an immediate and substantial hardship; 
7.  Recommend to the city council the purchase of fee or less-than-fee interests in property for purposes of historic landmark preservation; 
8.  Investigate and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote historic landmark preservation in the city; 
9.  Coordinate and monitor activities relating to preservation, restoration, maintenance and operation of historic landmarks under the ownership of the city; 
10.  Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, all applications for permits pursuant to the provisions of this section; 
11.  Review all environmental assessments, environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements and other similar documents as set forth in this section pertaining to historic landmarks within the city. The cultural resource preservation commission shall forward its comments to the decision-making body; 
12.  Retain consultants and conduct studies related to the purposes of this section, as the commission deems desirable or necessary, except that all expenditures of city funds are subject to prior approval by the city council; 
13.  Adopt guidelines relating to the selection of consultants; 
14.  Cooperate with local, county, state and federal governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic landmark preservation; 
15.  Adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions of this section; 
16.  Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall constitute public records; 
17.  Render advice and guidance, upon the request of a property owner or occupant, on the restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping or maintenance of any historic landmark, landmark site or neighboring property within public view; 
18.  Participate in, promote and conduct public informational, educational and interpretive programs pertaining to historic landmarks; 
19.  Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the city council. 
Any rules of procedure and any guidelines adopted by the commission must be approved by resolution of the city council prior to their effectiveness. All guidelines, rules of procedure and other matters adopted by the commission under the same provision of Ordinance No. 16.67 and in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall continue in full force and effect until amended, modified or repealed hereafter. 
E.  Historic Landmark Designation Criteria. For the purposes of this section, an improvement may be designated a historic landmark pursuant to subsection F of this section if it has qualities that relate to the following factors: 
1.  Identification or association with persons, eras or events that have contributed to local, regional, state or national history in a distinctive or important way; 
2.  Identification as or association with a distinctive or important work or vestige: 
a.  Of an architectural style with historic value, design or method of construction, or 
b.  Of a notable architect, engineer, builder, artist or craftsman, or 
c.  The totality of which comprises a distinctive or important work or vestige whose component parts may lack the same attributes, or 
d.  That has yielded or is substantially likely to yield information of value about history or culture, or that provides for existing and future generations an example of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived and worked; 
3.  Exemplification or reflection of special elements or characteristics of local, regional, state or national cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering or architectural history. 
The factor of age alone does not necessarily confer a special historical, cultural or architectural value or interest upon an improvement, but it may have such effect if a more distinctive or important example thereof no longer exists. 
F.  Historic Landmark Designation Procedures. Historic landmarks shall be established in the following manner: 
1.  Any person or group may request the designation of an improvement as a historic landmark by submitting an application for such designation to the cultural resource preservation commission. The commission may also initiate such proceedings on its own motion. An application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, property owner and occupant, as appropriate, as well as such information as is required by the commission in order to enable it to conduct an informed initial study. 
2.  The cultural resource preservation commission shall conduct an initial study of the proposed designation and shall make a preliminary determination, based on such documentation as it has, as to its appropriateness for consideration. If the commission determines that the application merits consideration, but only if it so determines, it shall schedule a public hearing to be held within thirty-five days of the date of its determination. 
3.  The cultural resource preservation commission's decision to schedule or not to schedule a public hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk. Notice of a decision not to schedule a public hearing shall be given by mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
4.  In the case of a determination to schedule a public hearing, notice of the proposed designation and hearing shall be given in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.50.090 of this title. 
5.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than thirty days from the date set for the commencement of the public hearing, the cultural resource preservation commission shall approve in whole or in part, or disapprove in whole or in part, the application in writing. 
6.  Within ten days after approval of such designation, the cultural resource preservation commission shall cause to be sent to the applicant(s), owner(s) and/or occupant(s), as appropriate, of the property so designated, by registered or certified mail, a copy of the designation and a letter outlining the basis for such designation and the obligations and restrictions which result from such designation. These documents shall also be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk within said period. 
Within ten days after the disapproval of such application, the cultural resource preservation commission shall cause to be filed with the planning director, the building official and the city clerk and to be sent to the applicant(s), owner(s) and/or occupant(s), as appropriate, of the property proposed for designation, notice of such denial of historic landmark designation. 
7.  All notices required herein shall be addressed to an applicant, property owner or occupant as his or her name and address appear on the application. In the case of a property owner, notice shall also be sent to him or her as his or her name and address appear on the latest equalized assessment roll of the Santa Cruz County assessor's office where they are different from the name and address shown on the application, unless the property owner has signed the application. All notices to such persons shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid. The notification requirements in this subdivision are supplemental to any other applicable provisions herein. 
8.  Failure to send any notice to any owner of property proposed for designation where the address of such owner is not a matter of public record, and failure to send any notice to any other person, shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. The cultural resource preservation commission may also give such other additional notice as it may deem desirable and practicable. 
9.  Further, as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible, the cultural resource preservation commission shall notify the planning department, the building official and the city clerk of the official designation and shall also file with the recorder of deeds of Santa Cruz County and the assessor of Santa Cruz County a certified copy of the designation and a summary of the effect such designation will have. 
10.  Once an application has been submitted to the cultural resource preservation commission (or submitted by the commission on its own initiative) to consider the designation of a proposed historic landmark, no building, alteration, demolition or removal permits shall be issued for and no reconstruction, alteration, demolition or removal of or with respect to, an improvement proposed for historic landmark designation shall occur pending a final determination of the matter by the commission or pending final determination by the city council of any appeal therefrom. 
G.  Historic Landmark Alteration or Demolition Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to tear down, demolish, alter, reconstruct, remove or relocate any improvement or any portion thereof, which has been designated a historic landmark pursuant to the provisions of this section, or to alter in any manner any exterior architectural feature of such an historic landmark, without first obtaining written approval to do so, as required herein, in the manner provided in this section, nor shall the building official or planning commission grant any permit to carry out such work on a designated historic landmark without the prior written approval of the cultural resource preservation commission having first been given, as required herein. It shall also be unlawful for any person to violate, or to allow or cause the violation of, any condition of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
1.  A historic landmark alteration permit shall be required for relocation of a designated historic landmark or for any alteration to a designated historic landmark that involves change in design, replacement of construction material or change in external appearance, or for any reconstruction thereof. Normal maintenance and repair are excepted pursuant to the provisions of subsection N of this section. 
2.  A historic landmark demolition permit shall be required in order to tear down or demolish any designated historic landmark. 
H.  Procedure for Permit Issuance. The following procedures shall apply in processing applications for approval of work covered by this section: 
1.  An application for a historic landmark alteration or demolition permit, as appropriate, for approval of any work covered by this section, on a form approved by the cultural resource preservation commission, shall be filed with the planning director. 
2.  The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and the property owner (if different from the applicant); shall specify the exact location of the designated historic landmark involved; shall contain a clear statement of the work proposed to be done; and shall contain such other information as may be required by the cultural resource preservation commission in order to enable it to properly process the permit. 
3.  Upon receipt of the application, the cultural resource preservation commission shall set the matter for public hearing within thirty-five days. The commission shall provide notice of the hearing consistent with the requirements for notice specified and referenced in subsections F4 and F7 of this section. 
4.  At the conclusion of the hearing, but in no event more than thirty days from the date set for the commencement thereof, the cultural resource preservation commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application with specification as to the reasons and findings therefor. If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the commission shall issue the historic landmark alteration or demolition permit, as appropriate and specify thereon any conditions imposed. 
I.  Historic Landmark Alteration Permit—Findings Required. Prior to approval or conditional approval of an application for an historic landmark alteration permit, the cultural resource preservation commission shall find that: 
1.  The action proposed is consistent with the purposes of historic preservation as set forth in subsection A of this section; and 
2.  The action proposed retains the historic architectural value and significance of the designated historic landmark, and retains the texture and material of the building, structure or improvement in question or its appurtenant fixtures and exterior architectural features; 
3.  The action proposed is compatible with the position of such building, structure or improvement in relation to the street or public way and to other buildings and structures in the neighborhood; or 
4.  As an alternative to the findings specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection the applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate or substantial hardship pursuant to subsection L of this section. 
J.  Historic Landmark Demolition Permit—Findings. Prior to approval or conditional approval of an application for an historic landmark demolition permit, the cultural resource preservation commission shall find that the applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate or substantial hardship pursuant to subsection L of this section. 
K.  Unsafe or Dangerous Conditions. None of the provisions of this section shall be construed to prevent reconstruction, alteration, removal, demolition or relocation necessary to correct any unsafe or dangerous conditions of any designated historic landmark or part thereof, when the building official certifies to the cultural resource preservation commission that such action is required for public safety purposes and that such conditions cannot be corrected through use of the California Historical Building Code. 
L.  Showing of Hardship. The cultural resource preservation commission may approve a permit to carry out reconstruction, alteration, relocation or demolition of a historic landmark if the applicant presents facts clearly demonstrating to the satisfaction of the commission at the public hearing that failure to receive such approval will cause an immediate and substantial hardship. If hardship is found to exist under this subsection, the commission shall make a finding to that effect and shall also specify the facts relied upon in making such finding. 
M.  Notification by Building Official. The building official shall immediately report any application for a permit to work on a designated historic landmark to the planning director; and shall immediately report to him all applications for demolition permits regardless of whether or not they pertain to a designated historic landmark. All such applications shall immediately be forwarded by the planning director to cultural resource preservation commission members. 
N.  Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any designated historic landmark that does not involve a change in design, material or external appearance thereof. 
O.  Discovered Potential Historic Landmark. A person who under any circumstances discovers any improvement and/or structure as herein defined which reasonably appears to be a potential historic landmark shall notify the planning department immediately. 
Upon notification of the discovery, the planning director shall immediately notify the property owner that no further alteration, demolition, removal or building activity may take place with respect to the discovery for a maximum period of fifteen days or until further notification, whichever first occurs. The planning director shall arrange for a personal inspection of the property with a consultant. This inspection shall take place within ten working days after the planning director has been notified of the discovery. The planning director shall notify both the property owner and the members of the cultural resource preservation commission of the date and time of the inspection. Members of the commission may accompany the planning director and the consultant on the property. The purpose of the inspection shall be to determine whether the discovery is a potential historic landmark meriting designation hereunder. 
If the consultant reports to the planning director that the discovery is a potential historic landmark, the director shall so notify the property owner and shall also notify him that no further alteration activity may take place until further notice from the planning director or the expiration of thirty days, whichever sooner occurs. However, the potential historic landmark may thereafter be subject to the provisions of subsection F regarding designation of historic landmarks and, if so, may be subject to further restrictions as therein provided. 
P.  Revocation of Permits. 
1.  Violation of any of the conditions of any historic landmark alteration or demolition permit committed, allowed or caused by the person to whom it is issued shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension thereof, or other appropriate action as herein set forth. 
2.  In the event any of the conditions of such permit are violated or allowed or caused to be violated by the person to whom it is issued, the planning director may issue a cease and desist order directing that all activities for which the permit was issued shall be discontinued immediately. 
3.  The planning director shall thereupon schedule a public hearing before the cultural resource preservation commission for consideration of revocation of the permit or other appropriate action with respect thereto. 
4.  The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days of issuance of the cease and desist order. Notice of the hearing shall be given consistent with the requirements for notices referenced in subsection H3 of this section. 
5.  At the hearing, the cultural resource preservation commission shall consider whether any violation of the conditions of the permit occurred and, if so, the extent of any damage that may have been caused to the designated historic landmark. The commission may also consider any report and recommendations of the consultant as to the necessity and type of corrective action to be taken to mitigate the effects of any damage to the designated historic landmark. 
6.  At the conclusion of the hearing, which shall occur not later than thirty days after its commencement, the cultural resource preservation commission shall determine whether a violation occurred and, if so, the appropriate corrective measures to be undertaken by the permittee. The commission shall further determine whether to revoke or suspend the permit or impose additional conditions thereon, as appropriate. The commission shall adopt findings in support of its decision. 
Q.  Appeals. The following actions of the cultural resource preservation commission may be appealed by any interested party to the city council: 
1.  The cultural resource preservation commission's decision not to hold a public hearing on an application for designation of an historic landmark; 
2.  A determination made after a public hearing to designate or not to designate a proposed historic landmark; 
3.  The cultural resource preservation commission's decision to grant, deny, revoke, suspend or otherwise deal with a permit; 
4.  Any other decision or determination made by the cultural resource preservation commission. 
Any interested party may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk pursuant to Section 17.50.060 of this title within ten days following the date of the action or determination to be appealed. 
R.  Integration With Other Processes, Procedures and Requirements. Procedures and processes required by this section are supplemental to any other requirements, processes and procedures prescribed by any other local, state and/or federal law, rule or regulation. The requirements, procedures and processes established by this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be integrated with all others that may be applicable in order that they may run concurrently rather than consecutively. 
S.  Fees and Costs. Fees and/or costs deemed necessary for the administration and implementation of this section shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
T.  Enforcement and Penalties. 
1.  Enforcement. In addition to remedies provided by any other provisions of law, the planning director shall have the authority to implement enforcement of the provisions of this section by any of the following means: 
a.  Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this section upon the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of the improvement, building, structure or land; 
b.  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section, and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; 
c.  Calling upon the chief of police and officers of the police department to assist in the enforcement of this section. 
In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this section. 
2.  Penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be fined in an amount not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment of not more than six months or both. Each day in which a violation of any provision of this section occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.44.150 - External antennae. 
A.  Statement of Findings. The use of external antennae for reception or transmission of radio and television signals is increasing throughout the city due to technological advances of such equipment; although such equipment is large, cumbersome and can be aesthetically unattractive, it appears to be a necessary and desirable accessory use of property within the city. At the present time the size, location and appearance of such equipment are not adequately addressed in the zoning regulations in effect in the city. In the absence of regulation, the placement of unattractive equipment in various locations would interfere with the use, possession and enjoyment of adjacent property and the public peace, health, safety and general welfare require enactment of the ordinance codified in this section to regulate the use of external antennae rather than prohibit them. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "External antenna" means a structure which is external to or attached to the exterior part of any building or structure, and which is composed of any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of signals or electromagnetic waves for radio or television purposes including, without limitation, satellite earth station antennae. 
2.  "Satellite earth station antenna" means a structure composed of any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the purpose of receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves for radio or television purposes and includes, but is not limited to, "dish" antennae and devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted upon and rotated through the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. 
C.  Restrictions and Standards. The following regulations shall apply to the maintenance of external antennae in all zone districts: 
1.  External antennae shall not be visible from a public or private street; shall have an immediate screening to protect the adjacent properties. Screening may be structural screens mounted on the ground or on structures, vine-covered fences, compact hedges or the like. Screening for all antennae shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director (hereinafter referenced as "director"). Screening, however, shall not be required in a fashion that obstructs proper reception or transmission of signals. 
2.  External antennae shall not be located in any front yard; or within any area between a public or private street and the main structure on the site (unless unusual or unique site conditions preclude location in any other area). 
3.  No antenna shall exceed six feet in height, plus one additional foot in height for each additional three feet of setback from the property line or lines adjacent to the antenna, up to a maximum height of ten feet. The height of the antenna shall be the total maximum height to which it is capable of being extended. 
4.  External antennae shall not be located closer to the property line than the required setback. 
5.  Roof-mounted antenna shall be limited to twenty- four inches in diameter and shall not be higher than the maximum height for structures allowed by the applicable district regulations. 
6.  External antennae shall not be located in parking or driveway areas. 
7.  External antennae shall be considered an accessory use. 
D.  Application for External Antenna Permit. Prior to installing an external antenna regulated by this section, an application (on a form approved by the director) for an external antenna permit (hereinafter referenced as "permit") shall be submitted to the planning department. The application shall include all information therein requested including, but not limited to, elevations and a site plan showing the proposed location of the external antenna, the location of all relevant improvements existing on the site, and the location of adjacent public or private streets, roads, alleys, rights-of-way and the like. 
E.  Review of Application; Conditions. The director of planning shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all applications for a permit. The director shall review each application for compliance with the provisions of this section and, as appropriate, may modify the proposed antenna, its location and/or its screening. The director may attach such conditions to approval of an application as he deems appropriate, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, to secure compliance with the purpose and intent of the provisions of this section. 
F.  Approval, Conditional Approval or Disapproval of Application. The approval, conditional approval or disapproval of an application for a permit shall be set forth in writing by the director and shall specify in the case of approval that the application is in compliance with the provisions of this section and the conditions attached to the approval, if any, and shall specify the reasons for disapproval in the event the application is disapproved. A copy of the written decision shall forthwith be given to the applicant. 
G.  Notice to Adjacent Property Owners. If an application is approved by the director, notice shall forthwith be sent to the adjacent property owners (as their names and addresses appear on the latest equalized assessment roll of the Santa Cruz County assessor's office) and occupants thereof, if different from the owners, informing them that an application has been approved and specifying the date of approval, the property involved, the conditions of approval, if any, and that any aggrieved person may appeal the decision to the planning commission by filing an appeal with the planning department within twenty-one days of the date of approval. 
H.  Approval of Application; Permit Issuance; Stay. Following approval or conditional approval of an application, no permit shall be issued until the expiration of the period for appeal of said decision; provided, however, that if an appeal is filed in a timely fashion, no permit shall be issued pending final determination by the planing commission of the appeal. 
I.  Revocation of Permit. Violation of any of the provisions of this section or of any conditions of a permit committed, allowed or caused by the person to whom a permit has been issued, shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit or other appropriate action as herein set forth. 
J.  Cease and Desist Order. In the event any such violation occurs, the director may issue a cease and desist order to the permittee directing that all activities for which the permit was issued shall be discontinued immediately. 
K.  Hearing on Revocation; Notice; Findings. 
1.  The director shall thereafter schedule a hearing before himself on revocation of the permit. The hearing before the director shall be held within twenty days of the issuance of the cease and desist order. Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, specifying the reason(s) therefor, shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, for the permittee as his name and address appear on the permit, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public and notice thereof shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and posted at City Hall in an appropriate place for posting of public notices, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
2.  At the hearing, the director shall determine, after all evidence and testimony has been presented (including that which is offered by or on behalf of the permittee), whether a violation has occurred and, if so, he shall determine whether to revoke the permit, impose appropriate conditions, and/or the appropriate corrective measures to be undertaken. The decision of the director shall be set forth in writing and shall specify appropriate findings in support thereof, and shall forthwith be given to the permittee and any interested persons who have filed a written request for a copy with the planning department. 
3.  Any decision of the director finding that a violation has occurred shall be stayed in the event an appeal is filed in a timely fashion; and, if so, shall be further stayed until the appeal is finally determined by the planning commission. 
L.  Appeals to Planning Commission. Any decision of the director under the provisions of this section, may be appealed to the planning commission by any person aggrieved thereby, by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department within twenty-one days of the date of the decision sought to be appealed. The notice shall specify decision being appealed and the reason(s) therefor. 
M.  Setting Hearing Before Commission; Notice. Upon receipt by the planning department of a written notice of appeal, the director shall cause a hearing to be set before the planning commission within thirty days thereafter. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the permittee, published and posted in the same manner and subject to the same time periods as specified in subsection K of this section with respect to notice of a revocation hearing before the director. 
N.  Decision of the Planning Commission. At the conclusion of its hearing, the planning commission shall approve, modify or reverse the decision of the director. The planning commission, as appropriate, may add to or modify the conditions of any decision of the director approving or conditionally approving an application for a permit. The decision of the planning commission shall be rendered at the conclusion of its hearing (which may be continued from time to time, but in no event shall it extend beyond thirty days from the date it commenced). The decision shall be in writing and shall contain appropriate findings to support it. A copy of the written decision shall be given forthwith to the applicant or permittee and to any person who has filed a written request with the planning department for a copy thereof. 
O.  Decision of the Planning Commission Final. The decision of the planning commission with respect to the appeal of any decision of the director under the provisions of this section, shall be final. 
P.  Decision of Director Final if no Appeal is Filed. The decision of the director with respect to any matter under the provisions of this section shall become final in the event an appeal is not made in a timely fashion. 
Q.  Fees to be Set by Resolution of the City Council. The fees, if any, to be established for any permit or proceeding hereunder shall be established by resolution of the city council. In the event a fee is so established, the fee specified shall be paid when the application or appeal to which it relates is filed. 
R.  Building Permit Required. Following issuance of an external antenna permit, a building permit shall be obtained prior to installation as required. 
S.  Maintenance of Antenna. All satellite earth antennas installed pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, shall be properly maintained including, without limitation, the approved screening therefor, in order to ensure continued compliance with the purposes and intent of this section. 
T.  Existing Antennae; Repair or Replacement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any external antenna (as defined herein) in existence on the date of adoption of this ordinance; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall apply and an external antenna permit shall be required, in the event said antenna is to be replaced, removed to a different location, or substantially altered. A substantial alteration shall mean an alteration whose cost exceeds twenty-five percent of the existing fair market value of the antenna. 
U.  Violation; Infraction. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and shall be subject to all provisions of Section 1.08.010 of this code relating to the treatment and punishment therefor. 
(Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.44.170 - Transitional housing. 
A.  No person shall operate a transitional housing facility without obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.50.020. In addition the applicant will supply the following information: 
1.  A letter of certification of final approval from the state or county licensing authority, 
2.  A site plan of the property showing parking, outdoor exercise area, and fencing, 
3.  A letter from the fire department approving the safety of the structure for the use, 
4.  A letter application describing the type of use, number of residents, age of residents, any special resident care that is provided, and a daily work schedule showing the number of employees at the facility, and 
5.  Landscaping and other information as required by the community development director. 
6.  Show that there is one parking space for each single resident and/or one space for each family unit living in the facility. 
(Ord. No. 16-138, § 13, 7-15-2015)  
Chapter 17.45 - SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION 
 
17.45.010 - Authority and effect. 
This chapter is adopted in accordance with, and to implement the provisions of, the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, as amended, which is set forth in the Public Resources Code. The provisions of this chapter are to be used and considered in conjunction with the Act and the implementing Regulations adopted, as authorized by the Act, by the California Mining and Geology Board. Any amendment of the Act or of the Regulations, hereafter adopted, which is applicable to the provisions of this chapter or a surface mining operation, existing or proposed, situated within the City of Scotts Valley (the "city"), shall control, in accordance with its terms, over any conflicting provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city council finds that the extraction of minerals is often beneficial to the needs of society and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety from the effects of the extraction of minerals. 
B.  The city council further finds that the reclamation of mined lands, as provided in this chapter, will permit the mining of minerals and will, at the same time, provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction and interpretation of this chapter: 
"Act" or "SMARA" means the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, as amended, which is set forth in California Public Resources Code starting with Section 2710. When the word "Act" is used in this chapter in conjunction with a section number, the number refers to a section in California Public Resources Code. 
"Backfill" means earth, overburden, mine waste or imported material used to replace material removed during mining. 
"Board" means the California Mining and Geology Board in the California Department of Conservation. 
"Borrow pits" means excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere. 
"Department" means the California State Department of Conservation. 
"Excavations for on-site construction" means earth material moving activities that are required to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements (such as excavation, grading, compaction, and the creation of fills and embankments), or that in and of themselves constitute engineered works (such as dams, road cuts, fills, and catchment basins). 
"Financial assurances" means the financial assurances provided to the city and department to assure the carrying out of a reclamation plan which must be approved by the city under the Act, prior to the approval or issuance of a permit. Financial assurances are required by Section 2770 of the Act and are described in Section 2773.1 of the Act, in the Regulations, and in guidelines adopted by the board. 
"Geologic hazard" means a geologic condition that is a potential danger to life and property. Geologic hazards include, but are not limited to, earthquake shaking, landslide, erosion, expansive soil, fault displacement and volcanic eruption. 
"Grading" means to bring an existing surface to the designed form by cutting, filling and/or smoothing operations. 
"Idle" means to curtail for a period of one year or more, surface mining operations by more than ninety percent of the operation's previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date. 
"Lead agency" means the city which is the agency under this chapter and the Act that has the principal responsibility for approving, approving with conditions, or denying surface mining operations, reclamation plans, and financial assurances relating to property situated within the boundaries of the city. 
"Mined lands" means and includes the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located. 
"Minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum. 
"Mining waste" means and includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. 
"Operator" means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his, her or its behalf. 
"Overburden" means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal, by surface mining operations. 
"Permit" means a surface mining permit required by the provisions of this chapter. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization, or partnership, or the city or any official thereof, Santa Cruz County, or the state or any department or agency thereof. 
"Planning director" means the planning director of the City of Scotts Valley and includes his or her designated representatives. 
"Reclamation" means the process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
"Reclamation plan" means a plan for the reclamation of mined lands required by Section 2770 and described in part in Sections 2772 and 2773 of the Act and Section 3502 of the Regulations. 
"Regulations" means the regulations of the board adopted to implement the Act. The Regulations are set forth in the California Code of Regulations in Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, entitled "State Mining and Geology Board," starting at Section 3500. 
"State Director" means the California State Director of Conservation. 
"State Geologist" means the individual holding the office created by Section 677 of the Public Resources Code. 
"State policy" means the regulations adopted by the board under the provisions of Section 2755 of the Act. 
"Surface mining operations" means all or any part of the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  In place distillation, retorting or leaching; 
2.  The production and disposal of mining waste; 
3.  Prospecting and exploratory activities; 
4.  Borrow pitting, stream bed skimming, segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same) are deemed to be surface mining operations unless specifically excluded under Section 2714 of the Act or Section 3505 of the Regulations. 
"Topsoil" means the upper part of the soil profile that is relatively rich in humus, which is technically known as the A-horizon of the soil profile. 
Other definitions contained in the Act, the Regulations, and Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code, starting at Section 2001. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.040 - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to: 
A.  Excavations or grading conducted for on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster; 
B.  On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities which are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site subject to all of the following conditions: 
1.  All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by the city in accordance with applicable provisions of adopted plans, policies, regulations, standards and ordinances of the city and state law, including, but not limited to, the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"), 
2.  The city's approval of the construction project included consideration of the on-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA, 
3.  The approved construction project is consistent with the city's General Plan and zoning of the site, 
4.  Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued; 
C.  Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated on-site structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the on-site stockpiling and on-site recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions: 
1.  The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses on the city's General Plan, 
2.  The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial, or are contained within a zoning category intended exclusively for industrial activities by the city, 
3.  None of the minerals being processed are being extracted on-site, 
4.  All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred on-site after January 1, 1976; 
D.  Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one thousand cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less; 
E.  Any surface mining operation that does not involve either the removal of a total of more than one thousand cubic yards of minerals, ores, and overburden, or does not involve more than one acre in any one location; 
F.  Such other surface mining operations to which the Act does not apply as set forth in the Act or the Regulations or as determined by the board under the provisions of Section 2714(d) of the Act. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.050 - Permit, reclamation plan and financial assurance requirements. 
A.  Any person who proposes to engage in surface mining operations shall, prior to the commencement of such operations to which the provisions and requirements of this chapter apply, obtain (1) a permit, (2) approval of a reclamation plan, and (3) provide and obtain approval of financial assurances, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Act. 
B.  No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct a surface mining operation prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as long as such vested right continues, provided that no substantial change is made in that operation except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A person shall be deemed to have such vested rights if, prior to January 1, 1976, that person has in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other authorization, if such permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefore. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials. 
C.  The reclamation plan required to be filed under subdivision (b) of Section 2770 of the Act, shall apply to operations conducted after January 1, 1976, or to be conducted. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan for, or the reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were conducted prior to January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.060 - Contents of application for permit. 
A.  An application for a permit shall be filed with the planning department. As many copies of the application as may be required by the planning director shall be submitted with the original application. The application shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning department. 
B.  The application shall identify the property on which the proposed surface mining operations will be conducted, shall describe in sufficient detail, the proposed operations, including the manner in which they will be conducted, the quantities of minerals proposed to be removed, and the time period(s) and hours of operation in which the removal will take place, and the method of dust and noise control. 
C.  The application shall describe a buffer around the perimeter to allow for on-site erosion control and stability of adjacent properties and provide an area for noise buffers and landscaping. The perimeter buffer shall be a minimum width of one hundred feet if the adjoining property is vacant residential land or two hundred fifty feet in width if the adjoining property is developed residential land. 
D.  The application shall include an analysis and plans to pay the costs to maintain all local streets and roads used by quarry trucks and plans for regular clean up of sand or other debris resulting from the operation from surrounding streets and roads. 
E.  The application shall include a plan to use reclaimed water in the quarry processes which includes an analysis of the effects on underground aquifers which analysis shall first be reviewed and approved by the water agency exercising jurisdiction over the area subject to reclamation. 
F.  The application shall include the necessary environmental review forms, information required by the Act, Regulations, and this chapter and such further relevant information as may be required by the planning director. The application shall be signed by the property owner(s) and the proposed operator. 
G.  The application shall have attached to it the proposed reclamation plan and a detailed description of the proposed financial assurances, including the total amount thereof, which will be provided by the operator. 
H.  The planning department shall review the application package for completeness and shall, within thirty days after receipt, either accept the application as complete for the purpose of initiating permit processing or return the application as incomplete with an explanation of how the application package is deficient. The resubmittal of the revised application shall start a new, thirty-day review for completeness, time period. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.070 - Notice to State Director and State Department of Transportation. 
A.  Within thirty days of the filing of an application for a permit, the planning director shall notify the State Director of such filing. 
B.  Whenever surface mining operations are proposed in the one hundred-year floodplain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the flood insurance rate maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the planning director shall notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received. The State Department of Transportation shall have a period of no more than forty-five days to submit comments to the planning director with respect to any potential damages to the state highway bridge resulting from the proposed mining operations. No permit shall be issued until the comments have been received or forty-five days have passed since the date the notice was given, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.080 - Processing. 
A.  Once an application is deemed complete, the planning department shall process and review the application, including review pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, the State CEQA Guidelines and the city's environmental review requirements. 
B.  Following completion of environmental review, the planning department shall prepare a staff report on the application, with recommendations, for consideration by the planning commission. 
C.  The planning commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the requested permit, the proposed reclamation plan and the amount of the financial assurances being proposed. 
D.  Prior to its final approval of (1) a reclamation plan, or (2) the amount of the financial assurances to be provided therewith, or (3) any amendment(s) to a reclamation plan, the planning commission shall certify to the State Director that, in its judgment, the reclamation plan, or the amendment(s) thereto, comply with the applicable requirements of the Act and Regulations. The planning director shall thereupon submit the certification and the reclamation plan, the financial assurances, or the amendment(s) to the State Director for review. The planning commission may conceptually approve the reclamation plan or the amendment(s) and the total amount of the financial assurances before they are submitted to the State Director. 
E.  The State Director shall have forty-five days from the date of the submittal within which to prepare and submit written comments on the reclamation plan, the financial assurances or the amendment(s) to the planning commission. The planning commission shall evaluate any written comments received from the State Director before taking final action on the permit, the reclamation plan or the amendment(s), or approving the amount of financial assurances that will be required. The planning department shall prepare a written response describing its recommended disposition of each major issue, if any, raised by the State Director for the planning commission's review. In particular, when the planning commission's position is at variance with a recommendation or objection raised in the State Director's comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why the specific comments or suggestions were not or should not be accepted. The planning commission shall adopt, or modify and adopt, the written response or shall adopt a different written response if the planning commission's position continues to be at variance with the State Director's recommendations or objections. 
F.  The planning commission shall then take final action to approve, approve subject to conditions and/or modifications, or deny the permit, the reclamation plan, and the amount of the financial assurances. The planning commission shall make the finding that the permit is consistent with the General Plan. A permit, approved or conditionally approved under this chapter, shall expire and become null and void if the mining operations authorized by the permit are not commenced within two years from the date the permit was approved. The approved permit shall be reviewed by the planning commission at least every five years at a public hearing. 
G.  The planning commission's action shall be final, subject only to appeal to the city council. If a decision or determination of the planning commission is appealed to the city council, the council, in making a determination on the appeal, may, in its discretion, assume all duties and authority assigned to the planning commission under this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.090 - Reclamation plan—Contents. 
A.  The applicant shall file, with the permit application, his, her or its proposed reclamation plan. The reclamation plan shall contain all of the following: 
1.  The name and address of the operator and the names and addresses of any persons designated by him as his agent(s) for the service of process; 
2.  The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the surface mining operation is to be conducted; 
3.  The method of controlling dust and limiting noise; 
4.  The proposed dates for the initiation and termination of the operation; 
5.  The maximum anticipated depth of the surface mining operation; 
6.  The size and legal description of the lands that will be affected by the operation, a map that includes the boundaries and topographic details of such lands, a description of the general geology of the area, a detailed description of the geology of the area in which surface mining is to be conducted, the location of all streams, roads, railroads, and utility facilities within, or adjacent to, such lands, the location of all proposed access roads to be constructed in conducting such operation, and the names and addresses of the owners of all surface and mineral interests of such lands; 
7.  A description of a plan for the type of surface mining to be employed and a time schedule that will provide for the completion of surface mining on each segment of the mined lands so that reclamation can be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance by the surface mining operation; 
8.  A description of the proposed use or potential uses of the land after reclamation and evidence that all owners of a possessory interest in the land have been notified of the proposed use or potential uses; 
9.  A description of the manner in which reclamation, adequate for the proposed use or potential uses, will be accomplished, including: (1) a description of the manner in which contaminants will be controlled, and mining waste will be disposed; (2) a description of the manner in which rehabilitation of any affected stream bed channels and stream banks to a condition minimizing erosion and sedimentation will occur; (3) a description of the revegetation plan including type and number of plant species; and (4) a statement of when the reclamation plan will be implemented; 
10.  An assessment of the effect of implementation of the reclamation plan on future mining in the area; 
11.  A statement that the person submitting the plan accepts responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan; 
12.  Any other relevant information which the planning director may require. 
B.  The proposed reclamation plan shall be applicable to a specific piece of property or properties, shall be based upon the character of the surrounding area and such characteristics of the property as type of overburden, soil stability, topography, geology, claim, stream characteristics, and principal mineral commodities and shall establish site-specific criteria for evaluating compliance with the approved reclamation plan, including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation and sediment, and erosion control. The plan shall conform to any applicable standards adopted by the Board. To the extent that there is a conflict between Board standards and standards established by the city, the more stringent standard shall apply unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.100 - Reclamation plan—Standards. 
A.  Reclamation plans shall conform to the requirements of Section 2773(a) of the Act, as applicable, and the minimum statewide reclamation standards adopted by the Board, which include, but are not limited to, the following subjects: wildlife habitat, backfilling, regrading, slope stability, re-contouring, erosion control, waterways, revegetation, drainage, agricultural land reclamation, structure and equipment removal, stream protection, topsoil salvage, and mine waste management, as set forth in Sections 3502, 3503 and Article 9, beginning at Section 3700 of the Regulations. 
B.  The city may impose additional reclamation standards or requirements, either in the review of individual projects as warranted to protect the public safety or welfare on a project by project basis. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.110 - Phasing of reclamation. 
Reclamation activities under an approved reclamation plan shall be phased with the phasing of the mining operations and shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance by the surface mining operation. Interim reclamation may be required for mined lands that will be disturbed again in future operations. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include: (1) the beginning and expected ending dates for each phase; (2) all reclamation activities required; (3) criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (4) the estimated costs. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.120 - Findings for approval. 
A.  Permits. Prior to approving a permit, the planning commission shall find that the proposed operations are consistent with the General Plan and comply with the provisions of state policy and this chapter. 
B.  Reclamation Plans. All of the following findings shall be made prior to approval of a reclamation plan: 
1.  The reclamation plan complies with the requirements of the Act, the applicable provisions of the Regulations and this chapter; 
2.  The potential use(s) of the reclaimed land under the reclamation plan are consistent with this chapter, the city's General Plan, and the zoning of the property; 
3.  All significant adverse impacts on the land to be reclaimed as a result of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible under the reclamation plan; 
4.  If applicable, that a written response to the State Director has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by the State Director. Where the city's position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the State Director, the written response has addressed, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted by the city; 
5.  Other findings as may be required by law. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.130 - Financial assurances for reclamation plans. 
A.  To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, there shall be required as a condition of the plan's approval financial assurances, the total amounts of which will be determined by the planning commission. The applicant may post security in the form of a corporate surety bond(s), trust fund(s), irrevocable letter(s) of credit, or other forms of financial assurances as specified in the Regulations. The financial institution furnishing or issuing any proposed security shall be authorized to do business in California with respect to the issuance or furnishing of such security. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Scotts Valley and the Department. The amount of the financial assurances shall be adequate, as determined by the planning commission, to enable the city or Department to perform, or have performed, reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
B.  Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with each element of the reclamation plan, including but not limited to: (1) revegetation and landscaping requirements; (2) restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat; (3) protection of archaeological sites; (4) restoration of water bodies and water quality; (5) slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials; and (6) other mitigation measures. 
C.  The amount of the financial assurances shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for each year or phase set forth in the reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required. Cost estimates shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and/or other qualified professional retained by the operator and approved by the planning director. Financial assurances shall be based upon cost estimates that include, but may not be limited to, labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial contractor who is retained by the operator to complete the reclamation. 
D.  In estimating the amount of financial assurances to be required, it shall be assumed that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operation and, consequently, the city or state may need to contract with a third-party commercial entity to mobilize quickly and complete the reclamation of the site, under requirements applicable to public works contracts. 
E.  Where reclamation is to be accomplished in annual increments, the amount of financial assurances required for any one calendar year shall be adjusted annually, not later than December 10 of the current year, to account for new lands that may be distributed in the coming year by the surface mining operations, inflation, and any reclamation already accomplished in accordance with the plan. The estimated costs shall be the amount required to complete the reclamation on all areas that will not be subject to further disturbance, and to provide interim reclamation, as necessary, for any partially excavated areas in accordance with the reclamation plan. Financial assurances for each year shall be released upon successful completion of reclamation (including any maintenance required) of all areas that will not be subject to further disturbance and upon the operator filing additional financial assurances for the year. 
F.  The financial institution or surety and its location, which the applicant has proposed to furnish or issue the financial assurances, shall be subject to the approval of the city's finance director. The form and content of the financial assurances shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. The Guidelines adopted by the Board shall be consulted. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.140 - Change in ownership or control. 
Whenever the ownership or control of a surface mining operation, or portion thereof, which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, is sold or otherwise transferred, the successor in interest shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter, the conditions and requirements of any permit and reclamation plan previously approved for the operation, and shall within two weeks of the transfer notify the planning director, in writing, of such transfer of ownership and the new owner's name, address and telephone number. Any existing financial assurances for the operation shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be released until new financial assurances are submitted to the city by the successor in interest and approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.150 - Inspections. 
The planning director shall arrange for the completion of an inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the annual report required in Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code, to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved reclamation plan, Chapter 5 of the Act, and the Regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted by the city in any calendar year. The inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, state-registered forester or other qualified specialist. The person making an inspection will be selected by the planning director. The person selected shall be experienced in land reclamation and shall not have been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous twelve months. All inspection(s) shall be conducted using a form provided by the Board. The planning director shall notify the State Director within thirty days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been conducted and shall forward a copy of the inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable costs of each such inspection, including a city administrative fee as may be adopted, from time to time, by the city council. The estimated cost of the inspection and an administrative fee shall be deposited by the operator with the planning department within fourteen days of notice of the amount thereof being given the operator by the planning director. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.160 - Idle mines—Interim management plans. 
A.  Within ninety days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, as defined in this chapter, the operator shall submit to the planning department an interim management plan. The interim management plan shall fully comply with the requirements of Section 2770(h) of the Act and shall set forth the measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in compliance with the Act, including, but not limited to, all requirements of the reclamation plan. The interim management plan shall be processed as a proposed amendment to the reclamation plan and shall not be considered a separate project for the purposes of environmental review. 
B.  Financial assurances for idle operations shall be provided as addressed in the reclamation plan or as otherwise approved through the idle mine's environmental review. 
C.  Within sixty days of receipt of the interim management plan, or such longer period mutually agreed upon by the planning director and the operator, the planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing at which it will consider, and following which it shall approve, approve with conditions and/or modifications, or deny the plan in accordance with this chapter and the Act. If approval of the proposed interim management plan is denied, the operator shall have thirty days, or such longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the planning director, to submit a revised plan. The planning commission, following a noticed public hearing, shall approve, approve subject to conditions and/or modifications, or deny the revised interim management plan within sixty days of its filing with the planning department. If the planning commission denies approval of the revised interim management plan, the operator may file an appeal of that action to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The council shall hear the appeal within forty-five days of its filing or within such longer period as the council and operator may agree upon. 
D.  The interim management plan may remain in effect for a period not to exceed three years, at which time the planning commission may renew its approval of the plan for another period not to exceed three years if the commission finds the operator has fully complied with the interim management plan, or the planning commission may require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. 
E.  Unless review of a proposed interim management plan, or a revised interim management plan, or appeal of either is pending, a surface mining operation which remains idle for over one year after becoming idle, as defined in this chapter, without obtaining approval of an interim management plan, shall be considered abandoned and the operator shall commence and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.170 - Enforcement—Violations and penalties. 
A.  If the planning department, based upon an annual inspection, or otherwise confirmed by an inspection, of a surface mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not being conducted in compliance with this chapter, its permit, or its approved interim management or reclamation plan, the planning director shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 2774.1 of the Act concerning violations, penalties, and enforcement of the Act. Any required hearing shall be held by the city council. 
Should the planning director make a determination to impose an administrative penalty in any of the circumstances set forth in Section 2774.1 of the Act, the penalty shall not exceed five thousand dollars per day, or such other maximum amount as set forth in the Act, and the planning director shall use the applicable criteria set forth in Section 2774.1 and elsewhere in the Act and Regulations in determining the actual amount of the administration penalty to be imposed. 
B.  If the planning director determines, or is notified by the State Director, that an operator is financially incapable of performing reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan or has abandoned the mine, the planning director shall schedule a public hearing upon making a determination that the operator is financially incapable of completing reclamation, or has abandoned the mine, the planning commission shall take one of the actions set forth in Section 2773.1(b) of the Act. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.180 - Fees. 
The city council, by resolution, shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the regulations, including but not limited to, the processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.190 - Public records. 
A.  Reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter are public records unless it can be demonstrated by the operator, to the satisfaction of the planning director, that the release of such information or parts thereof would reveal production, reserves or rate of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. Upon the written request of the operator or owner, and not otherwise, the planning director shall identify such proprietary information as a separate part of each application. Proprietary information shall be made available only to the state director and to persons authorized in writing by the mine operator and by the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778 of the Act. 
B.  A copy of all reclamation plans, reports, applications, and other documents submitted under this chapter shall be furnished by the planning director to the State Director upon the State Director's request. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.200 - Appeal. 
An applicant or any other interested person who considers a decision or determination made under the provisions of this chapter by the planning director or the planning commission to be erroneous, may appeal that decision or determination in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.060. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.210 - Notice of public hearings. 
Where a public hearing is required under the provisions of this chapter, or is otherwise determined to be held, notice of the public hearing shall be given by the planning director or city clerk pursuant to Sections 17.50.090 and 17.50.100. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.220 - Amendments and revisions of permits, reclamation plans, and financial assurances. 
Applications to amend or revise the scope, requirements, or conditions of an approved permit, reclamation plan, or financial assurances may be filed by an operator and shall be subject to, and processed and reviewed under, the same requirements which would, at the time, apply to a new permit application. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.230 - Substitution of financial assurances. 
One form of financial assurances may be substituted for another form, in whole or in part, provided the total approved amount of the assurances is not reduced, the entity providing the new financial assurances is approved by the city's finance director and if the assurance is something other than security as provided in this code, city council approval must first be obtained. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.240 - Planning director—Duties and authority. 
The planning director has the duty, responsibility and authority to do all of the following: 
A.  Application for Permit. Notify the State Director within thirty days of the filing of each application for a permit with the planning department. 
B.  Copy of Permit; Annual Update. Submit to the State Director by July 1 of each year a copy of the permit for each new active, or newly idle, surface mining operation and any conditions or amendment to each such permit. Once a permit has been submitted to the State Director under this section or chapter, in subsequent years the planning director shall submit to the State Director by July 1, a copy of any approved permit or reclamation plan amendment, or a statement there have been no changes during the preceding year. 
C.  Prior to Approval of Reclamation Plan, Financial Assurances, or Amendments Thereof. Submit to the State Director prior to the city's approval thereof, a copy of each reclamation plan, financial assurances or proposed amendment of either, together with, in the case of a reclamation plan, the certification of the planning commission required under Section 17.45.080 D of this chapter. Forward to the operator, a copy of any written comments received from the State Director under Section 17.45.080 E and any response(s) adopted by the planning commission. 
D.  Notification of Completion of Annual Inspection; State Director and Operator. Notify the State Director within thirty days of the city's annual inspection of a mining operation as required by Section 17.45.150 of this chapter. The notice shall contain the materials and information required by Section 2774(B) of the Act. At the same time, the planning director shall also notify the operator in accordance with the requirements of the Act. 
E.  Determinations of Whether Chapter Applies; Section 17.45.040 A and B. 
1.  Make written determinations, under the provisions of Sections 17.45.040 A and B and in conformity with the definitions contained in this chapter, the Act, and the Regulations, as to whether the provisions and requirements of this chapter are applicable or not applicable to a proposed excavation and/or earth moving plan which involves a quantity of not more than four thousand cubic yards of material being removed from the site. 
2.  If the plan involves more than two thousand, but less than four thousand, cubic yards being removed from the site, the planning director shall provide notice of any determination made that the provisions and requirements of this chapter are not applicable to the proposed excavation and/or earth moving plan as provided in Section 17.45.250. 
3.  If a proposed plan involves the removal of more than four thousand cubic yards of material from the site, the planning director shall schedule a public hearing on the matter before the planning commission, following which the planning commission shall make the determination under the provisions of Sections 17.45.040 A and B and the definitions applicable thereto, as to whether the provisions and requirements of this chapter are applicable or not applicable to the proposed excavation and/or earth moving plan. 
4.  "Site" as used in this subsection E of this section shall mean the property or properties upon which the project (other than just the earth moving or excavation activity) is proposed and of which the earth moving or excavation is an element. 
F.  Determinations of Whether Chapter Applies; Section 17.45.040 C through F. Make written determinations as to the applicability of this chapter to proposed operations under the criteria set forth in Section 17.45.040 C through F. 
G.  Review Chapter. Review this chapter as appropriate and make recommendations to the city council for such revisions as may be necessary to ensure this chapter will continue to be in accordance with state policy or to make the administration of this chapter more effective. 
H.  Appeals to Board. Act as the representative of the city, with the city attorney, with respect to any appeal filed with the Board under Section 2770(e) of the Act. 
I.  Release Financial Assurances. With consent of the finance director, release financial assurances as provided in the Act and this chapter. 
J.  Forfeitures, Implementation of Reclamation Plans and Penalties. With the assistance of the city attorney, seek forfeiture of financial assurances and proceed with the completion of reclamation plans as provided in the Act and/or this chapter, and impose penalties as provided in the Act. 
K.  Enforcement and Administration. Enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter and the Act and perform such other specific duties as may be assigned to him or her by the city council to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.250 - Notice of determination of chapter's inapplicability (Section 17.45.240 E2). 
The planning director shall provide notice of each determination made by the planning director, under Section 17.45.240 E2 and E3, that the provisions of this chapter are not applicable to a proposed excavation and/or earth moving plan which involves removing more than two thousand cubic yards from the site, as follows: 
A.  The notice shall contain a general identification or depiction of the site involved in its location, a description of the planning director's determination, a brief statement of the reason(s) for, and/or basis of, the determination and a statement that any interested person may appeal the determination to the planning commission by filing a written appeal with the planning department, within ten working days of the date the notice is mailed. 
B.  The notice shall be sent by first class mail to: 
1.  Each property owner or his agent, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and its master index update, whose property is situated within three hundred feet of the site which is the subject of the determination; 
2.  To the owner(s) of the site; 
3.  To the applicant, if other than the owner(s) of the property; 
4.  To each person who has filed a written request for the particular notice with the planning department and deposited a sufficient number of postage paid self-addressed mailing envelopes with the request. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.260 - Other approvals and permits required. 
A person proposing to operate a surface mining operation which is subject to the requirements of this chapter, in addition to obtaining all approvals required by this chapter, shall also obtain, prior to commencing operations, all other reviews, approvals and permits which may be required by the city for the proposed mining operation. These reviews, approvals and permits may include, but are not limited to, a grading permit and a conditional use permit, as well as project review under the provisions of CEQA. If such are required, they may be applied for and shall be processed to the extent feasible at the same time and in conjunction with the applications and materials required to be submitted by this chapter. If a conditional use permit is required under the provisions of Title 17 (the Zoning Code) for the proposed operation, the conditional use permit application may be processed first, if such would be in conformity with good administrative processes as determined by the planning director, but a condition thereof shall require that the applicant obtain the permit and other approvals required under this chapter, if it is determined that the provisions and requirements of this chapter apply to the proposed project or any element thereof. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
17.45.270 - Effect. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applied to all development and grading applications filed on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and to all prior developments and permits expressly made subject to its provisions by the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. 16.93 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 17.46 - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
 
17.46.010 - Applicability of chapter. 
The requirements and regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the following exceptions, modifications and interpretations. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.46.020 - Building lines. 
Where the topography or other special circumstance of the area may call for a building line contrary to the requirements of any district under this title, the planning commission may establish building lines for the location of future buildings; provided, that they shall be shown on the zoning map followed by the designation OBL (Official Building Line). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.46.030 - Special uses requiring use permits. 
A.  No dancehall, roadhouse, nightclub, commercial club or any amusement or recreation, or any place where live entertainment is provided, shall be established in any district closer than two hundred feet from the boundary of any residential or open space district unless a use permit is first secured in each case. 
B.  Radio and television transmission towers, wireless communication facilities and accessory uses thereto, but not including radio and television broadcasting studios, shall be allowed in any nonresidential district, subject to securing a use permit in each case. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.97 § 1, 1996)  
17.46.040 - Private stables. 
The following regulations shall apply in all cases for the maintenance of private stables. 
A.  The minimum lot upon which a horse may be kept is forty thousand square feet. One additional horse may be kept for each additional twenty thousand square feet above the square foot minimum. 
B.  Corrals and stables shall be located on the rear half of the lot and not closer than forty feet from any property line and/or dwelling on the same or adjacent property. 
C.  Contiguous parcels which are leased pursuant to a written or oral rental agreement may not be considered as a part of the minimum lot area requirements hereof. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.77 (part), 1989)  
17.46.050 - Height limits. 
A.  Towers, spires, or cupolas for the housing of equipment used solely to operate and maintain a building; chimneys, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, noncommercial radio and television aerials and transmission towers, fire towers and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances covering not more than ten percent of the ground area covered by a main structure may be erected to a height not more than twenty-five feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the district in which the site is located. Utility poles and commercial towers shall not be subject to the height limits prescribed in the district regulations. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 4, 1991)  
17.46.060 - Area requirements. 
A.  The use of land as permitted for the district in which it is located shall be permitted on a building site of less area, width, depth or frontage than that required by the regulations for such district, providing such was a separate lot or parcel of record or was shown on a map of a recorded subdivision on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
B.  A lot shall not be subsequently divided so as to reduce the lot area, width, depth or frontage below the requirements of this title for the zoning district in which it is located. 
C.  Site area, width, depth and frontage requirements of this title shall not apply to sites used for public utility pumping stations, power stations, public utility installations and drainage ways, which shall require a use permit. Such requirements shall be determined by conditions of the use permit granted for the use. 
D.  The percentage of the site area covered by structures shall be measured by dividing the number of square feet of horizontal area covered by structures, open or enclosed, by the total horizontal area within the property lines of the site. 
E.  On a cul-de-sac turnaround or a curved street with a radius of curvature of two hundred feet or less, a site may have a frontage of not less than forty feet. 
F.  Flag lots. 
1.  The creation of flag lots may be permitted in any Single-family Residential R-1 district upon specific approval of the city council (see Figure 17.46.060 Flag Lot Diagram), after report and recommendation of the planning commission. To be considered for approval, a proposed flag lot shall meet, while excluding the flag/access easement area itself, all requirements of width, depth and area specified for lots in the district in which it is located and shall not, by its creation, result in any other lot failing to meet the width, depth and area requirements of its district. The lot must be served by a corridor (flag area) which shall be defined as that portion of the lot fronting on the street and having a width of less than the minimum required lot frontage for the district and which also meets the following conditions: 
a.  Has not less than twelve feet frontage; 
b.  Is nowhere less than twelve feet in width; 
c.  Is not more than one hundred fifty feet in length; and, 
d.  Is suitable throughout its length for access by emergency vehicles; 
2.  The end of the flag/access easement area shall constitute the front yard of the lot. Lot area and the front yard setback shall be measured from this line, provided, that the minimum required setback must be maintained from any other lot line between the structure and the street upon which the flag area fronts. 
3.  The flag lot shall not result in more than four adjacent driveways in any two hundred feet along the frontage street. 
4.  The flag lot must not otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
5.  The new lot lines created shall be at right angles to the existing property lines. Angling lot lines or irregular lot lines to reduce the length of the flag is not consistent with the lot division standards. 
6.  Each flag lot and the lot in front of the flag lot must contain at least the required minimum site area required by the zoning district. The area of flag/access easement shall be included with the front lot and shall not be excluded in calculating the size of the front lot. Any paving located within the flag/access easement shall be included in the site coverage calculations for the front lot. The front lot shall conform with the parking and driveway area allowances specified in SVMC Section 17.44.030J. 
7.  All new or existing structures shall conform to the required setbacks after the creation of the new lot. No subdivision will be approved that will create a nonconforming setback to an existing or proposed structure. 
8.  Where both parcels take access off the same street, new driveways shall be combined with an existing driveway, where feasible to limit the amount of impervious surfaces and the number of access points on streets. 
9.  Flag lots shall have the street address clearly visible from the street to identify a dwelling that is set back from the street. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.80 § 2, 1990; Ord. No. 16.119, § 1, 6-1-2005) 
    
Figure 17.46.060 Flag Lot Diagram  
17.46.070 - Yard exceptions and modifications. 
A.  On a residentially zoned site situated between sites improved with buildings, the minimum front yard depth shall be the average depth of the front yards on the improved sites adjoining the side lines of the site. 
B.  Where a site is not situated between sites improved with buildings and where sites comprising forty percent of the frontage on a block are improved with buildings, the minimum front yard depth shall be the average of the existing front yard depths on the block. 
C.  In computing average front yard depths, the figure of thirty feet shall be used in lieu of any front yard depth greater than thirty feet. 
D.  Where an official plan line has been established by the city, the required yards on the street side of any lot shall be measured from such official plan lines, and in no case shall the provisions of this title be construed as permitting any structure to extend beyond such official plan line. 
E.  Architectural features including sills, chimneys, cornices, bay windows and eaves may extend into a required side yard no more than fifty percent of the required side yard nor more than two feet into a required front or rear yard. 
F.  Open unenclosed, uncovered balconies, porches, decks, platforms, stairways and landing places may extend into any required front or rear yard not more than six feet nor more than three feet into any required side yard. 
G.  In cases where the rear lot line abuts the side lot line of a key lot, a rear yard of fifteen feet shall be maintained from the rear lot line of such abutting lot. 
H.  In cases where a building site is less than sixty feet in width, a side yard of not less than five feet shall be required, except in commercial districts. 
I.  The minimum exterior side yard on a corner lot shall be ten feet. 
J.  Except in C, RM, RH and I districts, accessory structures may be located in a required rear yard, provided, that they shall not be located closer than three feet to the rear or side property lines. The partial or complete conversion of a one- or two- story detached accessory structure into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. 
K.  Where there is more than one structure on a site exceeding sixteen feet in height, the minimum distance between the structures shall be ten feet. The minimum distance between such structures shall be increased one foot for every two feet of height above sixteen feet of height of the lowest of such structures. 
L.  On the street side of a reversed corner lot, the side yard shall not be less than one-half of the required front yard of the adjoining key lot. 
M.  On a reversed corner lot, an accessory structure shall be located not closer to the rear property line than the required side yard on the adjoining key lot and not closer to the side property line adjoining the street than the required front yard of the adjoining key lot. 
N.  No accessory structure shall be located within six feet of the side lines of the front half of any adjacent lot. The partial or complete conversion of an existing one- or two-story detached accessory structure with six (6) feet reduced yard setbacks (located in the front half of the property) into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. The conversion of an existing, legal, nonconforming detached accessory structure with yard setbacks greater than six (6) feet but less than the required yard setbacks for the main dwelling, into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse, may be allowed with Use Permit approval from the Planning Commission at a public hearing, in accordance with Section 17.50.020 of the City's Municipal Code. 
O.  Detached accessory structures shall not be located within six feet of any alley. The partial or complete conversion of such structures into a secondary dwelling unit or guesthouse is prohibited. 
P.  In cases where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be considered a part thereof. 
Q.  Except in commercial and industrial zoning districts, detached accessory buildings, may be located in the required rear yard, provided, that not more than twenty percent of the area of the required rear yard shall be covered by structures. 
R.  In all cases where the front and rear property lines of a lot abut a street (a double frontage lot), the main building and accessory buildings thereon shall not be located closer to either street than the required front yard; provided, however, that in all cases where either street upon which the lot abuts is a street to which access to the subject lot has been legally precluded, then the setback required shall apply only from the street from which access is allowed. 
S.  In cases where the elevation of the front half of the lot at a point fifty feet from the centerline of the traveled roadway is seven feet above or below the grade of the centerline (fourteen percent or greater slope), a private garage attached or detached may be built to within five feet of the front property line. 
T.  The maximum building height of a detached accessory structure with reduced yard setbacks (in conformance with Sections 17.46.070J. and 17.46.070N. of the City's Municipal Code) shall be 18 feet. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.77(part), 1989; Ord. 16.115, § 20, 6-4-2003)  
17.46.080 - Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
A.  Every person who owns or possesses any premises where there is a swimming pool, or in-ground spa shall maintain a fence, wall or structure at least five feet high, completely enclosing the swimming pool or in-ground spa pursuant to the requirements of the California Building Code or other applicable building code. Fencing or enclosures for above ground spas or hot tubs shall be in accordance with the applicable building code. 
B.  Swimming pools and spas are prohibited in the required front yard of all residential districts. Swimming pools and in-ground spas shall be located a minimum of five feet from the rear or side property line. Mechanical and/or air handling equipment for maintenance, temperature control and chemical balance of a swimming pool and/or spa shall be located a minimum of three feet from any property line and shall be entirely enclosed to muffle the noise. 
(Ord. 16-112 § 9, 2000)  
17.46.090 - Moving of buildings. 
A.  No person or persons shall move or cause to be moved any building or structure without first obtaining a permit from the planning department. 
B.  An application shall be made showing the existing location of the structure to be moved together with the location to which it is proposed to be moved and its intended use. 
C.  If the planning department finds that the proposed structure to be moved and the intended use are within the zoning requirements, a permit shall be issued for moving the building. 
D.  If the planning department finds that the building to be moved is of substandard construction or unsound structurally, no permit shall be issued unless the person who wishes to move the building agrees to reconstruct the building or to otherwise structurally alter the building at its new location so as to bring the structure into compliance with the standards of the Uniform Building Code. In the event of the latter situation, the building inspector shall ascertain the amount of performance bond necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the Uniform Building Code and shall notify the applicant of the amount of the bond. No permit shall be issued in such situation unless and until an appropriate bond issued by a reputable surety authorized to do business in the state is filed with the planning department in favor of the city, in the designated amount. Any such performance bond shall be approved by the city attorney prior to its acceptance. In lieu of a performance bond, equivalent security may be accepted upon approval of the city attorney as to form and content. 
E.  All structures, other than single-family residences, to be relocated within the city shall be subject to design review board approval to assure that the structure is compatible with the design characteristics of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be located. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.46.100 - Kennels and small animal hospitals. 
The following regulations shall apply in all cases for the maintenance of kennels or small animal hospitals. 
A.  The premises where kennels or small animal hospitals are maintained shall be entirely enclosed by a nontransparent fence a minimum of six feet in height. 
B.  The actual enclosure in which animals are treated or maintained shall be at least seventy-five feet from any residence. 
C.  The premises shall be kept in a neat and sanitary manner by the daily removal of offal and the use of sprays and disinfectants to prevent an accumulation of flies, the spread of disease or offensive odor. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.46.110 - Fences, walls and ornamental structures. 
A.  Fences may be embellished with arbors and trellises when the overall height of the fence, including the trellis or arbor, meets the height limits set forth in Table 17.46.110.G. Arbors are allowed in the required side and rear yards. Arbors are allowed in the required front yard setback if they are less than twenty square feet in roof area and placed so as not to block the line of sight. Arbors over twenty square feet in roof area or over eight feet in height and not more than ten feet in height, proposed within a front yard setback, may be approved by the planning commission through design review (see Section 17.50.030 D). 
B.  Light posts, mail boxes and related ornamental structures may be installed in front yards as long as the structure is less than two feet in width and eight feet in height, if an arbor or trellis see Section 17.46.110 A. 
C.  Fences and walls, or any combination thereof are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the type, height and related permitting regulations as specified in Table 17.46.110.G below. 
D.  Heights of fences and walls shall be determined based upon the adjacent grade of the fence or wall, unless the grade adjacent to a fence or wall varies from side to side or along the length of the fence or wall. Whenever the grade adjacent to a fence or wall varies, the lowest grade surface adjacent to the fence or wall shall be used as the base to determine fence height. 
E.  No fence, wall or hedge located within a triangle having sides fifty feet in length from a street intersection, as measured from intersecting curb lines or intersecting edges of the street pavement where no curb exists, shall exceed three feet in height above the established grade of the adjoining street (see Figure 17.46.110.H). 
F.  Fences and retaining walls taller than three feet may be allowed in the front yard of a residentially zoned lot subject to obtaining a Special Fence Permit as provided in Section 17.50.050. 
Table 17.46.110 F. Fencing Locations, Heights, Types, Height Adjustments and Other Restrictions 
Zoning District 	Location 	Height 	Fencing Types, Special Height Adjustments and Other Requirements 
All Residential 
(R) and Open 
Space (OS) zones 	Front Yard 	3 	Fence Type: May be open, view or solid. 
Height Adjustment: 
1. Fences and retaining walls taller than three feet in a front yard setback may be considered through approval of a Special Permit as established in Section 17.50.050. 
	Interior 
Side or 
Rear Yard 	8, 
subject to 
limitations in 
next column 	Fencing Type: May be open, view or solid. 
Fences Over Six Feet in Height: Any portion of a fence over six feet tall shall be open or view fence type, unless there is a grade difference of no more than two feet between adjoining properties then the fence can be all solid type fencing. 
Height Adjustment: Whenever the grade between adjoining properties exceeds two feet, the fence may be taller than eight feet in height as measured from the lower property elevation, if approved by the planning commission through design review (See Section 17.50.030 D). 
	Exterior Side 
or Rear Yard 	8 
subject to 
limitations in 
next column 	Fencing Type: May be open, view or solid. 
Side Yard Fences Over 3 Feet Tall: Whenever a fence over three feet in Height is located in an exterior side yard, a minimum three foot setback shall be provided between the property line and the fence. The side yard fence setback area shall be landscaped and irrigated with evergreen, drought tolerant plants of varying height. The landscaping plan shall be approved by the community development director. 
Height Adjustment: The eight foot height limit may be increased if special design features are included on or near the fence and if approved by the planning commission through design review (See Section 17.50.030 D). 
All other zones 
(Commercial, 
Industrial and 
Public/Quasi 
Public) 	Front Yard 	3 	Fence Type: May be open, view or solid. 
Height Adjustment: View fences may be allowed with increased heights up to eight feet if specific storage, display or security needs for outdoor storage of products or equipment is associated with the business and the design and appearance of the fencing is approved by the planning commission throughDesign review (See Section 17.50.030 D). 
	Interior Side 
or Rear Yard 	8 	See interior side yard fences for residential uses listed above. Same height limitations and restrictions apply. 
	Exterior Side 
or Rear Yard 	8 	See exterior side yard fences for residential uses listed above. Same height limitations and restrictions apply. 
 
G.  Sight safety distance shall be determined by the figure below: 
  
Figure 17.46.110 G Sight Distance Across Street Comer 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 5, 1991; Ord. 16.99 § 1, 1996; Ord. 16.107 § 1, 1999; Ord. 16-112 § 10, 2000; Ord. 16-113 § 5, 2002; Ord. No. 16.118, § 1, 2-2-05)  
17.46.120 - Animal raising. 
The following regulations shall apply in all cases where poultry, birds, rabbits or fur-bearing animals in any number and for any purpose are raised, kept or maintained. 
A.  All dead animals or birds and offal shall be removed and disposed of, and sprays and disinfectants shall be used so as to prevent the accumulation or spread of disease, flies or offensive odors. 
B.  Where in excess of fifty birds are maintained in one block within a distance of one-quarter of a mile from any residence, ground sprays or ground cover shall be used to prevent the accumulation and spread of dust. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.46.125 - Beekeeping permits issued by the community development director. 
A.  Authority and Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of the beekeeping permit is to provide appropriate review and consideration of small scale beekeeping under the direction of the community development director or their designee, and to ensure that beekeeping on certain-sized parcels in single-family residential zones will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements and to the health, safety, and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use. 
2.  Beekeeping requires review and approval of a beekeeping permit before any beekeeping on the subject property. 
B.  Definitions. The terms used herein have the following meanings: 
"Apiary" means a place where bees, hive boxes, and related appliances wherever the same are kept, located, or found, especially a colony of bees kept for their honey. 
"Bee colony" is a group of bees which consist of the queen, the drones, and the worker which live in a hive box or similar receptacle. 
"Beekeeping" (or apiculture, from Latin apis, bee) is the maintenance of honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, by humans. A beekeeper (or apiarist) keeps bees in order to collect honey and beeswax, for the purpose of pollinating vegetation, or to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers. 
"Bees" means honey-producing insects of the species aspis mellifica, including the adults, eggs, larvae, pupae or other immature states thereof, together with such materials as are deposited into hives by the adults, except honey and rendered beeswax. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea, presently classified by the unranked taxon name Anthophila. 
"Hive" is the same definition as bee colony. 
"Hive box" means any box, receptacle, or container made or prepared for the use of bees, or similar container of which bees have taken possession. A hive box is usually called a Langstroth deep or super, and is roughly 19.75 inches long, 16.5 inches wide, and 9.5 inches tall. It contains ten frames of foundation on which the bees build comb for producing brood and food. A hive box needs some kind of top board, some kind of bottom board, and an entrance which is usually incorporated in the bottom board. 
C.  Applications and Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Application for a beekeeping permit shall be made on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city and shall be filed with the planning department, accompanied by the filing fee. 
2.  The application shall be accompanied by such maps, site plans, and other drawings, or information required or necessary to enable the community development director to make the determinations as set forth herein. The application form provided by the planning department shall provide a list of submittal requirements. 
3.  The filing fee for an application shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Application Processing Procedures and Notice. 
1.  The application shall be subject to review by the planning department to determine if the application is complete. 
2.  Upon deeming the application complete, the planning department shall send a notice to the applicant, property owner, the owners and tenants of property of the five parcels located closest to the subject property, and to all members of the planning commission. The notice shall indicate the date upon which the community development director will act on the permit and the intended action to be taken by the community development director. Such notices shall be mailed, via first class mail, a minimum of fifteen days prior to date that action is to be taken. 
E.  Development Standards. The community development director shall determine from data submitted whether the proposed beekeeping use and any related structures proposed for the beekeeping use will meet the development standards prescribed below, as determined by the community development director. 
1.  One bee colony and/or hive box will be allowed in single-family residential parcels which are greater than ten thousand square feet in size. Single-family residential parcels which are greater than forty thousand square feet may have up to two bee colonies and/or hive boxes; 
2.  No bee colony and/or hive box shall be located closer than twenty-five feet from any side or rear property line or adjacent residence or business; 
3.  Bee colonies and/or hive boxes shall be located in the rear of the property to the extent practical and feasible, as determined by the community development director; and 
4.  All properties on which a bee colony and/or hive box are kept must provide for adequate water sources on the property. 
F.  Required Findings. The application may be approved as submitted, disapproved, conditionally approved; or, the community development director may refer the requested beekeeping permit to the planning commission for consideration. The following finding shall be made by the community development director and/or planning commission: The proposed beekeeping use, location of the bee colony/hive box, its effect, and the resulting number of beekeeping permits in a neighborhood will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements, and to the health, safety, and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use. 
G.  Appeals. Appeal from the determination by the community development director shall be to the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
H.  Penalty. Every person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to Title 4 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 16.130, § 4, 8-18-2010)  
17.46.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16.123, § 53, adopted Sept. 5, 2007, repealed § 17.46.130, which pertained to children's day care facilities and derived from Ord. 16.76, § 1 (part), 1989.  
17.46.140 - Temporary construction offices. 
A trailer may be used as a temporary construction office in any commercial or industrial district upon compliance with the following regulations. 
A.  A temporary trailer permit shall be obtained upon approval of the planning department. 
B.  Use of the trailer shall be terminated and the trailer shall be removed from the site six months after the temporary permit is granted or within fifteen days of final building inspection, whichever is the first to occur, provided, that the term of use may be extended in the same manner as a use permit is extended for an additional period not to exceed six months. In no event shall the use of the trailer exceed a period of one year. 
C.  A deposit of cash, bond and/or certificate of deposit in a sum to be determined by the building official shall be required to guarantee the removal of the portable trailer. 
D.  A temporary trailer shall be permitted only after the issuance of a valid building permit for work to be done on the site where the construction office will be located. 
E.  No residential use shall be made of the temporary trailer except in commercial districts as provided in subsection F of this section. 
F.  Recreational vehicles/trailers may be utilized as temporary living quarters only for construction of public or nonprofit facilities, churches and schools located in the commercial district only as long as the following minimum standards are satisfied, which shall be in addition to the other standards, conditions and provisions set forth above in subsection A through D (which shall also apply): 
1.  A maximum of five temporary trailers/recreational vehicles shall be placed on any one site. 
2.  No temporary living quarters shall be located within three hundred feet of any existing residence. 
3.  All temporary living quarters shall connect to utilities (i.e., sewer, water and electricity) in conformance with the Uniform Building Code. No holding tanks, temporary septic systems or the like shall be permitted. 
4.  A permit shall be required prior to placement of recreational vehicles/trailers. The permit shall be issued by the planning director. In issuing such permit the planning director may impose reasonable conditions to ensure that the placement of recreational vehicles/trailers conforms to health and safety standards. The planning director may deny the permit if the director finds that the temporary living quarters may be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
5.  The minimum site area for the use of temporary living quarters on a jobsite shall be one-and-one-half acres. 
6.  If conditions are not adhered to or written complaints are received, the planning director may revoke the permit or add conditions to the permit in the interest of public health, safety or welfare. 
7.  Applicant and/or property owner shall sign a binding agreement to vacate the property and cease the activity within five days of written request by the planning director. In the event there is an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare, the planning director may require the use to cease immediately. 
8.  The temporary living quarters shall be located on the site on which the construction will occur. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.80 § 1, 1990)  
17.46.150 - Covenants for easements. 
A.  Creation of Easement by Covenant. In addition to any other method for the creation of an easement, an easement for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping or open space purposes may be created by a recorded written covenant of easement made by an owner of real property to the city pursuant to this section. The purpose of the covenant is to implement the goals and policies of the General Plan. 
B.  Contents of Covenant. The covenant of easement shall contain the following: 
1.  The legal description of the real property to be burdened by the covenant of easement and the real property to be benefited thereby; 
2.  The legal description or a scale drawing of the easement showing the location of the easement on the restricted property; 
3.  The purpose for which the covenant of easement is made; 
4.  The terms, conditions or limitations, if any, imposed upon the use of the easement; 
5.  An identification of the approval, permit or designation granted by the city which relied upon or required the covenant; 
6.  A statement that the covenant of easement is made pursuant to this section. 
C.  Common Ownership Required. At the time of recording the covenant of easement, all of the real property benefitted or burdened by the covenant shall be in common ownership. 
D.  Execution and Recording. The covenant of easement shall be duly executed by the owner(s) of the real property to be restricted and shall be recorded by the city in the office of the recorder of the county of Santa Cruz. The cost of recordation shall be borne by the owner(s) of the real property to be restricted by the covenant. 
E.  Effect of Recording. The covenant of easement shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the State Civil Code, except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. From and after the time of its recordation, the covenant shall impart notice thereof to all persons to the extent affordable by the recording laws of the state. Section 1104 of the California Civil Code shall be applicable to a conveyance of the affected real property. 
F.  Enforcement. A covenant of easement executed and recorded pursuant to this section shall be enforceable by the city and/or the successors in interest to the real property benefitted by the covenant; and the burdens of the covenant shall be binding upon the successors in interest to the real property burdened thereby, and the benefits of the covenant shall inure to the successors in interest to the real property benefitted thereby. Nothing in this section shall create in any person other than the city and the owner of the real property benefitted or burdened by the covenant standing to enforce or to challenge the covenant or any amendment thereto or release therefrom. 
G.  Release of Covenant. A covenant of easement made pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be released upon a determination by the city council that the restriction of the real property burdened by the covenant is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city, all pursuant to the procedure herein below specified. 
1.  Upon the application of any person (whether or not that person has title to the affected real property) filed with the city clerk, accompanied by payment of any fee established by resolution of the city council or upon the city council's own initiative, the matter of release of the covenant shall automatically be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation to the city council following a public hearing conducted by said commission. The commission shall make its report and recommendation to the city council within forty-five days of the reference date. The public hearing conducted by the commission shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.090 of this title. 
2.  Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter of the release of the covenant of easement within thirty days. The hearing shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.090 of this title. The hearing may be continued from time to time but shall be concluded within thirty days of the hearing date, except as the time may be extended upon written consent of the applicant. Upon a determination of the city council that the restrictions on the real property burdened by covenant of easement is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city, the covenant of easement shall be released; otherwise, it shall not be released. The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall be supported by adequate findings. Notice of the decision shall forthwith be given to the applicant and to the owner(s) of the affected real property. 
3.  If the covenant of easement is to be released, a release shall forthwith be recorded by the city in the office of the recorder of the county of Santa Cruz. Upon recordation of the release, the covenant of easement shall be of no further force or effect. 
4.  Fees to cover the reasonable cost of processing the release, including, without limitation, the costs of administering the provisions of this section, shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing of the application. 
H.  Authority for Section. This section is adopted pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Article 2.7 (commencing with Section 65870) of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.46.160 - Construction standards. 
A.  Dust. Dust from grading and construction operations must be controlled. The permittee may be required to keep adequate equipment on the construction site to prevent dust problems. 
B.  Hours of Operation. All construction activity shall be limited to the hours between eight a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, and nine a.m. through five p.m. on Saturday. No construction activity is allowed on Sunday. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.47 - RECYCLED WATER REGULATIONS 
 
17.47.010 - Findings. 
The Legislature of the State of California has adopted the Water Recycling in Landscaping Act (Gov. Code §§ 65601-65607, hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as the "Act"), along with sections 1009 and 13550-13556 of the California Water Code, evidencing a state-wide interest in developing facilities to reclaim and reuse water to supplement existing surface and underground water supplies and to assist in meeting the future water requirements of the State. Pursuant to the Act, the Scotts Valley Water District ("District") has notified the City that recycled water either is currently available or is expected to be available within ten years within the boundaries of the City. Recycled water is determined to be available pursuant to California Water Code section 13550 in new industrial, commercial or residential subdivisions located within the designated recycled water use areas in the City. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
17.46.020 - Authority, Policy and Purpose. 
These regulations are adopted under the authority of the Act. It is the policy of the City that recycled water which has been determined to be available pursuant to section 13550 of the California Water Code shall be used for nonpotable uses within the designated recycled water use areas as designated by the District when the City has determined (1) there is not an alternative higher or better use for the recycled water, (2) its use is economically justified, and (3) its use is financially and technically feasible for projects under review by the City. In furtherance of that policy, this Chapter establishes the general rules and regulations governing the use and distribution of recycled water in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
17.47.030 - Recycled Water Areas. 
The District, in cooperation with the City, has designated certain areas in the City as recycled water areas, all as set forth on a map, a copy of which is on file at the District offices. The District and City may, from time to time, modify the map and if new designations are established by the District, the District shall file an updated map with the Community Development Director within 60 days of such re-designation. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
17.47.040 - Recycled Water Use Rules and Regulations. 
A.  Subdivision Applications. No subdivision map for new development for any industrial, commercial or residential subdivision for which a tentative or parcel map is required by the City for parcels located within a recycled water project area shall be deemed complete without the subdivider having first provided the City with information adequate for the City to make the determinations set out in section 17.47.020. Upon receipt by City of an application for a tentative or parcel map for any industrial, commercial or residential subdivision the following procedure shall apply: 
1.  Referral to District for Recommendation. Upon application by a subdivider, and prior to deeming a new subdivision application complete, the Community Development Director shall refer the application to the District for review and recommendation regarding the use of recycled water and the installation of separate water meters and recycled water systems. The District shall make every effort to respond in writing within 30 days after the date of the referral, specifying its recommendation. The City need not consider the District's recommendation if it is not received within 30 days or if the pending application may be deemed approved under the Permit Streamlining Act before the recommendation is received. 
2.  City Action on Project. The City shall consider, as part of the subdivision review process, the recommendations of the District to determine if conditions of approval must be applied to the proposed subdivision to implement the policies established in this Chapter. After considering whether higher or better uses for recycled water exist and considering economic and financial feasibility as provided in this Chapter, the city council may add conditions to the map approval implementing the appropriate use of recycled water into the resulting improvements requiring the use of water that may be accomplished by use of recycled water. Common nonpotable uses that shall be considered for recycled water include, but are not limited to, irrigation of golf courses, parks, greenbelts, cemeteries, landscaped streets and medians, water intensive industrial uses, and other irrigation uses for both public and private development. 
B.  Public Improvements and Properties. Where deemed appropriate by the city council, existing and new city-owned or operated projects within a designated recycled water use area may be designed to accommodate recycled water. In addition, the City shall encourage other public agencies that are constructing projects with landscaping or other water intensive uses to work with the District to make use of recycled water where the construction is within a designated recycled water use area. 
C.  Major Industrial and Commercial Projects. Projects seeking discretionary approval from the city which involve the construction or re-construction of major industrial or commercial uses, especially those which have significant irrigation and/or water intensive aspects that can use recycled water and which are located in designated recycled water use areas, shall, as part of the review process, be treated like the subdivision processing set out in 17.47.040A, and where necessary, conditions attached which result in the use of recycled water. 
D.  Permits from State Agencies. Projects which are determined to be required for hook up to the recycled water system are required to work with the District to obtain the necessary permits from the State Department of Health Services prior to hooking up and using recycled water. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
17.47.050 - Separate Plumbing System. 
Public or private projects which are required to install recycled water systems shall be required to construct a separate plumbing system to serve nonpotable uses where appropriate and with plans approved by the District. The separate system to serve nonpotable uses shall be independent of the plumbing system provided to serve domestic, residential, and other potable water uses in the subdivision or as part of the project under review. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
17.47.060 - Connection to Recycled Water Distributor. 
The District and any lawful successor responsible for the distribution of recyclable water in the City shall have the final authority whether to issue a recycled water connection permit. Issuance shall be subject to reasonable rules and regulations adopted by the District. If the construction of a recycled water system is a condition of approval required by the City and the District refuses to issue a permit, the applicant may seek removal of the condition by the City based upon the District's actions. 
(Ord. No. 16.117, § 1, 5-19-04)  
Chapter 17.48 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 
 
17.48.010 - Description and purpose. 
Where buildings or uses legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title are not in conformity with the provisions of this title, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter to declare such buildings and uses to be nonconforming and inconsistent with the orderly development of the city and to not encourage such nonconforming uses and buildings to continue to exist. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.020 - Continuation of existing uses. 
Any use, building or structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which does not conform with the provisions of this title for the zone in which it is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use, building or structure and may be continued except as hereinafter specified; provided, however, that this section does not apply to any use, building or structure established in violation of the zoning ordinance previously in effect. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.030 - Conditional uses. 
Any use legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which was a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located and which is now classified as a conditional use shall be considered a nonconforming use until a conditional use permit is obtained pursuant to Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.040 - Repairs, alterations and maintenance. 
A.  Ordinary nonstructural repairs, alterations or maintenance may be made to a nonconforming building or structure as required to keep it in sound condition. Alterations or repairs of a structural nature to a nonconforming building or structure shall not be permitted except such as are required by law or ordinance or authorized by the planning commission upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 17.50.020 of this title; provided, however, that structural alterations or repairs may be made to a nonconforming residential building or structure which is used for residential uses in a zone in which residential uses are allowed. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the making of structural repairs or alterations or otherwise strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure which is unsafe or which is substandard under any of the Uniform Building Codes specified in Chapter 15.04 of this Code. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.050 - Change of use. 
A.  A nonconforming use which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same or a more desirable nature may be substituted for another nonconforming use, provided, that in each case a conditional use permit is first secured in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
B.  Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.060 - Cessation of use. 
A.  Where the nonconforming use of a building or structure has ceased for six continuous months or more, such building or structure shall not again be put to a nonconforming use. 
B.  When a nonconforming use of land not involving any building or structures, except minor structures such as fences, signs and buildings less than four hundred square feet in area, has ceased for six continuous months or more, such land shall not again be put to a nonconforming use. 
C.  Any existing nonconforming use of land for the purpose of above-ground bulk storage and distribution of liquified petroleum gases as identified in NFPA 58 and Uniform Fire Code Article 82 ("LPG") is hereby determined to be incompatible with the surrounding land uses and incompatible with densely populated commercial areas. To eliminate such uses, an amortization period of two years is hereby established to run from June 6, 2011, during which period of time all nonconforming LPG bulk storage and distribution facilities located in the commercial zones of the City of Scotts Valley shall be removed. Bulk storage means storage tanks that exceed a two thousand gallon capacity. 
Any owner who is required to eliminate the nonconforming uses prohibited in this subsection and who believes the amortization period is not reasonable with respect to their specific nonconforming use may appeal directly to the city council. The appeal must be filed within one hundred twenty days of this section becoming effective. The appeal shall be in writing and shall include the number of years the appellant believes may be appropriate to amortize appellant's nonconforming use and competent and substantial evidence to support that time frame. The city council shall set a date to hear the appeal no sooner than ninety nor later than one hundred twenty days after the notice of appeal is filed. At the appeal hearing, the appellant shall present the evidence contained in its appeal to show how the two-year period established above is not reasonable when applied to the appellant's nonconforming use. As part of the appeal hearing, the city or any other interested party may also present evidence to assist the council in determining whether the amortization period should be extended. Following the hearing, the council may, by resolution, determine and provide for a longer amortization period if the council finds that the longer period is found justified based upon the evidence presented. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 16.131, § 1, 5-4-2011)  
17.48.070 - Restoration of damaged structures. 
Any nonconforming building damaged more than sixty percent of its then reasonable replacement value at the time of damage by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot or other calamity or act of God shall be restored or reconstructed and used, subject to and in conformance with all the regulations specified by this title, including but not limited to the regulations of the zoning district in which the building is located; but if less than sixty percent damaged, it may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided, that such reconstruction shall be started within six months of such happening and prosecuted to completion within one year of such happening. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.080 - Expansion of legal nonconforming uses and buildings or structures. 
A.  Nonconforming Use. A legal nonconforming use may only be expanded by securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 17.50.020 of this title. 
B.  Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. 
1.  A building permit may be issued for a building or structure which alters a legal nonconforming building or structure only after review by the community development director. An application (on a form approved by the community development director) for an alteration to a nonconforming building or structure shall be submitted to the planning department. The application shall include all information therein requested including, but not limited to, elevations, floor plan and a site plan showing the proposed location for the addition, the location of all relevant improvements existing on the site, and the location of adjacent public or private streets, roads, alleys, rights-of-way and the like. 
2.  Review of Application for Alteration of a Legal Nonconforming Building or Structure. The community development director shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all applications for a building permit, or refer an application to the planning commission for consideration. The community development director shall review each application for compliance with the provisions of this title to ensure that the additional area to be added to a nonconforming structure is in compliance with all established zoning requirements. If a structure is nonconforming due to insufficient onsite parking including compact parking spaces, the community development director will evaluate the potential for the addition to increase the parking demand for the structure or building and may refer the permit to the planning commission for action. If a parking lot is to be re-striped, the compact spaces should be revised to meet the 9'x16 foot size requirement, where feasible. The community development director may attach such conditions to approval of an application as the director deems appropriate, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, to secure compliance with the purpose and intent of the provisions of this section. For commercial or industrial structures, when additions to such structures are proposed, the parking for the added use shall be at the rates and sizes provided by the current standards subject to review by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Approval, Conditional Approval or Disapproval of Application for Increasing the Size of a Legal Nonconforming Structure or Building. The approval, conditional approval or disapproval of an application for a permit shall be set forth in writing by the director and shall specify in the case of approval that the application is in compliance with the provisions of this section and the conditions attached to the approval, if any, and shall specify the reasons for disapproval in the event the application is disapproved. A copy of the written decision shall forthwith be given to the applicant. The decision made by the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 16-113 § 6, 2002: Ord. 16.108 § 1, 1998: Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.48.090 - Lot line adjustments to parcels with legal nonconforming uses and/or structures, and/or substandard lot(s). 
A lot line adjustment may be processed for parcels which contain a legal nonconforming use and/or structure, and/or for a substandard lot(s), when the lot line adjustment (1) does not increase the nonconformity of the legal, nonconforming use and/or structure, (2) involves already developed, substandard lot(s) which do not conform with the applicable zoning, provided, the resultant lots are not increased in nonconformity, or (3) where the lot line adjustment is necessary to eliminate an existing legal nonconforming structure, provided, the resultant lots are not increased in nonconformity. At the discretion of the community development director, lot line adjustment applications affected by this section may be submitted to the planning commission for its consideration and recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. 16.116, § 3, 3-4-2004)  
Chapter 17.50 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES, REQUIRED PERMITS AND APPEALS 
 
17.50.010 - Variances. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the variance procedure is to allow variation from the strict application of the terms of this title. These variances may be allowed in order to prevent or lessen such practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning title as would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the regulations prescribed by this title. These difficulties or hardships may be caused by the size, shape or dimensions of a site, the location of existing structures thereon, or from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title to the contrary, variances may be granted to the application of any of the regulations of this title. Variances shall not be granted for the purpose of allowing a use not permitted in the zoning district. 
B.  Authority. The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to grant such variances from the provisions of this title as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the spirit of this title and the General Plan upon which it is based shall be observed and the public safety and welfare secured. 
C.  Application. 
1.  Application shall be made to the planning commission on a form prescribed for that purpose by the city. The application shall be filed with the planning department and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The description of the property involved and the street address, if any; 
c.  All details of the proposed construction or use of such property, including information as to special circumstances, necessity, desirability and effect upon neighboring property and inhabitants; 
d.  Evidence that the applicant is the owner or purchaser under contract of the property involved, is the owner of a leasehold interest, or has the written permission of the owner to make application; and 
e.  Such other information as may be required by the planning department. 
All plans, drawings, photos, reductions and other information that may be required shall be submitted to the planning department before the application is officially accepted as complete. A list of required information shall be available in the planning department or on the application form. 
2.  The filing fee shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
3.  All applications shall be reviewed by the planning department within thirty days after they are received to determine whether they can be officially accepted as complete. If they are not complete, the planning department staff shall notify the applicant what additional information is needed. 
D.  Public Hearing By Planning Commission. 
1.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of public hearing of the application shall be given pursuant to the requirements described in Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
2.  Public Hearing Procedure. The planning commission shall consider the application for the variance at a public hearing, to be held not later than forty days following the date the application is accepted as complete. The variance shall become effective upon the expiration of the "Time Limit on Notice of Appeal" as provided in Section 17.50.060 F unless an appeal has been filed with the City Council in accordance with procedure set forth in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
E.  Necessary Findings. The planning commission shall grant a variance only when all of the following findings are made: 
1.  A hardship peculiar to the property and not created by any act of the owner, exists; 
2.  That because of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances of subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the terms of this title is found to deprive subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications; 
3.  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of zoning objectives and will not be materially detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; 
4.  That the granting of such variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications. 
F.  Conditions. A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time or may be granted subject to such conditions as the planning commission may prescribe. In the event of a violation of any condition imposed on the variance, the planning department shall notify the property owner of such violation and shall give the owner a reasonable time within which to correct the violation. Failure of the owner to correct a violation within the time allowed shall be grounds for revocation of the variance. A variance applies only to the property for which it has been granted and may not be transferred to any other property. 
G.  New Application. 
1.  A variance shall lapse and become void two (2) years following the date on which the variance became effective unless by condition of variance, a greater time is allowed or unless prior to the expiration of the variance, a building permit is issued by the building inspector and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the application. Variances may be extended for an additional period of up to one (1) year, provided that prior to its expiration an application for extension is filed with the planning commission. The planning commission may grant or deny a request for extension, based on its judgment as to whether the reasons and justifications for extension are compelling and such extension will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. When granting a request for extension, the planning commission may add conditions or modify conditions of approval applied to the original application. 
2.  Following the denial of a variance application or the revocation of a variance, no application for the same or substantially the same request shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation of the variance, unless explicitly authorized by the planning commission or the denial or revocation is declared to be without prejudice to the filing of a new application within one year. 
H.  Revocation. 
1.  Any variance granted may be revoked by the planning commission after appropriate proceedings as herein provided upon a finding that any term or condition of the variance is not being satisfied. Such revocation may be initiated by the planning commission or by the planning director. The planning commission shall then set the matter for public hearing, giving notice thereof as prescribed in Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. At the time set for hearing, the commission shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the alleged violations and, upon conclusion of the hearing, shall on the basis of all the evidence and testimony submitted render its decision. The decision of the commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council. 
2.  If the variance revocation is appealed to the city council, the written findings of fact on the alleged violations shall be submitted to the council along with the planning commission decision, whereupon the city council shall set the matter for hearing within thirty days thereof, giving notice of the hearing as prescribed in Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the commission's recommendation and at the conclusion thereof may sustain, modify, reject or overrule, wholly or partly, any decision of the commission on revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
I.  Decision—Findings—Continuance of Hearing. Any decision hereunder by the planning commission or by the city council on appeal shall be in writing and shall be supported by adequate findings as required by law, and a copy of such decision and findings shall forthwith be provided to the applicant and/or appellant, as the case may be, following the conclusion of the hearing on the matter. Any hearing held hereunder may be continued from time to time as necessary, except as may otherwise be provided in this title. 
J.  Appeal. All decisions of the planning commission hereunder shall become final at the expiration of the "Time Limit on Notice of Appeal" as provided in Section 17.50.060 F unless an appeal is filed within this period of time with the city clerk. All such appeals shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 11, 1991; Ord. 16.84 § 4, 1992; Ord. No. 16-122, § 4, 5-3-2006)  
17.50.015 - Large family child care homes. 
No person shall operate a large family child care home without obtaining a large family child care home permit in compliance with the standards set forth within this subsection. 
1.  Any person seeking a large family child care home permit shall submit an application for such permit to the community development director, including a site plan, setting forth any such reasonable required information that the community development director shall request, on application forms created by the community development director that reflect the standards in subsection (4) and (5) of this section and encourage the applicant to hold an informational neighborhood meeting prior to the submittal of the application. The community development director shall process the permit as economically as possible, and fees charged for review shall not exceed the costs of the review and permit process. The community development director shall act on the application within forty-five days of the date it is deemed complete. If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the community development director may postpone decision on the application for up to sixty days from the date the application is deemed complete. 
2.  At least ten days prior to the date on which the community development director will make a decision on an application for a large family child care home, the community development director shall give notice of the proposed use by mail or delivery to all owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within a one hundred foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed large family child care home. 
3.  No hearing shall be held before a decision is made on the application, unless a hearing is requested by the applicant or other affected person. (For purposes of this subsection, "affected person" means a person who owns property or lives within a one hundred foot radius of the proposed large family child care home.) If a hearing is requested, it shall be conducted by the planning commission, and the community development director shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within a one hundred radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed large family child care home. 
4.  The community development director, planning commission or the city council shall grant a large family child care permit to the applicant upon finding that the proposed large family child care home: 
a.  Conforms with all applicable city restrictions and regulations on yards, building height, setback, and lot coverage standards in the zone in which the residence is located. Legally nonconforming structures and uses shall be deemed to conform for purposes of this finding. 
b.  Is either situated on a lot zoned for single family dwellings or meets a minimum standard of seventy-five square feet of outdoor activity space for each child. The outdoor area must be owned or leased by the applicant and cannot be shared with other property owners unless permission is granted by the joint owners. 
c.  Is not located within a five hundred foot radius of the exterior boundaries of any existing large family child care home or child care center. 
d.  Provides a least two parking spaces for customers during the family day care home's hours of operation, and provides parking for any employees of one off street parking space for employees who are not permanently residing at the house. The parking spaces shall be in a manner to be readily and safely utilized by the customer(s). The required parking spaces may be located on the street along the property frontage (off-site) or on the driveway (on-site). The following are examples of acceptable parking areas: 
1.  On street parking areas along the property frontage, 
2.  Guest parking spaces reserved for the use of the dwelling unit, or 
3.  A private driveway exclusively serving a single dwelling unit such as a single family home. 
e.  Complies with the following limitations when the dwelling unit is provided with a private driveway and/or garage: 
1.  If the driveway is specified as the parking area for the use of the large family child care home, the driveway shall remain clear and available for customer(s) during the hours of operation; the parking spaces shall not be used by the property owner or child care home operator or employees during the hours of operations, 
f.  Provides adequate access to the facility with minimal disruption to local traffic and circulation, including safe and adequate drop-off/pick-up areas, such as curb spaces and driveway areas that are of sufficient size and are located to avoid interference with traffic and to provides for the safety of children, 
g.  Seeks, by design and layout of the site and considerate operational plans, to avoid noise which may be a nuisance to neighbors, consistent with local noise ordinances implementing the noise element of the general plan and taking into consideration the noise levels generated by children. Site plans revisions may be required by the community development director to minimize noise impacts, such as location of outside play areas, height and location of fences, and similar measures. 
5.  As conditions of approval, the applicant shall be required to: 
a.  Comply with applicable building codes, 
b.  Comply with any standards promulgated by the State Fire Marshall pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 1597.46 of the California Health and Safety Code related to large family child care homes and dwelling units, and submit a letter from the fire district approving the safety of the structure for use as a large family child care home pursuant to these standards, 
c.  Be licensed or deemed to be exempt from licensor by the State of California for a large family child care home. 
d.  Comply with any conditions imposed by the community development director deemed necessary to satisfy the requirements of subsection (4) of this section. 
6.  The applicant or other affected person may appeal the decision. The procedures for appealing the decision shall be that the applicant or affected party must submit a written appeal to the community development director within fourteen calendar days of the decision. The appellant shall pay the cost of the appeal. 
7.  A large family child care home permit shall expire if the use is not in operation for a period of one year. 
8.  Large family child care home permits may, with thirty days notice, be revoked by the community development director if there are any violations to the permit issued. 
9.  Large family child care homes that are licensed by the state at the time this ordinance is codified will have six months from the date of codification to register with the city as an existing non conforming use. There will be no fee for registering. 
(Ord. 16.124, § 1, 9-19-2007)  
17.50.020 - Conditional use permits. 
A.  Purpose. Use permits may be revocable, conditional or valid for a term and may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. Due to their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located properly with respect to the objectives of the zoning ordinance and with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve these purposes and provide the district use regulations the necessary flexibility, the planning commission is empowered to grant and to deny applications for use permits and to impose such reasonable conditions in connection with a use permit as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title. The planning commission may require in connection therewith guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be satisfied. 
B.  Application. 
1.  Application shall be made to the planning commission on a form prescribed for that purpose by the city. The application shall be filed with the planning department and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The description of the property involved and the street address, if any; assessor's parcel numbers shall suffice for purposes of this section unless only a portion of the parcel is intended for use; in such event, a metes and bounds description of the area proposed to be developed will be required; 
c.  An indication of the precise interest of the applicant in the property; 
d.  Plans and elevations necessary to show the detail of the proposed use or building; and 
e.  Such other information as may be required by the planning department. 
All plans, drawings, photos, reductions and other information that may be required shall be submitted to the planning department before the application is officially accepted as complete. A list of required information shall be available in the planning department or on the application form. 
2.  The filing fee shall be as set by resolution of the city council. 
3.  All applications shall be reviewed by the planning department within thirty days after they are received to determine whether they can be officially accepted as complete. If they are not complete, the planning department staff shall notify the applicant what additional information is needed. 
C.  Public Hearing by Planning Commission. 
1.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of public hearing of the application shall be given pursuant to the requirements described in Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
2.  Public Hearing Procedure. The planning commission shall consider the application for a conditional use permit at a public hearing, to be held not later than forty days following the date the application is accepted as complete. The conditional use permit shall become effective upon the expiration of the "Time Limit on Notice of Appeal" as provided in Section 17.50.060 F unless an appeal has been filed with the city council in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
D.  Necessary Findings. The planning commission may grant an application for a use permit as applied for or in modified form, if on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed location of the conditional use is in accordance with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the site is located. 
2.  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use or building will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
E.  Transferability. A use permit shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which is the subject of the use permit unless a shorter time is allowed by condition of approval, the use permit shall be valid for one year after the use has ceased. 
F.  New Application. 
1.  A use permit approval shall become void one year following the date on which the use permit became effective unless, by condition of the use permit, a great time is allowed or unless, prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued by the building inspector and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the use permit application. Use Permit approval may be extended for an additional period of up to one year, provided that prior to its expiration one year from the effective date, an application for extension is filed with the planning commission. The planning commission may grant or deny a request for extension, based on its judgment as to whether the reasons and justifications for extension are compelling and such extension will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. When granting a request for extension, the planning commission may add conditions or modify conditions of approval applied to the original application. 
2.  Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the same use on the site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit, unless explicitly authorized by the planning commission, or denial or revocation of the use permit is declared to be without prejudice to the filing of a new application within one year. 
G.  Revocation. 
1.  Any use permit granted may be revoked by the planning commission after appropriate proceedings as provided herein upon a finding that any term or condition of the use permit is not being met. Such revocation may be initiated by the planning commission or by the planning director. The planning commission shall then set the matter for public hearing, giving notice thereof as prescribed in Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. At the time set for hearing, the commission shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the alleged violations and, upon conclusion of the hearing, shall on the basis of all evidence and testimony submitted render its decision. The decision of the commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council. 
2.  If the revocation is appealed to the city council, written findings of fact on the alleged violations shall be submitted to the city council along with the planning commission decision, whereupon the city council shall set the matter for hearing within thirty days thereof. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the commission's decision and at the conclusion thereof may sustain, modify, reject or overrule, wholly or partly, any decision of the commission on revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
H.  Decision—Findings—Continuance of Hearing. Any decision hereunder by the planning commission or by the city council on appeal shall be in writing and shall be supported by adequate findings as required by law, and a copy of such decision and findings shall forthwith be provided to the applicant and/or appellant, as the case may be, following the conclusion of the hearing on the matter. Any hearing held hereunder may be continued from time to time as necessary, except as may otherwise be provided in this title. 
I.  Appeal. All decisions of the planning commission hereunder shall become final at the expiration of the "Time Limit on Notice of Appeal" as provided in Section 17.50.060 F unless an appeal is filed within this period of time with the city clerk. All such appeals shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 12, 1991; Ord. 16.84 § 5, 1992; Ord. No. 16-122, §§ 5, 6, 5-3-2006)  
17.50.030 - Design review procedures. 
A.  Authority and Purpose. 
1.  A design review process is established to carry out the objectives of the city's general plan and related zoning ordinances and to ensure that permits for construction as set out hereinafter will be carried out in a manner which is not detrimental to the surrounding uses and is consistent with the overall planning goals of the city. Any reference in this code to the "design review board" shall, in accordance with Section 2.16.050, be a reference to the planning commission. 
2.  The following required permits shall not be issued for the following uses until design review approval has been obtained: 
a.  Uses requiring design review approval in the zoning district regulations; 
b.  All permanent signs as required in the zoning district regulations and as required in Chapter 17.56 of this title; 
c.  Any other project referred to the design review process by the planning director. 
B.  Applications. 
1.  Application for design review approval shall be made on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city and shall be filed with the planning department, accompanied by the filing fee referenced below. 
2.  The application shall be accompanied by such maps, colors to be used, material board, location and types of all signs to be placed on the buildings, site plans, all elevations and other drawings as are necessary to enable the planning commission to make the determinations as set forth herein. 
3.  The filing fee for an application shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall submit the following drawings, as appropriate, along with the application for review: 
1.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of structures and other improvements, including, where appropriate, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, landscaped areas, fences and walls. The site plans shall indicate the locations of entrances and exits, the direction of traffic flow in and out of off-street parking and loading areas, the location of each parking space and each loading area, critical dimensions and the type of trash enclosure to be used; 
2.  Architectural drawings drawn to scale showing all elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear upon completion. All exterior surface materials and their colors shall be specified and the size, locations, material, colors and illumination of all signs shall be indicated; 
3.  A landscape plan for the site of a structure of use showing the locations of existing trees proposed to be retained on the site, the location and design of landscaped areas and the varieties of plant materials to be planted and all other landscape features. 
D.  Standards for Review. All design review manuals approved or adopted by the council as city policy shall be used by the planning commission as a guideline for review of applications before it. A list of these manuals shall be kept on file in the office of the planning department. The manuals are intended to help the applicant become aware of the issues that the planning commission considers important in the design of a project. In implementing the purposes of these manuals, the planning commission shall consider in each specific case any or all of the following items as may be appropriate: 
1.  The siting of any structure on the property as compared to the siting of other structures in the immediate neighborhood; 
2.  Materials, colors, proportion, mass and detail. All structures shall be in good proportion, have simplicity of mass and detail and be compatible in appearance with surrounding structures. There shall be an appropriate use of materials; colors shall be appropriate within the context of use and should blend with surrounding structures; 
3.  The size, location, design, color, number, lighting and materials of all signs and outdoor advertising structures. No sign shall be approved in excess of the maximum limits set by this title, but the size or number of signs in any area subject to design control may be reduced below this maximum number or limit; 
4.  Landscaping and Irrigation. Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be required on the site. Landscaping shall be in keeping with the character or design of the building. Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible; 
5.  The size, location and arrangement of on-site parking and paved areas; 
6.  Ingress, Egress and Internal Traffic Circulation. All the above factors shall be related to the setting or established character of the neighborhood or surrounding area. 
7.  Height and access to sunlight, setbacks, landscaping and use of materials for articulation and visual relief for fences and walls over eight feet tall or fences over three feet tall in front yards when across from Hwy. 17. 
8.  Arbors in front yards, over twenty square feet in roof area or between eight and ten feet in height: the design compatibility with the main structure and structures in the neighborhood, the mass and scale of the arbor, line of sight visibility for pedestrians and motorists in addition to other applicable standards of this section. 
E.  Required Findings. The planning commission shall determine from data submitted whether the proposed building, structure or other improvement will meet the design standards prescribed in this section and in this title. The application may be disapproved, may be approved as submitted or may be conditionally approved. The approval shall be noted by an endorsement of the planning department on the submitted plans as approved. 
F.  Expiration. Design approval shall lapse and become null and void two years following the effective of the design review permit date unless by a condition of the design permit, a greater time is allowed or unless a building permit is issued by the building division and construction is commended and diligently pursued toward completion. Design approval may be extended for an additional period of up to one year, provided that prior to its expiration, an application for renewal is filed with the planning commission. In case of an application that requires approval of the city council, planning commission approval shall expire at the same time the city council approval expires. The planning commission may grant or deny a request for renewal, based on its judgment as to whether the reasons and justifications for renewal are compelling. When granting a request for renewal, the planning commission may add conditions or modify conditions of approval applied to the original application. 
G.  Appeals. Appeal from the determination by the planning commission shall be to the city council in accordance with the procedures and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.79 § 1, 1990; Ord. 16.82 § 13, 1991; Ord. 16.87 § 3 (part), 1993; Ord. 30.9 § 2, 1996; Ord. 16-112 § 11, 2000; Ord. No. 16-122, § 7, 5-3-2006)  
17.50.040 - Home occupations. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide opportunities for limited commercial and business activities within residential neighborhoods, provided the activities are compatible with, and do not detract from the peace, quiet, character, and quality of the city's residential areas. 
Home occupations shall require a business license secured from the city and are allowed in any residential premises or dwelling in any residentially zoned district subject to the following regulations: 
A.  No premises shall be used for a home occupation unless the user has a business license for a home occupation; 
B.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a residential premises or dwelling; 
C.  No one other than a resident of the residential premises or dwelling shall be regularly employed in the conduct of a home occupation; 
D.  The equipment, materials, machinery or mechanical devices used shall have no discernible impact on the adjacent properties; 
E.  The conduct of the home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic in the vicinity of the residential premises or dwelling in excess of the amount created by nearly residential properties; 
F.  There shall be no use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials or supplies to or from the premises other than usual parcel deliveries and no deliveries or customer visits between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m.; 
G.  There shall be no operation of the home occupation or storage of materials or supplies, indoors or outdoors, in a manner which is visible from adjacent properties, walkways or streets; 
H.  No advertising signs or devices other than a name plate may be displayed and the name plate shall not exceed one square foot in area and must be affixed to the residential premises or dwelling; 
I.  No more than one business vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of more than one ton shall be kept outside the garage at the residential premises or dwelling. All parking shall be in conformance with the city's off-street parking regulations and semi-tractor trailers are strictly prohibited; 
J.  No home occupation shall alter the residential character of any portion of the property; 
K.  No home occupation shall be permitted which has a building/fire code rating of B2 or greater or which requires a hazardous materials permit; and 
L.  Any home occupation must conform to the commercial/industrial standards contained in Section 17.44.020 of this title including Section 17.44.020(C)(3) relating to noise standards. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 16.90 § 1, 1994)  
17.50.050 - Special Permits Issued by Community Development Director. 
A.  Authority and Purpose. 
1.  A special permit process is established to carry out the objectives of the city's general plan and related zoning ordinances and to ensure that permits for construction as set out hereinafter will be carried out in a manner which is not detrimental to surrounding uses, site improvements, safety and is consistent with the overall planning goals of the city. The purpose of the special permit process is to allow for small projects to be reviewed for conformity with the zoning ordinance with appropriate review and consideration under the direction of the community development director or their designee. 
2.  The following uses or construction are subject to approval of a special permit prior to installation: 
a.  Fences taller than three feet, but no taller than six feet, or retaining walls taller than three feet within the front yard setback of a residentially zoned parcel subject to meeting one or more of the following eligibility criteria: 
1.  The site conditions warrant use of a taller fence or retaining wall due to slope conditions which require erosion control or stabilization, or for vehicular access; 
2.  The site has an unusual shape or size or where the site conditions warrant use of the front yard for the exclusive personal use of the occupants where no other yard space is available for such use; 
3.  The site is located in an area of excessive noise which deprives the occupants of the use of the site in a manner enjoyed by other properties in the neighborhood (such as from commercial uses and Hwy. 17); 
B.  Applications and Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Application for special permit review shall be made on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city and shall be filed with the planning department, accompanied by the filing fee referenced below. 
2.  The application shall be accompanied by such maps, site plans, colors and materials, elevations, landscape plans, and other drawings, reports or environmental information required or necessary to enable the community development director to make the determinations as set forth herein. The application form provided by the planning department shall provide a list of submittal requirements. 
3.  The filing fee for an application shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Application Processing Procedures and Notice. 
1.  The application shall be subject to review by the planning department to determine if the application is complete. 
2.  Upon deeming the application complete, the planning department shall send a notice to the applicant, property owner, the owners of property located within a 100 foot radius of the property lines of the site and to all members of the planning commission. The notice shall indicate the date upon which the community development director will act on the permit and the intended action to be taken by the community development director. Such noticed shall be mailed, via first class mail, a minimum of 15 days prior to date that action is to be taken. 
D.  Standards for Review. All special permits shall be reviewed for consistency with the city's general plan and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. The community development director shall consider the standards for review as contained in Section 17.50.030 regarding design review that are applicable to the type of special permit being requested. 
E.  Development Standards. Each application for a special permit shall be reviewed for conformance with minimum special design standards applicable to the type of permit as specified below. 
1.  Fences and Retaining Walls: 
a.  The fence/wall shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the property line to provide space for landscaping between the fence/wall and the property line. 
b.  Use of chain link fencing shall be discouraged in areas except where it is not visible or where such fencing can be landscaped with evergreen vines; 
c.  The proposed fence/wall design incorporates architectural design features such as decorative wood patterns, landscaping, brick, stone and other materials or design elements to make the fence/wall attractive in appearance and less obtrusive; 
d.  The proposed fence/wall incorporates horizontal or vertical articulation features, which minimize any potential corridor or tunnel effect; 
e.  The propose fence/wall does not impact neighboring properties by significantly blocking access to sunlight. 
F.  Required Findings. The community development director shall determine from data submitted whether the proposed building, structure or other improvements will meet the standards for review prescribed in this section. The application may be disapproved, may be approved as submitted, conditionally approved or the community development director may refer the special permit request to the planning commission for consideration. The approval shall be noted by an endorsement of the planning department on the submitted plans as approved. The following findings shall be made by the community development director: 
a.  The standards for review provided in Section 17.50.030.D shall be met as applicable to the proposed special permit; 
b.  For fences and retaining walls over three feet in the front yard setback, the following additional findings shall be made: 
1.  The proposed fence or retaining wall shall be located in a manner to provide safe ingress and egress for the site and adjacent properties; 
2.  The effect of the proposed fence or retaining wall shall not be harmful to the character of the neighborhood; 
3.  The length and or location of the proposed fence or wall shall be harmonious with the character of the area; 
4.  The impact of the fence or wall is minimized by the presence of areas of unimproved right-of-way between the fence or wall and the improved right of way. 
c.  For retaining walls over three feet in the front yard setback, the following additional findings shall be made: 
1.  A series of retaining walls may be allowed where the exposed portion of any retaining wall does not exceed three feet in height; 
2.  Between each retaining wall, landscaping shall be provided to soften the appearance of the height of the retaining wall. 
G.  Lapse of Special Permit Approval. Special Permit approval shall lapse and become null and void from the period of time granted on the permit as determined by the community development director unless prior to expiration of said period, a building permit is issued and construction has commenced and is diligently pursued toward completion. If a building permit is not required, construction shall be commenced and diligently pursued toward completion. An extension of an additional period of up to one year may be granted by the community development director, provided that prior to its expiration, an application for renewal is filed with the planning department. The community development director may grant or deny a request for renewal, based on their judgment as to whether the reasons and justifications for renewal are compelling. When granting a request for renewal, the community development director may add conditions or modify conditions of approval applied to the original application. 
H.  Appeals. Appeal from the determination by the community development director shall be to the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16.118, § 2, 2-2-05)  
17.50.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeals to Planning Commission. An appeal may be taken to the planning commission by the applicant or any interested person from the whole or any portion of an administrative determination or decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Appeals to City Council. An appeal may be taken to the city council by the applicant or any interested person from the whole or any portion of a decision made by the planning commission, design review board, committee or commission, officer or board of the city authorized to enforce or administer this title, pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter, excluding tree removal permits. 
C.  Notice of Appeal—Filing Fee. All appeals under this chapter shall be made by filing a notice of appeal clearly identifying the determination or decision from which the appeal is taken and stating the grounds for the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the payment of a filing fee in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Filing Notice of Appeal. 
1.  The notice of an appeal to the planning commission shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. 
2.  The notice of an appeal to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk. 
E.  [Reserved.] 
F.  Time Limit on Notice of Appeal. The appellant shall file the notice of appeal and pay the filing fee thereon with fourteen calendar days after the date of the decision. 
G.  Effect of Filing Notice of Appeal. The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the issuance of any permit, variance, or other entitlement provided by the terms of Title 17, as well as the effectiveness of the determination or act appealed, until such time as the matter is determined on appeal. 
H.  Review by Planning Commission. 
1.  Scheduling of Hearing; Notice. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal and payment of the filing fee, the secretary of the planning commission shall schedule the matter for hearing at the next available regular meeting of the planning commission to be held within thirty calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is filed and the fee paid. The secretary of the planning commission shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the appellant, and to the applicant if other than the appellant, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, unless such notice is waived by the party entitled to receive the same. If a public hearing is conducted on the appeal, notice shall be given in accordance with Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
2.  Conduct of Hearing by Planning Commission. The planning commission shall conduct a de novo review on the appeal. No public hearing shall be required unless the administrative determination or decision was made in connection with a proceeding which required a public hearing; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent the planning commission, in its sole discretion, from receiving testimony or other evidence from any person pertaining to the subject matter of the appeal at the time the hearing is held. 
3.  Decision by Planning Commission. The planning commission may affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part the determination or decision which is the subject of the appeal, and may refer the matter back to the original maker of the determination or decision for such further action as may be directed by the commission. Where an appeal has been filed pertaining to only a portion of a determination or decision, the planning commission shall have authority to review the entire matter and may affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part the determination or decision which is the subject of the appeal, and may refer the matter back to the original maker of the determination or decision for such further action as may be directed by the commission. The decision of the planning commission shall be rendered by the planning commission not later than the second regularly scheduled meeting after the hearing commenced, unless by mutual agreement of the planning commission and applicant the period of time for rendering a decision is extended. The decision of the planning commission shall be in writing and shall be supported by adequate findings. The planning commission shall forthwith transmit a copy of the decision to the applicant and appellant. 
I.  Review by City Council. 
1.  Schedule of Hearing; Notice. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal and payment of the filing fee, the city clerk shall schedule the matter for hearing at the next available regular meeting of the city council to be held within thirty calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is filed. The city clerk shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the appellant, and to the applicant if other than the appellant, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, unless such notice is waived by the party entitled to receive the same. If a public hearing is conducted on the appeal, notice shall be given in accordance with Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
2.  Conduct of Hearing by City Council. The city council shall conduct a de novo review on the appeal. No public hearing shall be required unless the decision by the planning commission was made in connection with a proceeding which required a public hearing; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent the city council, in its sole discretion, from receiving testimony or other evidence from any person pertaining to the subject matter of the appeal at the time the hearing is held. 
3.  Decision by City Council. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the planning commission, and may refer the matter back to the planning commission for such further action as may be directed by the council. Where an appeal has been filed pertaining to only a portion of a decision by the planning commission, the city council shall have authority to review the entire matter and may affirm, reverse or modify all or any other portion of the decision notwithstanding the fact that no appeal has been taken therefrom. The city council shall forthwith transmit a copy of its decision to the applicant, the appellant and the body whose action is appealed. The decision of the city council shall be in writing, shall be supported by adequate findings and shall be final. 
J.  Hearing on Appeal. The city council shall have the power to continue any hearing on an appeal from time to time; provided, however, that a decision shall be rendered by the city council not later than their second regularly scheduled meeting after the hearing commenced, unless by mutual agreement of the city council and the applicant the period of time for rendering a decision is extended. When the period of time is extended, the decision of the council shall be rendered not later than the end of the extension period. In any event, upon rendering a decision, written notice thereof shall forthwith be given to the appellant and to the applicant, if different from the appellant. 
(Ord. 16.82 § 7, 1991; Ord. 16.84 § 6, 1992; Ord. 16.123, §§ 55—57, 9-5-2007)  
17.50.070 - Notice of hearing on appeal— Generally. 
Except as to those specified in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter or any other provision of this title, notice of any hearing on appeal under this title shall be given in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.50.080 - Special consideration of appealable actions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, all acts or determinations which are appealable, as referenced in Section 17.50.060A and B, to the city council shall be considered and acted on by the city council upon the request of any member of the city council, provided, that such a request, outlining the reasons why such special consideration of the matter is appropriate, is filed in writing with the city clerk within the time period provided for filing an appeal as specified in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. Without in any way limiting the foregoing, the provisions of Section 17.50.060 of this chapter relating to the processing and disposition of an appeal, including, without limitation, notification and the time period for rendering a decision, shall apply; provided, however, that no hearing shall be held on the sufficiency of the request. The council member requesting such special consideration shall not be considered an appellant, shall not have to pay any filing fee and shall be considered fully qualified to act on all such matters. The filing of any such request for special consideration shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit or variance provided by the terms of this title, as well as the effectiveness of the act or determination involved, until the matter is disposed of as provided in Section 17.50.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.50.090 - Notice of public hearing procedures—Mail or delivery. 
A.  Whenever any provision of this title requires notice of public hearing to be given in accordance with the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall cause notice thereof to be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to: 
1.  The owner of the subject real property (or the owner's duly authorized agent) and the project applicant. In the case of an appeal, in addition to the foregoing persons, notice shall also be given to the appellant and the commission, board, committee or officer whose act or determination is appealed; 
2.  Each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project whose ability to provide those facilities and services might be significantly affected; 
3.  Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city clerk. Any such request shall be renewed annually; 
4.  All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll, the records of the county assessor or tax collector which contain more recent information than the assessment roll may be utilized. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subdivision or subdivision 1 of this subsection, is more than one thousand, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, notice may be provided by one publication of a display advertisement of at least one eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing; 
5.  If the notice is mailed or delivered pursuant to subdivision 4 of this subsection, the notice shall also either: 
a.  Be published once in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing, or 
b.  Be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city, including one public place in the area affected by the proceeding. 
B.  The notice shall include the date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body or officer, a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing. 
C.  In addition to the notice required by this section, the city may give notice of the hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable. 
D.  The failure of any person or entity to receive notice given pursuant to this section shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which notice was given. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.50.100 - Notice of public hearing— Publication or posting. 
A.  Whenever any provision of this title requires notice of public hearing to be given in accordance with the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall cause notice thereof to be published once in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing, or if there is no such newspaper of general circulation, the notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city. 
B.  The notice shall include the information specified in subsection B of Section 17.50.090 of this chapter. 
C.  In addition to the notice required by this section, the city may give notice of the hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.50.110 - Authority of the city council. 
Upon hearing the appeal, the city council, as final appellate body, shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered and shall find whether, in its opinion, error was made. The city council may, within the terms of this title, affirm, reverse or modify the action appealed as it deems just and equitable and may exercise all rights of any other officer, commission, board or committee. The city council shall forthwith transmit a copy of its decision to the applicant, the appellant and the body whose action is appealed. The decision of the city council shall be in writing, shall be supported by adequate findings and shall be final. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.51 - GREEN BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
17.51.010 - Purpose and findings. 
The city finds that green building design, construction and operation can have a significant positive effect on energy and resource efficiency, waste and pollution generation, and the health and productivity of a building's occupants over the life of the building. The second purpose is to create healthy work and living environments increasing the productivity of workers and residents and visitors to the city by improving indoor air quality and lighting. 
The intent of this section is to help promote the environmental sustainability of natural resources and improvement of the interior environment by efficiently redirecting the use of recyclable materials away from landfills, by introducing recycled-content and materials created with a low embodied energy materials in construction, and by reducing the energy consumption needs of structures by making use of efficient construction methods. 
The city also finds that green design and construction decisions made by the city in the construction and remodeling of city buildings can result in significant cost savings to the city over the life of the buildings. The city also recognizes that it must lead by example in order to have the general populace follow suit and therefore commits itself to the practice of green building for all new and remodeling construction on city owned buildings and structures. 
The City of Scotts Valley finds that it is necessary to have some mandatory requirements in the Green Building Ordinance related to water. These mandatory requirements cannot be used to obtain the necessary green points needed to obtain a building permit. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007; Ord. 16.123.1, § 1, 10-1-2008)  
17.51.020 - Definitions. 
Addition: A new building or structure expansion that is physically connected to a previously existing building. 
Interior remodel: Change or alteration in only the interior of a building that does not increase its net square footage. 
New construction: A new building not physically connected to a previously existing building. 
Non-habitable residential structure: A building on a residential property that is not legally habitable, such as a garage or shed. 
Non-residential: Not meeting the definition of "residential". 
Residential: Single-family or multi-family residences, less than or equal to three stories (above grade) in height. 
Remodel: Change or alteration in a building that does not increase its net square footage. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
17.51.025 - Special water mitigation requirements. 
A.  All new construction and remodels over 500 square feet in the city limits of the City of Scotts Valley shall install only high efficiency fixtures as follows: 
1.  All new commercial construction shall install high efficiency fixtures and will be required to rough plumb dual piping to use recycled water when it becomes available in toilet fixtures and for landscaping. Connection to the recycled water system will be governed by the requirements in Chapter 17.47 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  All new residential construction shall install only high efficiency toilet fixtures. 
3.  All remodels over 500 square for residential, commercial and industrial buildings shall install high efficiency fixtures in the area being remodeled. 
(Ord. 16.123.1, § 2, 10-1-2008) 
_____ 
17.51.030 - Standards for compliance. 
Persons constructing a new building, adding to or substantially remodeling a building in the City of Scotts Valley shall participate in the Scotts Valley's Green Building Program. In order to obtain a building permit for any new building, addition or substantial remodel in excess of those exempted in Section 17.51.40, each project must include elements from the program checklist equal to or exceeding the following: 
Table 1: Non-Residential (Commercial) Actions and Point Requirements 
Total points possible 	75 
Action 	Points required to receive action: 
C-1. Receipt of Building Permit* 	7 
C-2. Green Building Award 	40 
 
*Exceptions: These points are not required for non-residential additions and remodels totaling less than one thousand square feet, or interior-only non-residential remodels of any size 
Table 2: Residential New Construction Actions and Point Requirement 
Total Points Available 	460 	
Action 	Points required to receive action: 
	First 500 Square Feet 	Each Additional 100 Square Feet or fraction thereof 
R-N-1. Receipt of building permit 	10 	1.5 
R-N-2. Green Building Award 	60 	3.5 
 
Table 3: Residential Remodel and Addition Action Point Requirements 
Total Points Available 	464 	
Action 	Points required to receive action: 
	First 500 Square Feet 	Each Additional 100 Square Feet or fraction thereof 
R-A/R-1. Receipt of building permit* 	5 	1.1 
R-A/R -3. Green Building Award 	35 	2.5 
 
*Exception: These points are not required for additions and/or remodels of less than five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007) 
_____ 
17.51.040 - Exceptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
• Additions and remodels of less than five hundred square feet of any dwelling structure. 
• Additions and remodels of less than one thousand square and interior remodels of any non-residential structure. 
• Equipment and non-structural modifications of any residential or non-residential structure. 
• Non-habitable residential structures of less than one thousand square feet. 
• General maintenance of any structure. 
• Historical structures where the historic fabric would be compromised. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
17.51.050 - Maintenance of document. 
From time to time, but not less than on a bi-annual basis, building and planning staff shall update the Green Building Program documentation and checklist to reflect advances in green building techniques and materials and to make necessary modifications in program implementation. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
17.51.060 - Method of compliance. 
The chief building official and/or the principal planner shall maintain the following documents for the public: 
•  City of Scotts Valley: Standards for Green Building Compliance 
•  New Home Green Points Check List for Residential Buildings 
•  New Building Green Points Check List for Non-Residential Buildings 
These documents shall be to aid in the design and certification of new residential and non-residential buildings and significant remodels and additions thereto. Every applicant of a building permit not exempted by [Section] 17.51.40 (Exemptions) above shall complete and submit the appropriate check list for their project as well along with the standard application documents. All compliance measures shall be clearly delineated on plan sets. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
17.51.070 - Exceptional design. 
Designers and builders employing exceptional design, construction practices and/or maintenance features may have their project modified from the strict interpretation of the program if in the opinion of the principal planner or building official such features exhibit at least a 20 percent increase in points over the minimum standards for a Green Building Award as outlined in [Section] 17.51.30 (Standards for compliance) above. Exceptional designs shall also be recognized by the city and eligible to receive a plaque that may be displayed on the structure. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
17.51.080 - Creation of green building educational resource fund. 
All permits issued by the City of Scotts Valley not exempt by Section 17.51.050, sub-trade permits, and permits issued in conjunction with a master permit shall be assessed a fee equal to .0025 times the overall valuation of the project. Revenues collected shall be maintained by the finance department in a revolving Green Building Education Fund and shall be used only for program management, public educational purposes such as publications and local seminars. 
(Ord. 16.123, § 58, 9-5-2007)  
Chapter 17.52 - AMENDMENTS 
 
17.52.010 - Generally. 
This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of any zoning district or by changing, amending or supplementing the regulations or any other provision hereof whenever it is in the interests of the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience or sound zoning practices to do so. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.52.020 - Initiation. 
A.  A change of zoning district designation may be initiated by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property within the area for which a change of zone is proposed, by filing a petition therefor. 
B.  A change of zoning district designation or a change or amendment of any of the regulations of this title may be initiated by resolution or motion of the planning commission or by action of the city council in the form of a request to the commission that it consider a proposed change or amendment. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.52.030 - Application for rezoning. 
A.  Petitions for changes of zoning district designation shall be filed with the planning commission upon such forms and accompanied by such maps, drawings and data as are determined necessary by the planning director to demonstrate that the proposed change of zone is in general conformance with the General Plan and that it is in the interest of the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience or sound zoning practices. Without limiting the foregoing, the applicant may be required to submit the following information: 
1.  Maps drawn at an appropriate scale showing the relationship of adjoining parcels to property to be rezoned; existing or proposed streets and surface drainage channels affecting the property to be rezoned; and existing zoning and/or land use in the area adjoining the property proposed to be rezoned; 
2.  Plans and elevations of any proposed construction; 
3.  Economic and population data with respect to the proposed rezoning. 
B.  Petitions filed by property owners or their designated agents shall be subject to and accompanied by a filing and investigation fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Requests by property owners (or their designated agents) that the planning commission or city council initiate rezoning proceedings shall not be subject to filing fee as provided above if the commission or council determines it shall initiate the proceedings. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.52.040 - Hearing and notice—Planning commission. 
A.  Upon the filing of such petition for a change of zone or upon the initiation of procedure for an amendment to the regulations of this title, the item shall be set for public hearing before the planning commission. 
B.  Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to the noticing requirements described in Section 17.50.090 of this title, if the proposed change, ordinance or amendment is one which changes property from one zone to another or affects the permitted uses of real property; otherwise notice shall be given pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.50.100 of this title. 
C.  The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing upon the matters referred to in such petition for a change of zone or such proposal to amend, change or supplement the regulations of this title. If from the facts presented at the public hearing or on investigation by the planning commission it is found that the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, general welfare or good zoning practice warrants the change of zone or regulations, the planning commission shall recommend such change to the city council. Within thirty days following the public hearing(s), the planning commission shall transmit its report in writing to the city council. The report shall include the recommendation(s) and the reasons therefor, and the relationship of the proposed ordinance, change or amendment to applicable general and specific plans. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1 (part), 1989)  
17.52.050 - Hearing and notice—City council. 
A.  The city council, upon receipt of each recommendation of the planning commission on an amendment or change of zone, shall set the same for public hearing at a subsequent meeting of the council and in no case later than forty-five days from the receipt by the city council of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
B.  Notice of the hearing shall be given in pursuant to the requirements described in Section 17.50.100 of this title. 
C.  The city council shall hold at least one public hearing upon the matters referred to in the petition for a change of zone or proposal to amend, change or supplement the regulations of this title. The city council may approve the recommendation of the planning commission or may modify or reject, wholly or partly, the recommendation of the planning commission. 
D.  If the city council proposes to adopt an amendment to this title in a form altered from said amendment as recommended by the commission and not previously considered by the commission, the council shall refer said matter back to the commission for report and recommendation before adoption. The commission need not hold a noticed public hearing on such referral of the item not previously considered by it. The failure of the commission to report within forty days after said referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change by the commission. 
E.  This title may be amended by the city council whenever it is in the interests of the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience or sound zoning practices to do so; provided, however, that in order to amend this title, the city council shall find that the proposal amendment is consistent with the General Plan. 
F.  In case an application for a rezoning initiated by a petition of a property owner(s) is denied, no new application for the same or substantially the same rezoning for the same or substantially the same property shall be filed for one year subsequent to such denial, unless explicitly authorized by the city council or the denial is declared to be without prejudice to the filing of a new petition within one year. 
G.  The determination by the city council shall be final and conclusive. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within ninety days after the receipt of a report and recommendation from the planning commission, or after the expiration of ninety days from the end of the period specified in subsection D of this section. Upon the consent of the planning commission, any petition for an amendment may be withdrawn upon the written application of a majority of all persons who signed such petition. The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, may by resolution abandon any proceedings for an amendment initiated by its own resolution or motion, provided, that such proceedings are before such body for consideration and provided that any hearing of which public notice has been given shall be held. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.52.060 - Conditional reclassification. 
A.  On any change of boundaries of a district or any change from one district classification to another where the change is initiated by petition filed by the owner or owners, such reclassification may be made subject to one or more conditions subsequent, on failure of any one of which the property shall automatically revert to the district classification from which it was changed. 
B.  Conditions permitted under the provisions of this section are as follows: 
1.  That one of the uses for which the property was reclassified shall be established; and/or 
2.  That a particular use represented by the applicant as being intended by him shall be established; and/or 
3.  That a particular use and/or structure or structures represented by the applicant as being intended by him shall be established and constructed, within a specified period of time and in accord with such plans as presented by the applicant in requesting the change of zoning granted, the nonhappening of which in such specified period of time would automatically reinstate the previous district classification existing prior to the change. 
C.  Where a change in zoning classification is granted under these provisions, notation thereof shall be made upon the zoning map by retaining the previous district classification in parentheses with any such other designations as will indicate the conditional nature of the reclassification. 
D.  When a condition of reclassification under this section imposes a time limit within which a particular use shall be established or construction of a particular structure or structures shall be commenced or completed or both, the city council shall have power, in cases of undue hardship, to grant a reasonable extension of such time limit; provided, that prior to the expiration of the original time limit or limits in question an application has been made to the city council for such extension. The city council shall have additional power to modify, waive or, with the consent of the owner of the property, to substitute conditions of reclassification at any time prior to the automatic reversion to the district classification which occurs on failure to comply with the conditions of approval. 
E.  The powers of the city council to extend time limits or to modify, waive or change condition are matters of grace only. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.54 - ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.54.010 - Administration, interpretation and enforcement. 
A.  All department officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, certificate or license for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. 
B.  The planning director and planning commission, with the assistance of the city attorney, shall be responsible for the administration, interpretation, enforcement and correction of violations of the provisions of this title, subject to the provisions of Section 17.54.060 of this chapter. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the building official to review each application for a building permit and to refuse to issue a permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure or the use of any building, land or premises, not in conformity with the provisions of this title. The issuance of a building permit shall not, however, stop the city from enforcing any of the provisions of this title, nor shall said building permit constitute a waiver of any provision of this title or any permit required under the provisions of Chapter 17.50 or any other chapter of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.54.020 - State law applicable. 
The provisions of this title shall be subordinate to and superseded by the controlling provisions of any applicable state law or laws in the event of conflict as said state law or laws presently exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.54.030 - Abatement of nuisance. 
Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council or upon the written request of the planning director or planning commission, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or using any such building or structure or using property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.54.040 - Enforcement. 
In addition to remedies provided by any other provisions of law, the planning director shall have the authority to implement the enforcement of the provisions of this title by any of the following means: 
A.  Serving notice requiring the correction of any violation of this title upon the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of the improvement, building, structure or land; 
B.  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; 
C.  Calling upon the chief of police and officers of the police department to assist in the enforcement of this title. 
In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this title. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
17.54.050 - Violations constituting misdemeanor or infraction offense—Penalties. 
A.  The violation of any provision contained in this Title 17 is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance subject to the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code, unless such violation is designated in subsection B of this section as an infraction offense. 
B.  The violation of any regulations contained in the following chapters and sections is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute an infraction and a public nuisance, subject to the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code: 
1.  Chapter 17.41 (Secondary dwelling units and guesthouses); 
2.  Section 17.44.030 (Off-street parking and loading requirements); 
3.  Section 17.44.080 (Tree protection regulations); 
4.  Chapter 17.56 (Sign regulations); 
5.  Section 17.44.150 (External antennae); 
6.  Section 17.46.040 (Private stables); 
7.  Section 17.46.050 (Height limits); 
8.  Section 17.46.080 (Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs); 
9.  Section 17.46.100 (Kennels and small animal hospitals); 
10.  Section 17 46.110 (Fences, walls and ornamental structures); 
11.  Section 17.46.140 (Temporary construction offices); 
12.  Section 17.46.160 (Construction standards); 
13.  Section 17.50.040 (Home occupations). 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989; Ord. 16.82 § 6, 1991; Ord. 16.115, § 21, 6-4-2003)  
17.54.060 - Severability. 
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed and adopted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases might be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 16.76 § 1(part), 1989)  
Chapter 17.56 - SIGNS 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose, objective and intent. 
This chapter provides standards for signs to safeguard life, health, property, safety, and public welfare, while encouraging compatibility, creativity, variety, and enhancement of the city's visual image. The specific purposes of sign regulation are to: 
A.  Provide each sign user an opportunity for effective identification by regulating the time, place, and manner under which signs may be displayed; 
B.  Enable users of goods and services to identify establishments offering services to meet their needs; 
C.  Ensure freedom of expression for all sign uses by maintaining a content-neutral approach to sign regulation; 
D.  Regulate the number and size of signs according to standards consistent with the purpose of each zoning district; 
E.  Protect residential districts adjoining nonresidential districts from adverse impacts of excessive numbers or sizes of signs nearby; 
F.  Encourage creative, well-designed signs that contribute in a positive way to the city's visual environment, and help maintain an image of quality for the city; 
G.  Ensure that signs are responsive to the aesthetics and character of their particular location (adjacent buildings and surrounding neighborhood) and that are compatible and integrated with the building's architectural design, including historic building elements, and with other signs on the property; and 
H.  Ensure the quality of the city's appearance by avoiding clutter and by subjecting certain signs to the design review process. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2(part), 1996; Ord. 16.129, § 1, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the terms set out below are defined to mean the following: 
"Approving authority" means that person or body (planning director, planning commission or city council) which has authority pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to approve an application for a sign permit. 
"Blank face" means a sign containing no graphics, wording, numerals, etc. 
"Building face" means the outer surface of a building or portion of building given to an individual business, including exposed foundation, windows, doors, parapet, fascia and wall area, but not including any overhanging fascia, canopy, marquee, awning, or roof surface. 
"Building frontage" means the width of the face of a building abutting the public right-of-way or primary pedestrian access. 
"Bulletin board" means a board, either in a free-standing kiosk or on a wall, on which temporary bulletins or notices are posted. 
"Business frontage (primary)" means the width of the face of a business abutting, or if not abutting, exposed to an abutting public right-of-way. In the case of multiple frontages abutting public rights-of-way, the longest frontage shall be considered the primary business frontage. 
"Business frontage (secondary)" means the width of the face of a business abutting a secondary street, freeway, parking lot, or pedestrian access. 
"Canopy" means a permanent, roof-like shelter extending from part or all of the building face and constructed of some durable material which may or may not project over a public right-of-way. 
"Commercial center" means a group of five or more contiguous businesses which utilizes common off-street parking and access and which exhibit a common architectural design. 
"Commercial sign" means a sign designed to advertise a product, or service or event. 
"Construction sign" means any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
Design review board. Any reference to design review board is a reference to and means the planning commission which is comprised of a group of five persons appointed by the city council, who serve at the city council's pleasure, to carry out the objectives of the zoning ordinance and to ensure that new uses and structures will not be detrimental to the appearance of the city. 
"Directional sign" means an incidental sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
"Freestanding or monument sign" means a sign not attached to a building or other structure, but which is attached to the ground and which exhibits sign graphics on one or two faces, which, if two faces shall be the same on both faces. 
"Height of a freestanding sign" means the distance from the average surface grade surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest element, including any structural element. Where a sign is placed on a mound, the height of the mound shall be included. 
"Highway" means State Highway 17. 
"Identification sign" means a permanent sign which identifies a building, occupant, or activity conducted on the premises. 
"Illegal sign" means a sign installed in violation of this chapter or installed without a permit. 
"Illumination (external)" means any light from a source outside a sign and which illuminates the sign by reflection. No directly or transparently exposed light source is included in this definition. Illumination shall be at the lowest level consistent with adequate identification and readability. 
"Illumination (internal)" means any light from a source contained within a sign and which is seen translucently through the face of the sign. No directly or transparently exposed light source is included in this definition. Illumination shall be at the lowest level consistent with adequate identification and readability. 
"Mural" means a picture or decoration which is painted on, or otherwise applied directly to an external wall and which does not nor is intended to convey the name of or information regarding any specific business or product. This does not preclude the mural being signed by the artist. 
"Neighborhood sign" means any sign which advertises, promotes, identifies, declares, or informs people living in a residential area of the activities, events or problems in that area. For example, garage sales, lost pets or real estate signs. 
"Noncommercial sign" means a sign designed to express a political, religious, or other ideological sentiment that does not advertise a product or service, and is also not an event sign. 
Nonconforming sign. See Section 17.56.190A. 
"Open house caravan day" means the day on which a periodic convoy of real estate brokers and agents tour the city to view new listings on the real estate market. 
"Pedestrian access (primary)" means the single doorway located and designed to be the major entry to a building. 
"Pedestrian access (secondary)" means doorways, other than the primary pedestrian access, for gaining entry to a building. 
Planned sign program. See Section 17.56.180B. 
"Planning director" means, when referred to in this chapter, the community development director of the city or a designated representative. 
"Political sign" means a sign associated with a candidate for elected office, political party, ballot measure or which makes a political statement. 
"Portable sign" means a sign not permanently affixed to the ground or a structure. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign attached to a building wall or structure but which protrudes out from the wall or structure at an angle, as opposed to being attached flush against the wall or structure. 
"Promotional sales sign" means a sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, to promote a special sale, or similar purpose. 
"Property frontage" means the linear dimension of a parcel of property abutting a public street. 
Public convenience sign. See Section 17.56.050. 
"Real estate sign" means a sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of property. See Sections 17.56.080C and F and 17.56.180H. 
"Roof eaves" means the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall. 
"School" means a public or private elementary, junior high school or high school. 
"Setback" means the distance measured from the improved right-of-way to the structure." 
"Sign" means a visual communications device used to convey information to the viewer and visible from a right-of-way. 
"Sign area" means the area of the background surface, and frame if present, on which the sign graphics are displayed. The area of a sign without a background surface, or where a significantly larger building element such as a wall or fascia serves as the background, shall be taken as the smallest three- or four-sided geometric figure enclosing the graphics. The area of a freestanding sign shall be taken as the area of only one face even though sign graphics are exhibited on both faces if both faces are identical and not more than twelve inches apart. 
"Sign copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign, but does not include color. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed at a building frontage. 
"Under-canopy sign" means a sign suspended from an overhead element such as a canopy, marquee or roof. 
"'V' sign" means a free-standing two-sided "v" shaped sign whose faces are not parallel and has one support in common for both faces and the apex of the "v" is pointed at the street from which the sign is intended to be seen. 
"Wall sign" means a sign attached to and flat against a building wall or structure. 
"Window sign" means a sign located inside a building in a window and visible from the nearest pedestrian or vehicle right-of-way outside the building. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16.100 § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 16.121, § 1, 9-21-2005; Ord. 16.129, § 2, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.030 - Scope. 
By adopting this chapter the city intends to regulate signs on the basis of location, relationship to land uses, illumination, motion, size, height, orientation, separation, safety of physical structures, and the public need for functional information. It is the intent of this chapter to minimize visual clutter, and enhance traffic safety by ensuring that signage does not distract, obstruct or otherwise impede traffic circulation. Proper sign control also safeguards and preserves the health, property and public welfare by prohibiting, regulating and controlling the structural design, location and maintenance of signs. It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner, that is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs. 
This chapter is not intended to regulate official traffic or government signs; product displays or dispensers or point of purchase displays or any display or construction not defined as a sign; signs not intended to be seen from the public or private right-of-way; window displays; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of any nation; gravestones; barber poles; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; murals. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16.129, § 3, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.040 - Street addresses. 
All commercial and industrial structures shall display a street address in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. The street address may alternatively be on an approved sign obviously associated with the structure(s). The numbers and letters shall not be less than six inches in height nor larger than eighteen inches in height. The street address sign area shall not be counted when calculating permitted sign area. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.050 - Public convenience signs. 
A.  Signs which serve the public safety or convenience, such as entrance, exit, parking, no parking, no trespassing, office, manager, street address, bulletin boards, map boards, instructional and directional signs, and civic and cultural promotion signs, may be allowed in any zoning district of the city. 
B.  Public convenience signs may be wall signs, freestanding signs or monument signs and may be of any size, number and illumination determined by the approving authority to be necessary and adequate to their intended purpose. Minimum setback for freestanding signs shall be five feet. Such signs shall be in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act as described in the current edition of the California Building Code. 
C.  Public convenience signs six square feet or less in area and not illuminated may be approved by the planning director. Signs larger than six square feet or illuminated shall require approval by the design review board; however, public hearing notices in excess of six square feet may be approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. No. 16.121, § 2, 9-21-2005; Ord. 16.129, § 4, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.060 - Construction and maintenance. 
A.  Construction/Installation. All signs shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the applicable building codes as amended and applied by the city, using accepted engineering and building practices. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Every sign, including but not limited to those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition at all times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts required to maintain the sign's original condition. 
2.  Any sign which advertises a business, commodity, service, entertainment, activity or event which has ceased to operate for a period of thirty consecutive days, or is located on property which has been vacant and unoccupied for a period of thirty consecutive days shall be removed; however, a blank face can be substituted to avoid removal. 
3.  Landscaped areas surrounding signs shall be maintained in a healthy condition by the owner and kept free and clear of all debris. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.070 - Prohibited signs. 
Permits will not be issued for: 
A.  Signs placed on, affixed to, or erected on or over public property, public or private rights-of-way, or public waterways, unless it is: 
1.  Erected by the city public works department in the interests of public, health, safety or welfare; or 
2.  Located within the non-paved outside edge of a public right of way, or behind any existing curb or sidewalk along the property frontage, subject to obtaining an encroachment permit from the Public Works Director. 
B.  Signs which can create hazards or dangerous distractions to motorists or pedestrians by the direction or reflection of light or by the sign's movement, such as signs with blinking or flashing lights; or where the source of light is directly is directly visible; or where the signs rotate or are mechanically driven; 
C.  Signs located near an intersection that may obstruct the visual lines of sight for drivers of motor vehicles (see Figure A); 
D.  Signs which may obstruct the free use of any otherwise required exit, entrance, window vent, emergency access, fire lane or standpipe; 
E.  Illuminated signs of nonresidential uses facing directly on and immediately adjacent to residential property. 
F.  Signs facing the freeway, except for signs that identify the property tenant or that advertise the property as for sale or lease; 
G.  Signs which block the line of sight from the street facing the sign to the top of the roof (see Figure B); 
H.  Any sign affixed to trees or fences; 
I.  Any sign that utilizes visible guy wires, angle irons, or iron frame structures, unless specifically approved by design review; 
J.  Any sign not in compliance with the size or specific use criteria of Section 17.56.180; 
K.  Any portable or readily moveable sign, except those signs allowed pursuant to Section 17.56.080; 
L.  Any other signs not specifically allowed by provisions of this chapter; however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any sign, notice or advertisement required by law. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16-113 § 2, 2002; Ord. No. 16.121, § 3, 9-21-2005) 
  
Figure A 
  
Figure B—Typical Height of Sign on Roofing Examples 
  
Figure B (cont'd.)—Typical Height of Sign on Roofing Examples  
17.56.080 - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs may be located in any zoning district in the city subject to this subsection 17.56.080. Temporary signs shall be exempt from the requirements of a sign permit application, review, approval and fees but must adhere to all other regulations of federal, state and local laws. 
A.  Temporary Noncommercial Signs: 
1.  Applicability. The following standards apply to temporary noncommercial signs located in any zoning district in the city. 
2.  Standards for temporary noncommercial signs. 
a.  Temporary noncommercial signs shall not exceed four and one-half square feet. 
b.  No sign shall exceed five feet in height measured from existing grade and shall not be located above the edge of the roof. 
c.  On Scotts Valley Drive south of Bethany Drive and on Mount Hermon Road, temporary noncommercial signs shall not be located in the public or private rights-of-way. On all other streets in the city, temporary noncommercial signs shall not be located on sidewalks, streets, medians or where the sign interferes with vehicular sight distance, and are only allowed on unimproved public or private rights-of-way with the adjacent property owner's consent. 
d.  Temporary noncommercial signs shall be removed no later than fifty days after installation of the temporary noncommercial sign. 
B.  Temporary Commercial Signs: 
1.  Applicability. The following standards apply to temporary commercial signs in the city. 
a.  Number and size allowed. Temporary commercial signs are allowed in addition to permanent signs allowed for the property. However, combinations of permanent and temporary window signs shall not cover more than twenty-five percent of any window. 
2.  Standards for temporary commercial signs. 
a.  Real estate signs used to advertise residential property, provided they are not illuminated, and do not exceed four and one-half square feet in area are permitted subject to the following standards: 
i.  One sign shall be allowed on the subject property. 
ii.  Up to four additional signs, which may also exhibit directional arrows and instructions, shall be allowed on weekends, holidays, and on the traditional "Open House Caravan Day" provided that on Scotts Valley Drive south of Bethany Drive and on Mount Hermon Road, the signs shall not be located in the public or private rights-of-way. On all other streets in the city, the signs shall not be located on sidewalks, streets, medians or where the sign interferes with vehicular sight distance, and are only allowed on unimproved public or private rights-of-way with the adjacent property owner's consent. 
iii.  Removal is required within thirty days of sale or lease. 
b.  Real estate signs used to advertise commercial or industrial property, provided they are not illuminated, are permitted subject to the following standards: 
i.  The sign shall be up to a maximum size of twenty square feet, a minimum set back of five feet from the property line and outside of the right of way, non-illuminated and, if freestanding, not more than twelve feet in height. 
ii.  Removal is required within thirty days of sale or lease. 
c.  Special or Community Event or Neighborhood Signs for Special or community event or neighborhood signs for events such as parades, garage, yard, sidewalk or parking lot sales, carnivals, exhibits, paper drives, blood drives or school activities shall be allowed to announce, identify, advertise or locate the events subject to the following standards: 
i.  Special or Community Event or Neighborhood signs shall not exceed four and one-half square feet in area, can be placed seven days prior to the beginning of the event, must be removed on the final day of the event, and cannot be illuminated. One sign may be located on the subject property with up to four additional signs on other private property with the permission of the owner. 
d.  One commercial, industrial or residential construction sign, either freestanding or wall mounted, which identifies a project under construction is permitted subject to the following standards: 
i.  The sign shall be up to a maximum size of twenty square feet, a minimum setback of five feet from the property line and outside of the public or private right-of-way, non-illuminated and, if freestanding, not more than twelve feet in height. 
ii.  Removal is required within thirty days of completion of the construction, sale or lease. 
iii.  The freestanding construction sign may be a "V" sign as long as the combined total area of both faces does not exceed twenty square feet. 
e.  Promotional Sales Signs are allowed in the commercial and industrial zoning districts subject to the following standards: 
i.  A promotional sales sign is permitted for a period of no more than sixty days total per year. No more than one sign at a time shall be allowed per activity or business. It shall be located on the building below the roof eaves. It shall be no larger than thirty square feet and at no time shall any portion of the sign be higher than twenty feet above ground level. The sign shall not exceed the length of the business frontage portion of the building, nor shall it block the ingress/egress to any of the business entrances. It shall be placed on the primary frontage of the commercial or industrial business which is the subject of the sign. The sign must be maintained in good condition. 
ii.  Searchlights and/or balloons greater than two feet (twenty-four inches) in diameter may only be used in conjunction with the promotional sales for a period not to exceed three consecutive days three times per year. All balloons must be securely tethered and shall not be released. 
3.  Placement of temporary commercial signs. Temporary commercial signs shall not be attached to temporary structures. 
4.  Illumination prohibited. Temporary commercial signs shall not be illuminated. 
5.  Durable materials required. Temporary commercial signs shall be constructed of durable, rigid material suitable to their location and purpose. Only interior window signs may be made of nonrigid (e.g., paper) material. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16-113 § 3, 2002; Ord. 16.129, § 5, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.100 - Sign permits required. 
No sign shall be placed, installed or altered without first obtaining a sign permit and otherwise complying with all other applicable provisions of federal, state and local law, except as exempt pursuant to Section 17.56.080. However, copy can be changed without a permit on existing legal signs using the same materials and where only the colors, typeface and/or style are changed. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16.129, § 6, 8-18-2010)  
17.56.110 - Permit application. 
To obtain a sign permit, the applicant shall first submit a permit application form (available in the office of the planning director located at City Hall), plans and/or specifications for the sign and the required fees to the planning director or his/her authorized representative. The application may be acted upon by the planning director if it is so specified in this chapter or if the site is subject to a planned sign program; otherwise the application shall be acted upon by the design review board. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.120 - Permit and appeal fees. 
A.  A permit or appeal fee shall be required as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Any sign erected by nonprofit and community interest organizations such as schools, churches, organized youth groups, service clubs and charitable organizations defined as tax exempt in the Internal Revenue Code, shall be exempt from payment of the required fees. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.130 - Sign permit review and appeal process. 
All sign permit applications, plans, specifications and other required material shall be submitted to the planning department for distribution and review. Review and approval will be as follows: 
A.  The planning director shall approve, approve with conditions, deny, or schedule the item for consideration by the design review board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable requirements of federal, state or local laws or regulations. 
B.  The design review board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable requirements of federal, state or local laws or regulations. 
C.  In the event an application is denied, written notice of the denial including the findings of the reviewing body and minutes of the meeting shall be provided to the applicant within fifteen working days after the decision is rendered. 
D.  Any decision may be appealed pursuant to Section 17.50.060 of this Code. 
E.  If, upon appeal, a sign permit is granted, modified or denied, the sign shall be constructed, modified or removed as directed by the body acting upon the appeal. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.140 - Effective date. 
All approved sign permits shall become effective upon expiration of the appeal period as defined in Section 17.50.060 of this Code. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.150 - Additional building permits and limitations. 
A.  In addition to the sign permit, other permits may be required, such as a mechanical and/or electrical permit. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain such additional permits, if required, from the planning director. 
B.  The issuance or granting of any permit or approval of plans and specifications such as a building permit or approval of architectural design is not a permit for any sign on that property. A separate permit must be obtained for any sign erected in the city. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.160 - Expiration of sign permit. 
Every sign permit approved under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one year from the date of such permit. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996)  
17.56.170 - Criteria for sign approval. 
A.  A sign shall be approved by either the planning director or the planning commission if it: 
1.  Serves to identify the business or the activity conducted on the property, or identifies the product or service offered thereon; and 
2.  Is located on the property, or within the contiguous right-of-way; and 
3.  Is harmonious with the materials, color, texture, size, shape, height, location and design of the building, landscaping, property and environment of which it is a part; and 
4.  Is in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Signs attached to buildings shall be incorporated into the architectural features of the building, considering the placement, style, proportions, materials and finish. 
C.  Freestanding signs shall be harmonious with the building and where appropriate shall include landscaping around the base of the sign, with such landscape area approved as part of the sign permit. Landscape plans shall include size, species, location and spacing of plant materials, method of separation between planter and adjacent area, and an irrigation plan for maintaining the landscape materials. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. No. 16.121, § 4, 9-21-2005)  
17.56.180 - Sign area and signs allowed for specific uses. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the maximum allowable sign area for signs located on a building shall be the larger of: 
1.  One square foot of sign per foot of width of front of building or front and street side elevations of building on corner lot; or 
2.  One-half square foot of sign per foot of property line adjoining street. 
B.  Planned sign program. 
1.  The intent of this section is to facilitate creation of thorough and integrated signing systems for three or more tenant developments, or for commercial property over one acre in size or with two hundred fifty linear feet or more of frontage. Additional, larger or different types of signs may be allowed where conditions warrant, and to encourage high quality sign designs which will enhance the character or value of the community. 
2.  Planned sign programs may be approved by the design review board. The design review board may increase the allowed maximum aggregate sign area up to fifty percent and include additional numbers and types of signs as it deems appropriate. 
3.  The planned sign program shall include a format for all signs to be used in the development, including their maximum size, colors, location, illumination details, mounting details and landscaping details (if any). 
4.  Unless otherwise provided in the approved planned sign program for a specific development, the planning director shall have the authority to approve permits for signs in conformance with the adopted planned sign program for that development. 
C.  Commercial center identification. 
1.  Each commercial center shall be allowed one freestanding identification sign in addition to commercial business signs allowed by the chapter. The maximum allowable sign area for the freestanding sign shall be forty square feet of sign area per acre or portion thereof, which may be used in any ratio for identification of center and/or the tenants; however, no sign shall exceed one hundred square feet in area or twelve feet in height unless the city council approves an exception which could allow signs up to two hundred square feet. Minimum setback for freestanding signs shall be five feet. Such signs may be internally or externally illuminated, but shall be restricted to identification of the name and address of the center and tenants unless approved by the planning commission as part of a planned sign program. Each commercial center shall comply with Section 17.56.040 regarding street addresses. 
2.  For commercial centers that have more than one entrance on a major thoroughfare, one sign for each entrance shall be allowed if the entrances are separated by at least three hundred feet. The maximum allowable sign area identified in Subsection C.1. of this section shall apply to each sign. 
D.  Commercial business identification signs. 
1.  One wall sign, projecting sign or under-canopy sign, shall be allowed to be located on the primary business frontage of each business, to identify that business. Businesses with secondary business frontage shall be allowed one additional wall sign on each secondary business frontage, unless such signs are prohibited pursuant to a planned sign program for a specific development. Identification signs on the primary and secondary business frontages may be externally illuminated with low level ground-mounted lights or internally illuminated. 
2.  For businesses not a part of a commercial center, a freestanding sign not to exceed twelve feet in height may be allowed. The allowable sign area for a freestanding sign shall be one-quarter square foot per linear foot of property line along the adjoining street plus two square feet per tenth of an acre. The longer of the two frontages may be used when a business is located on a corner lot at the intersection of public streets. The maximum allowable sign area for the freestanding sign shall be fifty square feet. Minimum setback for freestanding signs shall be five feet. 
3.  Additional identification signs may be allowed to identify a primary pedestrian access if it is not located on the primary business frontage or to identify a secondary pedestrian access or loading area, pursuant to a sign permit approved by the design review board. The number of additional identification signs shall be as determined by the design review board, the sign area of each shall not exceed five square feet and the signs may be wall signs, projecting signs or under-canopy signs. These additional signs may be externally or internally illuminated. 
E.  Gasoline service station price signs. For each business frontage, one freestanding sign not to exceed eight feet in height shall be allowed to indicate the prices and types of gasoline for sale. This information shall not be repeated in any other form on the same frontage. The sign area for each sign shall not exceed twenty square feet. The signs may be designed to use replaceable, interchangeable numerals and the replacement or rearrangement of the numerals shall not require review or approval. The signs may be externally illuminated with low level ground-mounted lighting or internally illuminated. 
F.  Theater marquee signs. A separate freestanding sign may be allowed on a parcel containing a facility for theatrical performances or movies. This freestanding sign may be up to fifty square feet in area plus an additional thirty square feet for each screen or stage. 
G.  Subdivision/apartment identification. 
1.  A residential development, such as a subdivision of single-family homes, townhouses or condominiums shall be allowed one freestanding sign or one wall- or fence-mounted sign to identify the development. Such sign shall not exceed twenty square feet in area or three feet in height for a freestanding sign or thirty square feet for a wall- or fence-mounted sign. Any proposed illumination shall be approved by the design review board. Minimum setback for freestanding signs shall be five feet. 
2.  Apartment identification. An apartment development shall be allowed one freestanding sign not to exceed three feet in height or one wall sign per property frontage plus one additional sign for each additional five hundred linear feet of property frontage. Each sign shall not exceed twenty square feet in area and shall be so designed to temporarily or permanently incorporate rental availability information. Rental availability information shall be restricted to identification of the manager's or agent's location and/or telephone number and the number of bedrooms. Rental or lease terms, apartment sizes and description of amenities shall not be included. Such signs may be externally illuminated. Minimum setback for freestanding signs shall be five feet. 
H.  Residential real estate development signs. Residential real estate signs announcing, locating, identifying or advertising a development of two or more residences shall have a maximum size, number of signs per frontage, setback and time of removal requirements as allowed by the design review board. The submittal package should include a complete signing program for model homes, identification, directional and any supplemental signs which will complement the character of the development, the neighborhood and the community. All signs shall be freestanding or wall-mounted and not illuminated. The signs shall not be more than twelve feet in height. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. No. 16.121, § 5, 9-21-2005; Ord. No. 16-127, § 1, 3-3-2010)  
17.56.190 - Enforcement. 
A.  Nonconforming signs. 
1.  Every sign in existence on September 19, 1995, and which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, is a legal nonconforming sign. A legal nonconforming sign shall comply with Subsection 17.56.060.B., and may be modified provided that the modifications do not increase the nonconformity, or do not create danger to public health, safety or welfare. 
2.  Every sign not lawfully in existence after September 19, 1995, and which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, is an illegal nonconforming sign. An illegal nonconforming sign must be removed or brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  [Reserved.] 
B.  Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction, punishable as set forth in SVMC Chapter 1.08. 
C.  Violations constitute public nuisance. In addition to the penalties otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of the chapter is a public nuisance. The city attorney, upon order of the city council, shall commence the necessary action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner prescribed by law in the courts which may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will accomplish such abatement and restraint. The remedies provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy or remedies or penalties provided in this title or other law or ordinance. 
D.  Notice of violation/removal. 
1.  No citation will be issued until the planning director has issued a notice of violation to the owner, agent or person having a beneficial interest in the building or the premises on which a prohibited sign or any other sign which violates any provision of this chapter is located. The person having a beneficial interest in the sign, the agent or the owner of the sign shall remove or alter the sign to comply with the provisions of this chapter within seventy-two hours of the date of the notice. The notice shall also state that if the sign is not removed or brought into compliance within seventy-two hours of the date of the notice, the planning director may cause it to be removed. 
2.  If the planning director causes the sign to be removed, the sign must be retained for fifteen days, during which the owner, agent or person having a beneficial interest may protest the action and reclaim the sign. At the expiration of fifteen days, any unclaimed sign shall be deemed abandoned and may be discarded. 
3.  The cost of removal, alteration and/or storage of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be paid by a permittee, sign owner, agent or person having a beneficial interest in the sign. The cost of removal and storage shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The cost of removal and storage or alteration shall become a debt owing the city for the collection of which the city may maintain a civil action in its name. 
4.  The planning director or his/her representative may summarily and without notice cause the removal of any sign which is an immediate safety threat to person or property. 
(Ord. 16.95 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 16.100 § 2, 1996; Ord. 16.121, § 6, 9-21-2005; Ord. 16.129, § 7, 8-18-2010)  
Chapter 17.60 - REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose and intent. 
In accordance with federal and state fair housing laws, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide reasonable accommodations in the city's zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request a modification or exception to the rules, standards, practices, and land use regulations, and policies for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a persons with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. 
A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter applies only to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Disabled person" means a person who has a medical, physical or mental condition that limits a major life activity, as those terms are defined in California Government Code section 12926, anyone who is regarded as having such a condition or anyone who has a record of having such a condition. It includes a person or persons, or an authorized representative of a disabled person. The term disabled person does not include a person who is currently using illegal substances, unless he or she has a separate disability (42 U.S.C. 3602(h)). 
"Fair housing laws" or "the Acts" means (1) the federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. § 3601 and following) and (2) the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Gov't. Code § 12955 and following), including amendments thereto. 
"Reasonable accommodation" means providing disabled persons flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. It may include such things as yard area modifications for ramps, handrail s or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened driveways, parking area or walkways; building additions for accessibility; tree removal; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable accommodation does not include an accommodation which would (1) impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city or (2) require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning program. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.030 - Review authority. 
A.  Community Development Director or Designee. The community development director or designee has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this chapter. The community development director or designee may refer the matter to the planning commission, at his or her discretion, when a reasonable accommodation request includes the following items, but not limited to: any encroachment into the setback areas, results in a building size increase above what is permitted in the applicable zoning district with respect to height, lot coverage, or whenever a reduction in required parking is requested. 
B.  Planning Commission. The planning commission has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this chapter, when referred by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.040 - Noticing. 
A public hearing is not required for a reasonable accommodation request reviewed and decided upon by the community development director. Upon deeming the application complete, the planning department shall send a notice to the applicant, property owner, the owners and tenants of property of the five parcels located closest to the subject property, and to all members of the planning commission. The notice shall indicate the date upon which the community development director will act on the permit and the intended action to be taken by the community development director. Such notices shall be mailed, via first class mail, a minimum of fifteen days prior to date that action is to be taken. Requests for reasonable accommodation subject to review and decision by the planning commission shall require a public hearing pursuant to the advance noticing requirements of Chapter 17.50 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.050 - Application and submittal requirements. 
A.  Application. The applicant shall submit a request for reasonable accommodation on a form provided by the City of Scotts Valley planning department. The application shall include the following information, and shall be filed with the planning department, accompanied by any required fee: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
3.  The name and address of the property owner, and the owner's written consent to the application; 
4.  The current use and/or activity of the property; 
5.  A description of the basis that the individual is considered disabled under the fair housing laws: identification and description of the disability which is the basis for the request for accommodation, including current, written medical certification and description of disability and any effects on the person 's medical, physical or mental limitations; 
6.  The policy, program, regulation or standard adopted by the City of Scotts Valley applicable to the request for accommodation, including the development standard or regulation from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; 
7.  A description of the specific accommodation request; 
8.  A description of the basis by which the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the affected disabled person(s); 
9.  Copies of plans, drawings, pictures, and/ other supporting data that provide sufficient information to render a decision (plans and drawings will be to standard scale); 
10.  Other reasonable requests for information requested by the city to facilitate the rendering of a decision, consistent with fair housing laws. 
B.  Review with other Related Applications. If the development, project or proposal for which the reasonable accommodation is being requested also requires some other discretionary approval (such as conditional use permit and/or design review), then the applicant shall submit the reasonable accommodation application for a determination by the community development director, at the same time with the other applications. 
C.  Required Fees. Any fee required for an application for reasonable accommodation shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.060 - Standards. 
The decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for reasonable accommodation shall be based on a finding of consistency within the meaning of this chapter and shall take into consideration all of the following factors: 
A.  Required Findings. 
1.  The housing or housing related facilities will be used by an individual with a disability under the Acts; 
2.  The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Act; 
3.  The requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
4.  The requested accommodation does not negatively affect the character of the zoning district and intent of adopted city, policies, regulations, programs or laws. 
B.  Development Standards and Conditions. 
1.  An approved request for reasonable accommodation is subject to the applicant's compliance with all other applicable zoning regulations. 
2.  An approved reasonable accommodation request under this chapter is considered a personal request for accommodation by the applicant and shall not run with the land. The reasonable accommodation shall terminate upon any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property. 
3.  Where appropriate, the applicable reviewing authority may condition its approval on any or all of following: 
a.  Periodic inspection of the location, as specified in the application, to verify continued compliance with the provisions of this section and any conditions of approval; 
b.  Prior to any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property, or at the time the need for the reasonable accommodation is no longer necessary, the owner of the property shall bring the property into conformance with the city's Zoning Code to the extent that relief was provided under the Zoning Code as part of the request for reasonable accommodation; 
c.  Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if it can be determined that the Applicant's reasons for approving the accommodation no longer exists; 
d.  Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists; 
e.  Methods, design considerations and features that reduce the impact on surrounding uses; 
f.  Methods, design considerations and features the preserve the integrity of the property and structures; 
g.  Other reasonable accommodations providing an equivalent level of benefit they will not result in an encroachment into required setbacks, permitted exceedance of height limits, lot coverage or floor area ratio requirements specified for the applicable zoning district; and, 
h.  Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of Scotts Valley residents. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.070 - Decisions. 
A.  Decision by Community Development Director. The community development director shall render a decision (or refer the matter to the planning commission) within thirty days after the planning department determines the application is complete, per application requirements set forth in Section 17.60.050.A. of this chapter. The application shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied, based on the findings set forth in Section 17.60.060. The city shall notify the applicant of the decision. The written decision shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the community development director's finding on the factors stated in Section 17.60.060. 
B.  Decision by Planning Commission. If the application for reasonable accommodation is referred to, or reviewed by, the planning commission, a decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application shall be decided at the scheduled public hearing, based on the findings set forth in Section 17.60.060. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
17.60.080 - Appeals. 
Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Section 17.50.060 (Appeals) of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-137, 7-15-2015)  
Chapter 17.62 - DENSITY BONUS 
 
17.62.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This density bonus ordinance is intended to provide incentives for the production of affordable housing, senior housing and the development of child care facilities. In offering these incentives, this chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the city's General Plan and to further implement and be subject to the requirements of state law (Government Code Sections 65302, 65913, and 65915—65918 et seq.). In the event that any provision in this chapter conflicts with state law, state law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms used in the section shall be defined as follows: 
"Affordable housing/affordable housing unit" means a housing unit which is available for sale to moderate income households or for rent to low and/or very low income households, as those terms are defined in this section. 
"Affordable rent" means a monthly rent charged to low and very low income households for housing units as calculated in accordance with Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Child care facility" means a facility that provides non-medical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four hours and is licensed by the California State Department of Social Services, further subject to the definition in California Government Code Section 65915(h)(4). 
"Condominium" means a form of housing tenure and other real property where a specified part of real estate, usually of an apartment house, is individually owned. Use of land access to common facilities in the piece such hallways, heating system, elevators, and exterior areas are executed under legal rights associated with the individual ownership. These rights are controlled by the association of owners that jointly represent ownership of the whole piece. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase for residential units over the otherwise allowed residential density under the applicable zoning and land use designation on the date an application is deemed complete. 
"Density bonus housing agreement" means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the city to ensure that continued affordability of the affordable housing units required by this chapter persists and the units are maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
"Density bonus units" means those additional residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Housing authority" means an appointed body of the City of Scotts Valley authorized to engage in or assist in the development or operation of affordable housing. 
"Housing development" means a development project for five or more residential units. Within this chapter, it shall also include a subdivision or common interest development, a project which rehabilitates and converts a commercial building to a residential use and a condominium conversion of an existing multi-family building. 
"Incentives or concessions" means regulatory concessions which include, but are not limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus. 
"Initial subsidy" means the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. (e.g., X (fair market value of the home to be purchased) - Y (the price the moderate income family paid for the home) + Z (amount of any down payment assistance) = Initial Subsidy). 
"Low income household" means a household whose income does not exceed eighty percent of the area median income for Santa Cruz County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Moderate income household" means a household whose gross income does not exceed 120 percent of the area median income for Santa Cruz County as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Sections 50079.5 and 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Proportionate share of appreciation" means the ratio of the local government's Initial Subsidy as defined above to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. (e.g. X (initial subsidy) /Y (fair market value) = Proportionate Share of Appreciation). 
"Senior citizen housing development" means a residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated or renovated, and having at least thirty-five dwelling units for senior citizens in compliance with the requirements of Section 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code, or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code. 
"Very low income household" means a household whose income does not exceed fifty percent of the area median income for Santa Cruz County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.030 - Types of bonuses and incentives allowed. 
A.  Very Low- and Low-Income Housing and Senior Citizen Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of at least twenty percent, but no more than thirty-five percent over the maximum residential density (except in the case of senior citizen housing, as provided below), provided that the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with one of the following criteria: 
1.  Very Low-Income Households: Five percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to very low-income households; or 
2.  Low-Income Households: Ten percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to low-income households; or 
3.  Senior Citizen Housing Development: For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus shall be twenty percent of the number of senior housing units provided. For "congregate senior housing facilities" (as defined in Section 17.44.100.B. of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code), refer to Section 17.44.100.C for specific density bonus provisions. 
B.  Moderate-Income Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of five percent over the maximum residential density if the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordable with all of the following criteria: 
1.  At least ten percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable ownership costs to moderate-income households; and 
2.  The housing development is common interest project as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code; and 
3.  All of the dwelling units in the housing development are offered for sale to the public. 
C.  Higher Density Bonus for Greater Contribution of Affordable Units. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus based upon the contribution of affordable units, may receive a higher amount of density bonus if the percentage of very low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units exceeds the base percentage established in subsection A. or B. of this section, as follows: 
1.  Very Low-Income Units. For each one percent increase above five percent in affordable units for very low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as specified in Table 17.62.030.C.1, below 
Table 17.62.030.C.1 Percent of Density Bonus For Greater Contribution of Very Low-Income Units 
Percentage of
Very Low-Income Units 	Percentage of
Density Bonus 
5% 	20% 
6% 	22.5% 
7% 	25% 
8% 	27.5% 
9% 	30% 
10% 	32.5% 
11% 	35% 
 
2.  Low-Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten percent in the affordable units for low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as specified in Table 17.62.030.C.2, below: 
Table 17.62.030.C.2 Percent of Density Bonus For Greater Contribution of Low-Income Units 
Percentage of
Low-Income Units 	Percentage of
Density Bonus 
10% 	20% 
11% 	21.5% 
12% 	23% 
13% 	24.5% 
14% 	26% 
15% 	27.5% 
16% 	29% 
17% 	30.5% 
18% 	32% 
19% 	33.5% 
20% 	35% 
 
3.  Moderate-Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten percent in affordable units offered for sale to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to maximum thirty-five percent, as specified in Table 17.62.030.C.3, below: 
Table 17.62.030.C.3 Percent of Density Bonus For Greater Contribution of Moderate-Income Units 
Percentage of
Moderate-Income Units 	Percentage of
Density Bonus 
10% 	5% 
11% 	6% 
12% 	7% 
13% 	8% 
14% 	9% 
15% 	10% 
16% 	11% 
17% 	12% 
18% 	13% 
19% 	14% 
20% 	15% 
21% 	16% 
22% 	17% 
23% 	18% 
24% 	19% 
25% 	20% 
26% 	21% 
27% 	22% 
28% 	23% 
29% 	24% 
30% 	25% 
31% 	26% 
32% 	27% 
33% 	28% 
34% 	29% 
35% 	30% 
36% 	31% 
37% 	32% 
38% 	33% 
39% 	34% 
40% 	35% 
 
D.  Continued Affordability. Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall remain affordable as follows: 
1.  Very low-income and low-income household units shall remain affordable to the designated income group for a minimum of fifty-five years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the dwelling units. 
2.  Moderate-income household units shall remain affordable for a minimum of fifty-five years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the dwelling units. 
E.  Specification of Basis for Density Bonus. Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this Section shall elect whether the bonus will be awarded on the basis of subsection A.1., A.2., A.3., or B. of this section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of very low-income affordable housing units, low-income affordable housing units, moderate-income affordable housing units, or the development's status as a senior citizen housing development. Density bonuses from more than one of these categories may not be combined. 
F.  Provisions for Resale of Units. An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure that, the initial occupant of all for-sale units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus are persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as required, and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost, as that cost if defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code. The local government shall enforce any equity sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirement of another public funding source or law. The following apply to the equity sharing agreement: 
1.  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciate. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote home ownership. 
2.  For purposes of this subsection, the city's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the very low, low, moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance of mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. 
3.  For purposes of this subsection, the city's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the city's initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.040 - Density bonus for donations of land. 
A.  Land Suitability. Upon written request, when an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development donates developable land to the city in accordance with this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus. Applicants donating developable land to the city shall be eligible for a fifteen percent density bonus at the site of the housing development if the donated land is suitable for the construction of very low-income units equaling at least ten percent of the market rate units being constructed for the project. For each one percent increase above the minimum ten percent, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 17.62.030, up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of thirty-five percent if an applicant seeks both the increase required pursuant to this section and Section 17.62.030. 
B.  Qualification Criteria. To qualify for the additional density bonus described in subsection A. of this section, the donation of developable land must meet all the following criteria: 
1.  The tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development must otherwise be subject to a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.62.030 of this chapter; and 
2.  The land must be transferred no later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or housing development application; and 
3.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred must be sufficient to permit construction of dwelling units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the total number of market rate dwelling units in the proposed development (i.e., the proposed development before the addition of any density bonus); and 
4.  The donated land is at least one acre in size or is large enough to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan land use designation, has the appropriate zoning and development standards for affordable housing and, at the time of project approval is, or at the time of construction will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure; and 
5.  No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, the donated land must have all of the applicable permits and approvals (other than building permits) necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the donated land, except that the city may subject the proposed housing development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by California Government Code Section 65583.2 Subsection (i) if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer; and 
6.  The donated land is subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the very low income units consistent with Subsection 17.62.030D. of this article, which deed restriction shall be recorded upon the donated property at the time of its transfer; and 
7.  The land will be transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city reserves the right to require the applicant to identify a developer and to require that the land be transferred to the developer; and 
8.  The land is within the boundary of the proposed housing development or within one-fourth mile of the boundary of the proposed housing development; and, 
9.  No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, a proposed source of funding for the construction of the very low-income housing units shall be identified. 
C.  Density Bonus Based on Greater Suitability of Land for Very Low-Income Housing. For each one percent increased above the minimum ten percent in the number of very low-income housing units that can be accommodated on the donated land, the maximum density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as specified in Table 17.62.040.C, below: 
Table 17.62.040.C
Percent of Additional Density Bonus for Additional Very Low-Income Units on Donated Land 
Percentage of
Very Low-Income Units that can be Accommodated on Donated Land 	Percentage of
Additional
Density Bonus 
10% 	15% 
11% 	16% 
12% 	17% 
13% 	18% 
14% 	19% 
15% 	20% 
16% 	21% 
17% 	22% 
18% 	23% 
19% 	24% 
20% 	25% 
21% 	26% 
22% 	27% 
23% 	28% 
24% 	29% 
25% 	30% 
26% 	31% 
27% 	32% 
28% 	33% 
29% 	34% 
30% 	35% 
 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.050 - Condominium conversions. 
A.  Applicable requirements and procedures for the review and approval or disapproval of the conversion of existing multi-family rental housing to residential condominiums are provided in Section 17.44.060, Condominium Conversions and Condominiums, of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. 
B.  An applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums is eligible for either a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value, at the option of the city, if the applicant agrees to provide: 1) at least thirty-three percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low- or moderate-income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, or 2) at least fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to low-income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, and 3) the applicant agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section. 
C.  Condominium conversions qualified under subsection A. of this section, may receive one of the following, at the city's option: 
1.  A flat density bonus of twenty-five percent to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion, excepting that a condominium conversion is ineligible for this bonus if the apartments to be converted originally received a density bonus or incentives pursuant to any other provisions of this article or pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915. An applicant may choose to implement a lower density bonus. 
2.  Incentives of equivalent financial value in the form of a reduction or waiver of requirements or fees which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. "Other incentives of equivalent financial value" shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the condominium conversion project or its applicant. 
D.  The city reserves the right to place such reasonable conditions of the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value pursuant to this section as it finds appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued affordability of units to subsequent purchases who are persons and families of low- and moderate-income or lower income households. 
E.  Condominium conversions are eligible only for the granting of a density bonus or incentive of equivalent value pursuant to this section, which bonus or incentive may not be granted in addition to, or combined with, any other incentives, concessions, density bonuses or waivers and reductions of development standards pursuant to other sections of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert rental apartments into condominiums. 
F.  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions if the condominium project is proposed on any property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low-income; subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power; or occupied by lower or very low-income households, unless the proposed condominium project replaces those units, as defined in Subsection 17.62.070.G, and either of the following applies: 
1.  The proposed condominium project, inclusive of the units replaced, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Subsection 17.62.050.A. 
2.  Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low-income household. 
G.  Subsection 17.62.050.F does not apply to an applicant seeking a density bonus for a proposed housing development if their application was submitted to, or processed by the city before January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.060 - Childcare facilities. 
A.  A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.62.030 of this article, and also includes a childcare facility qualified under this section is eligible for either of the following, at the option of the city, if requested in writing by the applicant: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility; or 
2.  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility. 
B.  A childcare facility will only qualify the housing development for an additional density bonus or incentive or concession if it is: 1) located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development, and 2) the housing development is otherwise eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.62.030 of this article. As a condition of approving the additional density bonus for the housing development, the childcare facility must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The childcare facility may be used only for childcare for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable as stated in deed restrictions and pursuant to Subsection 17.62.030.D of this article; and 
2.  Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the percentage of children of very low- income households, low- income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low-income households, low-income households, or moderate-income households pursuant to Section 17.62.030 of this article. 
C.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession or incentive for a childcare facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate childcare facilities. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.070 - General provisions governing density bonus calculations. 
A.  For the purposes of any provisions in this article, an applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the housing development is eligible. 
B.  When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next larger whole number. 
C.  For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the dwelling units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the affordable units are located. 
D.  For the purposes of this article, the "total units" or "total dwelling units" in a housing development does not include those units added by any density bonus. 
E.  Regardless of the number or extent of affordable units, senior housing, land dedication, childcare facilities or other qualifications for a density bonus provided in any single housing development, no housing development may be entitled to a total density bonus of more than thirty-five percent. Table 17.62.070.E provides a summary of density bonus by type of affordable housing unit. 
Table 17.62.070.E Density Bonus Summary 
Types of Affordable Units Providing Eligibility for a Density Bonus 	Minimum
Percent 	Bonus
Granted 	Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in
Affordable Units 	Percent of
Affordable Units Required for Maximum 35% Bonus 
Affordable Housing Type: 
Very Low-Income 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	11% 
Low-Income 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	20% 
Moderate-Income 	10% 	5% 	1% 	40% 
Senior Citizen Housing 	Qualified Development 	20% of the units 	— 	— 
Land Donation for Very Low-Income Housing: 
Land Donation for Very Low-Income Housing 	Land donated can accommodate 10% of market rate units, plus housing development qualified for density bonus as an affordable or senior project 	15% 	1% 	30% of market rate units (assuming housing development provides 5% very low-income units) 
Condominium Conversions: 
Low-Income 	15% 	25% 1 	— 	— 
Low/Moderate-Income 	33% 	25% 1 	— 	— 
Childcare Facility: 
Childcare Facility 	Housing Development qualifies for density bonus as an affordable or senior project 	Square feet in childcare facility 1 	— 	— 
Note: 
1  Maximum of 25% bonus for condominium conversions, or an incentive or equal value, at the city's option. 
 
F.  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions if the housing development is proposed on any property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income; subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power; or occupied by lower or very low income households, unless the proposed housing development replaces those units, and either of the following applies: 
1.  The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced pursuant to this section, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Section 17.62.030. 
2.  Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household. 
G.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "replace" shall mean either of the following: 
1.  If any dwelling units described in Subsection 17.62.030.F, above, are occupied on the date of application, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size or type, or both, to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those household in occupancy. For unoccupied dwelling units in a development with occupied units, the proposed housing development shall provide units of equivalent size or type, or both, to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category in the same proportion of affordability as the occupied units. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to Subsection 17.62.030.F, above. 
2.  If all dwelling units have been vacated or demolished within the five-year period preceding the application, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size or type, or both, as existed at the highpoint of those units in the five-year period preceding the application to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those persons and families in occupancy at that time, if known. If the incomes of the persons and families in occupancy at the highpoint is not known, then one-half of the required units shall be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, very low-income persons and families and one-half of the required units shall be made available for rent at affordable housing costs to, and occupied by, low-income persons and families. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restrictions for at least 55 years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to Subsection 17.62.020.F. 
H.  Subsection 17.62.030.F does not apply to an applicant seeking a density bonus for a proposed housing development if their application was submitted to, or processed by the city before January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.080 - Incentives and concessions for affordable housing. 
A.  Definition of a Qualified Incentive or Concession. A qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one but no more than three of the following incentives identified by state law: 
1.  A reduction in the parcel development standards (e.g. coverage, setback, zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes, architectural design requirements and/or parking requirements). Development standard means any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. In no case may the city apply a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of affordable units. A waiver or modification to development standards may be requested by the applicant, and shall be approved unless such waiver or modification creates an adverse impact as described in subsection C.2., below. 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing project, and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing project and existing or planned development in the area where the proposed development will be located. 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions. 
B.  Number of Incentives. The number of incentives shall be based on the percentage of affordable units in the project as follows, and summarized in Table 17.62.080.B, below: 
1.  One incentive or concession shall be entitled for projects where at least five percent of the total units are for very low-income households, ten percent of the total units are for low-income households, or ten percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate-income households. 
2.  Two incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least ten percent of the total units are for very low-income households, twenty percent of the total units are for low-income households, or at least twenty percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate-income households. 
3.  Three incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least fifteen percent of the total units are for very low-income households, thirty percent of the total units are for low-income households, or thirty percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate-income households. 
Table 17.62.080.B Density Bonus Incentives
and Concessions Summary 
Affordable Units of Category 	Percent of
Affordable Units 
Affordable Housing Types: 			
 Very Low-Income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
 Low-Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
 Moderate-Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Maximum incentive(s)/concession(s) 1, 2, 3 	1 	2 	3 
Notes: 
1  An incentive or concession may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus. 
2  Incentives or concessions may be selected from only one category (very low-, low-, or moderate). 
3  No incentives or concessions are available for land donation. 
 
C.  Findings to Deny Incentive or Concession. The city shall grant the incentive or concession requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding based upon substantial evidence of any of the following: 
1.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for affordable rents for the restricted units; or 
2.  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. A specific adverse impact means a significant, unavoidable impact, as provided in written standards, policies, or conditions; or, 
3.  The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal law. 
D.  Exceptions. This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this Section require the city to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact. 
E.  Amendment, Zone Change. The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.090 - Waivers and modifications of development standards. 
A.  Applicants granted a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.62.030 of this article may, by written proposal, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that would otherwise have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted pursuant to this article. The applicant may also request a meeting with the city to discuss such request for waiver and modifications. 
B.  In order to obtain a waiver or modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 17.62.030 of this article, at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this article. 
C.  A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 17.62.080 of this article. 
D.  The city may deny a request for any waiver, modification or reduction of development standards if the wavier, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.100 - Parking incentives. 
Upon the written request of the applicant for a housing development meeting the criteria for a density bonus under Section 17.62.030 of this article, the city shall not require a vehicular parking ratio that exceeds the following: 
A.  Zero to one bedroom units: One onsite parking space. 
B.  Two to three bedroom units: Two onsite parking spaces. 
C.  Four and more bedroom units: Two and one-half parking spaces. 
Guest parking and handicapped parking shall be included within the maximum number of spaces that may be required. If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a housing development may provide onsite parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. For purposes of this article, the parking ratios set forth in this section shall be deemed a concession or incentive available to the applicant under Section 17.62.080 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.110 - Standards for density bonus housing developments. 
A.  Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the housing development and compatible with the design of market rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality. The applicant may reduce the interior amenities and square footage of inclusionary units, provided all units conform to all other requirements of this Municipal Code. 
B.  For developments with multiple market rate units containing differing numbers of bedrooms, affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be representative of the market rate unit mix. 
C.  All building permits for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be issued concurrently with, or prior to, issuance of building permits for the market rate units, and the affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with, or prior to, construction of the market rate units. Occupancy permits and final inspections for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be approved concurrently with, or prior to, approval of occupancy permits and final inspections for the market rate units. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.120 - Application requirements. 
A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this section shall be submitted with the first approval of the housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. 
B.  For affordable units qualifying the housing development for a density bonus, the application shall include the following information: 
1.  A site plan identifying the base project without the density bonus, number and location of all inclusionary units, affordable units qualifying for the project for a density bonus, and proposed density bonus units; and 
2.  Proposed category(ies) qualifying the housing development for a density bonus; and 
3.  Level of affordability of all affordable and inclusionary units and proposals for ensuring affordability, if applicable; and, 
4.  A description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. 
5.  If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 17.62.040 of this article can be made. 
6.  If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, the application shall demonstrate that the project meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.62.050 of this article. 
7.  If a density bonus or concession is requested for a childcare facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the childcare facility and provide evidence that the findings included in Section 17.62.060 of this article can be made. 
C.  Upon submission of the application to the city, the community development director or designee shall determine if the application is complete and conforms to the provisions of this article. No application for a first approval for a housing development requesting a density bonus, incentives, concessions, or waivers may be deemed complete unless an affordable housing plan is submitted conforming to the provisions of this article. 
D.  A request for a minor modification of an approved application may be granted by the city manager or designee if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original application and the conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.130 - Application review. 
A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this article shall be reviewed as part of the first approval of the housing development by the approval body with authority to approve the housing development, unless additional review by the planning commission or city council is required. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this article may submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development. 
B.  Within ninety days of receipt of the preliminary application the city shall provide to an applicant, a letter which identifies project issues of concern (the maximum financial assistance that the community development director can support when making a recommendation to the city council), and the procedures for compliance with this article. The community development director shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified additional incentives pursuant to Section 17.62.080 of this article shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested incentives. If alternative or modified incentives are recommended by the community development director, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives. 
C.  Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification, the approval body shall make the following findings: 
1.  The housing development is: a) eligible for a density bonus, and/or b) any concessions, incentives, waivers, modifications, or reduced parking standards requested conform to all requirements of this article, and c) supported by a financing mechanism for all implementation and monitoring costs. 
2.  If the density bonus is based all or in part on dedication of land, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.62.040 of this article. 
3.  If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, that the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.62.050 of this article. 
4.  If the density bonus, incentive, or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a childcare facility, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.62.060 of this article 
5.  If a waiver or modification is requested, the applicant has shown that the waiver, modification or reduction of development standards meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.62.090 of this article. 
D.  If the findings stated in subsection C of this section can be made, and a request for an incentive or concession is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny a concession or incentive based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 17.62.080 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a concession or incentive. 
E.  If the required findings stated in Section 17.62.080.C can be made, and a request for a waiver or modification is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny the requested waiver or modification based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 17.62.090 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a waiver or modification. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to grant an incentive or concession or to waive or reduce development standards if that incentive, concession, waiver, or reduction has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. 
G.  Any decision regarding a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of the Scotts Valley Municipal Code. In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession or incentive, nor the granting of a density bonus, shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
17.62.140 - Developer affordable housing agreement. 
A.  Applications requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the city. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the community development director, who shall formulate a recommendation to the planning commission for final approval. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits for all housing developments pursuant to this article and shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcels on which the affordable units or density bonus units will be constructed. 
B.  The density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded prior to final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in the housing development. The density bonus housing agreement shall run with the land and bind future owners and successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 16-136, 7-15-2015)  
Chapter 17.64 - MARIJUANA AND CULTIVATION [] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16.128.4, § 3, adopted Jan. 20, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 17.60. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of chapter numbers, these provisions have been included as Ch. 17.64. 
 
17.64.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Cannabis" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(f) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Caregiver" or "primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health & Safety Code § 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of cannabis or medical cannabis or a cannabis or medical cannabis product, except as set forth in Section 19319, related to qualifying patients and primary caregivers. 
"Cooperative" shall mean two or more persons collectively or cooperatively cultivating, using, transporting, possessing, administering, delivering or making available medical marijuana, with or without compensation. 
"Cultivation" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(l) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cultivation site" means a facility where cannabis or medical cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities, that holds a valid state license pursuant to this chapter, and that holds a valid local license or permit. 
"Delivery" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(m) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Dispensary" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(n) as the same may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this Chapter, "Dispensary" shall also include a cooperative. "Dispensary" shall not include the following uses: (1) a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, (2) a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, (4) a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, (5) a residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Dispensing" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(o) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Distribution" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(p) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Distributor" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(q) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Manufacturer" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(y) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Manufacturing site" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(af) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Marijuana processing" shall mean any method used to prepare cannabis or its byproducts for commercial, retail or wholesale use including, but not limited to, drying, cleaning, curing, packaging and extraction of active ingredients to create cannabis related products and concentrate. 
"Medical cannabis," "medical cannabis product," or "cannabis product" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(ag) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act" or "MMRSA" shall mean the following bills signed into law on October 9, 2015 as the same may be amended from time to time: AB 243, AB 246, and SB 643. 
"Nursery" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(ah) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Qualifying patient" or "qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health & Safety Code § 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Testing laboratory" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(z) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Transport" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(am) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Transporter" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business & Professions Code § 19300.5(aa) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 16.128.4, § 3, 1-20-2016)  
17.64.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activities of all types are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts in the City of Scotts Valley. No person shall establish, operate, conduct or allow a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city. 
B.  To the extent not already covered by subsection A. above, all deliveries of cannabis and/or medical cannabis are expressly prohibited within the City of Scotts Valley with the exception of discreet delivery of medical cannabis to a residence or business of a qualified patient or a primary caregiver from a medical marijuana dispensary located outside the City of Scotts Valley. 
C.  To the extent not already covered in subsection A. above, all cannabis processing is expressly prohibited within the City of Scotts Valley. 
D.  Dispensing cannabis is prohibited. No person shall dispense cannabis in the city. Cannabis dispensaries are prohibited. No person shall own, manage, operate or work in, whether as an employee or independent contractor, a cannabis dispensary in the city. 
E.  This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a state license is required. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under the California Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MCRSA"), the Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA"), Senate Bill 94 and/or the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"). 
F.  Cultivation of cannabis for commercial or non-commercial purposes, including cultivation by a qualified patient or a primary caregiver, is expressly prohibited in all zoning districts in the City of Scotts Valley except as provided below: 
1.  An individual may cultivate cannabis indoors on the parcel where the individual resides for personal medical or nonmedical purposes. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited. 
2.  A primary caregiver may cultivate medical cannabis indoors at the primary caregiver's residence for a qualified patient for whom he/she is the primary caregiver. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited. 
3.  Cannabis cultivation is permitted only on parcels with residential units. Cannabis cultivation is permitted only within a legally permitted residential unit, a garage (provided required parking is maintained), or a self-contained outside accessory building that is secured, locked, and fully enclosed. 
4.  The cannabis cultivation area shall not exceed a total of six plants per residence or property (for example, a property owner/resident may not grow six plants indoors and grow additional plants in a separate self-contained building on the property). 
5.  The use of gas products, volatile solvents or dangerous poisons, toxins or carcinogens (including, but not limited to, CO 2 , butane, gasoline, kerosene) or generators for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited. 
6.  Cannabis cultivation for sale is prohibited. Notwithstanding this prohibition, a primary caregiver may recover from his or her qualified patient the actual costs incurred by the primary caregiver in cultivating the medical marijuana he or she delivers to the qualified patient. 
7.  From the public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation. 
8.  Any accessory structure used for cultivation shall be located in the rear half of the lot and must maintain minimum yard requirements as specified in the development standards of the subject zoning district. The accessory structure shall not be entitled to any exceptions or modifications that allow for reduced side and rear yard setbacks. The yard in which the accessory structure is located must be fully enclosed by a solid six foot high fence. 
9.  The residence shall maintain the kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use and these rooms shall not be used for cannabis cultivation. 
10.  Written consent of the property owner to cultivate cannabis shall be obtained and kept on the premises at all times. 
11.  Any cannabis cultivation area located within a residence shall not create humidity, mold, or other nuisance condition. 
12.  The cannabis cultivation area shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, excessive light, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, and shall not be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes. 
(Ord. No. 16.128.4, § 3, 1-20-2016; Ord. No. 16.128.5, § 2, 11-15-2017)  
17.64.030 - Public nuisance. 
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this Chapter 17.64 shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 16.128.4, § 3, 1-20-2016)  
17.64.040 - Civil penalties. 
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Chapter 17.64, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties pursuant to Title 4 of this Code against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys fees and costs to the prevailing party. 
(Ord. No. 16.128.4, § 3, 1-20-2016) 
