 
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    City Seal

1.12    Enforcement Procedures

1.16    Appeal of Administrative Decisions

1.20    General Penalty

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
(Reserved)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    How code designated and cited.

1.04.020    Definitions and rules of construction.

1.04.030    Public offices open on certain state holidays.

1.04.010 How code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following sections and chapters shall constitute and be designated as “The St. Helena Municipal Code,” and may be so cited as the “municipal code” or the “code”. (Ord. 02-5 § 2: prior code § 1.1)

1.04.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

“And” may be read “or” if the sense requires it.

“City” is construed as if followed by the words “of St. Helena”.

“Code” means “the St. Helena Municipal Code” and includes any appendices thereto.

Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

“Council” is construed to mean the city council of the city of St. Helena.

“County” means the county of Napa.

“Day” is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

“Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset.

“Following” means next after.

Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

“In the city” means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers unless otherwise specified.

“May” is permissive.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

“Oath” includes affirmation.

Officer, Department, etc. Every officer, department, board, commission or similar body mentioned in this code means an officer, department, board, commission or similar body of the city of St. Helena, unless otherwise specified.

“Official Time” means Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the city.

“Or” may be read “and” if the sense requires it.

“Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

“Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property, as herein defined.

“Preceding” means next before.

“Property” includes real and personal property.

“Real Property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

“Shall” is mandatory.

“Signature or subscription by mark” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

“State” means the state of California.

“Tenant or occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes owners or any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

“Week” consists of seven consecutive days.

“Writing” includes any form of a recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

“Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Prior code § 1.2)

1.04.030 Public offices open on certain state holidays.
The public offices of the city shall remain open on each Columbus Day and on every day on which an election is held throughout the state of California. (Prior code § 2.50)

Chapter 1.08
CITY SEAL
Sections:

1.08.010    City seal.

1.08.010 City seal.
The seal heretofore used by and for the city, the inscription of which in the center thereof is “Incorporated March 24, 1876, Re-Incorporated May 14, 1889,” and around the outer edge of the seal is “City of St. Helena, State of California,” is established and declared to be, have been, and now to be the seal of the city. (Prior code § 1.7)

Chapter 1.12
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

1.12.010    Violations declared a public nuisance.

1.12.020    Recovery by city of attorney fees.

1.12.030    Enforcement authority and powers—Declaration of purpose.

1.12.040    General enforcement authority.

1.12.050    Power to arrest.

1.12.060    Citation procedure.

1.12.070    Violation of promise to appear in court.

1.12.080    Warrant for arrest upon failure to appear.

1.12.090    Right of entry for enforcement officials.

1.12.100    Abatement by civil action.

1.12.110    Abatement by criminal prosecution.

1.12.120    Abatement by administrative proceedings.

1.12.130    Summary abatement of immediate dangers.

1.12.140    Notice to appear or abate.

1.12.150    Form of notice.

1.12.160    Abatement of nuisance prior to scheduled hearing.

1.12.170    Manner of conducting hearing.

1.12.180    Appeal to city council.

1.12.190    Abatement of nuisance.

1.12.200    Limitation on filing judicial action.

1.12.210    Costs of abatement.

1.12.220    Expenses as a special assessment against the property.

1.12.230    Notice of special assessment.

1.12.240    Recovery of police response costs.

1.12.250    Civil penalties.

1.12.010 Violations declared a public nuisance.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, of any ordinances or resolution of the city, or of any permit, license, certificate, or authorization issued or given by the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in the manner provided hereafter or in any other manner provided by law, including, but not limited to, the institution of civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. A public nuisance shall include, but is not limited to, a violation or failure to comply with any term, condition, mitigation measure or project description incorporated into any use permit or into other land use approvals or permits. (Prior code § 1.9)

1.12.020 Recovery by city of attorney fees.
The city may in its discretion commence legal actions and/or equitable proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect and recover any unpaid and delinquent taxes, fees, charges, and/or assessments, as well as applicable penalties and interest, imposed under any provision of this code or city resolution. In any such judicial action or proceeding, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees; provided, that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees and costs. In addition, if the city prevails, it may also recover any taxes, fees, charges, assessments, penalties and interest. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 12-5 § 1: prior code § 1.10)

1.12.030 Enforcement authority and powers—Declaration of purpose.
The city council finds that the enforcement of this code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to protection of the public’s health, safety and quality of life. The council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with code regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action may require the city attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance. (Prior code § 1.15)

1.12.040 General enforcement authority.
Any police officer, the fire chief, the health officer, the city manager, the building official, the public works director, the planning director, the city clerk, the animal control officer, or any officer or employee of the county of Napa whose duty is to enforce any ordinance of the city, or the duly appointed deputy of such persons, or any person designated by the city council as an enforcement official of the city, have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this code and applicable state codes, and all such persons are considered to be enforcement officials within the meaning of this chapter. With the exception of police officers, enforcement officials are not peace officers as defined in California Penal Code Section 830. (Prior code § 1.16)

1.12.050 Power to arrest.
Any designated enforcement official is authorized to arrest without a warrant any person whenever the enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of this code or applicable state codes or caused a public nuisance in his or her presence. An enforcement official, except a police officer, can only arrest a person by issuing a criminal citation pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5. (Prior code § 1.17)

1.12.060 Citation procedure.
If any person is arrested for a violation of this code and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer shall prepare, in triplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court as prescribed by California Penal Code Chapter 5C, commencing with Section 853.5. (Prior code § 1.18)

1.12.070 Violation of promise to appear in court.
Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. (Prior code § 1.19)

1.12.080 Warrant for arrest upon failure to appear.
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in California Penal Code Section 853.6, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty (20) days after his or her failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then, within twenty (20) days after delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. (Prior code § 1.20)

1.12.090 Right of entry for enforcement officials.
A.    Whenever an enforcement official has reason to believe that a public nuisance exists or that an inspection is necessary to enforce any provision of this code, the official may enter the premises at any reasonable time in a lawful manner to perform the inspection or any other duty or requirement imposed by this code.

B.    The enforcement official shall present proper identification, state the purpose of the visit and request permission of the owner or responsible person to enter the premises. If entry is refused, the enforcement official may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.59.

C.    When the enforcement official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or responsible person shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this chapter, to promptly permit entry therein by the enforcement official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code.

D.    Any person or entity who applies for a permit, approval or other entitlement required pursuant to any provision of this code shall consent in writing, on a form acceptable to the city, to the enforcement official’s reasonable entry onto and inspection of the premises which are the subject or site of the permit, approval or entitlement for the purpose of determining and obtaining compliance with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 12-5 § 2: prior code § 1.21)

1.12.100 Abatement by civil action.
A civil action may be brought in the name of the people of the state, or by the city, to abate a public nuisance by the city attorney or by the district attorney or county counsel, and each of such officers shall have concurrent right to bring such action for a public nuisance within this city. In any such judicial action or proceeding, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees; provided, that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 12-5 § 3: prior code § 1.22)

1.12.110 Abatement by criminal prosecution.
Persons who permit a public nuisance to continue to exist after an abatement notice has been served and after the abatement period specified in the notice has elapsed may be prosecuted by the city attorney or district attorney. (Prior code § 1.23)

1.12.120 Abatement by administrative proceedings.
Upon discovery of any public nuisance as defined by this code, the city administrator, or his or her designee, may notify the owner and any responsible person that the nuisance shall be abated by the city at such person’s expense unless they appear at the stated time and place to show cause why there should be no abatement, pursuant to Sections 1.12.140 through 1.12.200. (Prior code § 1.24)

1.12.130 Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
A.    Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, the condition or use may be summarily abated by the city without notice or hearing as provided in this chapter. Prior to any summary abatement actions, the city shall make all reasonable attempts to contact the owner or his, her or its management agent by phone or in person to provide notice of the nature, timing and extent of the summary abatement of the nuisance as well as the city’s intent to collect the abatement costs and attorney’s fees and that such costs and fees may be collected as a special assessment and the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments and that any special assessment for abatement costs and fees may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5. Absent the need to commence immediate abatement to protect the health and safety of the public, the notice shall inform the owner or owner’s representative of the right to an informal hearing before city manager to contest the need for summary abatement. The informal hearing shall be conducted within twenty-four (24) hours of the notice and any decision of the city manager shall be final.

B.    When summary abatement is necessary, it shall be ordered only by the city manager or his or her designee.

C.    Summary abatement shall be limited to those actions necessary to eliminate an immediate threat to the public health or safety.

D.    Notice of the summary abatement shall be provided to the owner or other responsible parties as soon as practical. Service of the notice shall be made either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the U.S. mail to such person to be notified at the address shown upon the last tax roll or as shown upon some other public record pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service of mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. The notice shall describe the condition that caused the nuisance and imminent and/or immediate danger that resulted in the summary abatement as well as the city’s intent to collect the abatement costs and attorney’s fees as a special assessment against the property subject to collection at the same time and in the same manner as is provided for the collection of ordinary property taxes pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5. The notice shall also advise that a hearing to contest the need for the summary abatement may be requested within fifteen (15) days of the notice. If a timely request for a hearing is submitted, it shall be heard within fifteen (15) days of the request pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.12.170. The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the terms of Section 1.12.180.

E.    The costs and expenses of a summary abatement shall be made a lien on the property and shall be collected pursuant to the procedure found in Sections 1.12.210 to 1.12.230. (Ord. 12-5 § 4: prior code § 1.25)

1.12.140 Notice to appear or abate.
A.    Written notice of appearance before the designated hearing officer(s) shall be given to the property owner or responsible person at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for hearing. When Section 8.08.010(C) has been violated, such notice shall be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the date set for hearing and a copy of the written notice shall be mailed to the tenant at the property address. Service of the notice shall be made either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the U.S. mail to such person to be notified at the address shown upon the last tax roll or as shown upon some other public record pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service of mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office.

B.    A copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property on which the nuisance exists or in any other location of the property wherein it will be most likely to give notice to the owner or responsible person, at least fifteen (15) or thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date according to subsection A of this section.

C.    The notice shall direct the owner or responsible person that the nuisance shall be abated by the city at such person’s expense unless they appear at the stated time and place to show cause why there should be no abatement.

D.    In all notices citing a violation of Section 8.08.010(C) on residential rental property, the California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 17274 and 24436.5 advisements concerning nondeductibility of certain expenses shall be included, and notice as required by this section shall also be given to the holder or holders of a deed of trust on the property at issue. The holder or holders of a deed of trust shall have an additional fifteen (15) days to comply if the owner has not complied within the time stated in the notice. (Prior code § 1.27)

1.12.150 Form of notice.
The notice to appear or abate shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE TO APPEAR OR ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE

YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED as the owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having control of the premises at (address), (assessor’s parcel number), that pursuant to Section 8.08.010 of the St. Helena Municipal Code, the undersigned has determined that there exists upon the above referenced premises a public nuisance, specifically (description of condition constituting nuisance). A copy of Section 8.08.010 is attached.

(Add if violation of Section 8.08.010(C): In accordance with Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year with respect to the above referenced violation.)

YOU ARE HEREBY REQUIRED to abate this condition to the satisfaction of the undersigned within _____ days of this notice or to appear at the City Hall at 1480 Main Street, St. Helena, California, on _____at _____ (time) to show cause, if any exists, why the condition or use should not be abated by the City and the expenses thereof, including, but not limited to, the costs of administration, code enforcement, civil penalties in the amount of $ _____ in accordance with Section 1.12.250 of the Municipal Code, and attorneys fees be charged to you as a personal obligation and/or made a lien upon the property.

Abatement is to be accomplished in the following manner:

(Description of what needs to be done to remedy situation.)

Telephone City Hall at least three (3) business days prior to the date set for hearing and advise whether you intend to appear. If you fail to appear without timely notifying City Hall, you will be charged an administrative fee.

By: __________________________

(Name of City Officer)

(Prior code § 1.28)

1.12.160 Abatement of nuisance prior to scheduled hearing.
Any owner or responsible person may, at his or her own expense and prior to the scheduled hearing, abate the declared nuisance in accordance with the provisions of the notice sent by the city officer; provided, that all necessary permits are first obtained. In the event of a public nuisance committed by a tenant, an owner or responsible person shall be considered to have abated the declared nuisance if legal proceedings are commenced against the persons or tenants committing the public nuisance in compliance with state and local law; commencement of the legal proceedings shall be considered to have occurred upon the service of a written notice to terminate the tenancy upon the tenant by the owner or other responsible person. If the city officer determines that the nuisance has been abated, the proceedings under this chapter shall be terminated, except that the owner or responsible person shall be liable for any costs, including incidental expenses and attorney fees, incurred by the city for administration, code enforcement and/or abatement by the city, until the date of termination of proceedings under this chapter. (Prior code § 1.29)

1.12.170 Manner of conducting hearing.
A.    Hearing Officer. The city manager shall act as the hearing officer, except in cases in which Section 8.08.010(E) is alleged to have been violated in which case the city council shall act at the hearing officer. The city manager may delegate his or her role to such city officers and employees as he or she deems appropriate.

B.    Procedure. At the time and place designated in the notice, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, oral, physical and documentary evidence regarding the alleged nuisance and the proposed method of abatement. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

C.    Burden of Proof. The enforcement official shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a public nuisance exists.

D.    Oath or Affirmation. Oral evidence testimony may be taken on oath or affirmation.

E.    Evidence. The hearing shall not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to relying in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

F.    Representation. The owner or any responsible person may be represented by anyone of his or her choice or may represent himself or herself.

G.    Hearsay. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence.

H.    Rights. The parties in the hearing shall have the following rights:

1.    To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;

2.    To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;

3.    To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called such witness to testify;

4.    To rebut evidence against such parties;

5.    To request the hearing officer to take official notice of any fact which would be subject to judicial notice by the courts of this state;

6.    To introduce exhibits.

I.    Decision. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and, where applicable, an order of abatement. This decision shall set forth the factual findings made by the hearing officer, a conclusion as to whether a public nuisance exists, and the manner and time of the abatement. The order shall include reference to the right to appeal set forth in Section 1.12.180. If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which is likely to recur after abatement, the owner may be directed to take adequate precautions for a period of time not to exceed one year so that the nuisance will not recur. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the owner, responsible person, the enforcement official and the city clerk. (Prior code § 1.30)

1.12.180 Appeal to city council.
A.    The property owner or other responsible person or any aggrieved city resident may appeal the decision of the hearing officer (except when the hearing officer is the city council) to the city council within ten (10) days of the date of the decision by submitting an appeal in writing to the city clerk. The appeal shall state with reasonable particularity the grounds for the appeal.

B.    Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting of the city council, but not later than thirty-five (35) days after the date of filing an appeal, consistent with the agenda preparation procedures and schedule of the city council.

C.    In the event of an appeal, the city council shall follow the procedure provided in Section 1.12.170. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 1.12.140.

D.    At the conclusion of the appeal hearing before the city council, the council shall issue a written decision and, where applicable, adopt a resolution ordering the abatement of the nuisance. The resolution shall set forth the factual findings made by the city council and the manner and timing of the abatement. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 1.31)

1.12.190 Abatement of nuisance.
The city manager or city council, as the case may be, shall direct the appropriate city staff to abate and remove such nuisance pursuant to the order of abatement or cause the necessary work to be done so as to abate and remove. (Prior code § 1.32)

1.12.200 Limitation on filing judicial action.
Any court action or proceeding to review or challenge the city council’s decision and order of abatement as reflected in its resolution shall be barred unless it is commenced within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the resolution, and the resolution shall contain a statement so advising the appellant(s) of this time limit on seeking judicial review. No action or proceeding to review or challenge an abatement order or decision shall be permitted unless each ground or basis for such action or proceeding first has been asserted to the hearing officer and council pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 1.12.170 and 1.12.180. (Prior code § 1.32.1)

1.12.210 Costs of abatement.
A.    The enforcement official shall keep an itemized statement of costs incurred by the city in inspecting and abating a public nuisance and/or the costs to the city in causing the owner or responsible person to abate the nuisance. The costs, including, but not limited to, any civil penalties imposed pursuant to Section 1.12.250, police response costs imposed pursuant to Section 1.12.240, and the incidental expenses of abating the nuisance or causing the owner or responsible person to abate the nuisance shall be billed to the owner or responsible person and shall become due and payable thirty (30) days thereafter. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, for administration and code enforcement, including, but not limited to, attorney fees; costs incurred in inspecting the property; costs incurred in documenting the nuisance; the actual expenses and costs of the city for preparation of notices, documentation, inspection; and the cost of printing and mailing the notices and documents herein. Once the abatement is completed, either by the city or the owner or responsible person, the enforcement official shall provide a copy of the statement to the owner of the property in question, or to any responsible person, by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and to the director of finance. The cost notice will also include a statement that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments and that any special assessment for abatement costs and fees may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The owner of the property and the responsible person shall be liable jointly and severally for all such costs.

B.    The owner or responsible person may request a hearing before the city council to contest the statement of costs. The request for a hearing shall be made within ten (10) days of mailing of the statement by the city clerk or the right to a hearing shall be deemed waived.

C.    The city council shall review the statement of costs and any information presented by the owner or responsible person. The city council’s decision shall be mailed to the owner and all responsible persons. The decision of the city council shall be final.

D.    The investigation and other costs related to the commission of a criminal act by a tenant or other person not an owner of real property upon which the criminal act is committed shall not be charged to the owner or other responsible person unless such owner or responsible person has been shown to have participated in or had prior knowledge of such criminal acts. (Ord. 12-5 § 5: prior code § 1.33)

1.12.220 Expenses as a special assessment against the property.
If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement of costs pursuant to Section 1.12.210(A), or, if requested, after any decision on appeal to the city council pursuant to Section 1.12.210(C) which confirms in whole or in part the costs of abatement, the costs shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The assessment shall continue until it is paid together with interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) a year computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. (Prior code § 1.34)

1.12.230 Notice of special assessment.
The city shall file in the office of the county recorder, with a copy sent by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, a certificate substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

Under the authority of Government Code Section 38773.5 and Title 1 of the St. Helena Municipal Code, the city did on _____, 20_____, abate a nuisance upon the real property hereafter described and then on _____, 20_____ did assess the costs and incidental expenses of the abatement upon the real property and/or the costs of causing the owner or responsible person to abate the nuisance. The City of St. Helena claims a special assessment on the real property in the amount of $ _____. This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) a year from _____, 20_____, and discharged of record. The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land situated within the City of St. Helena, County of Napa, State of California, more particularly described as follows:

Dated: __________, 20_____

By:__________

(Ord. 12-5 § 6: prior code § 1.35)

1.12.240 Recovery of police response costs.
In addition to any costs and expenses which may be assessed for and/or as a result of an abatement of a nuisance under this chapter, any person or entity whose violation of or failure to comply with any requirements of this code results in the police department being called to and/or visiting that person’s or entity’s property, or to a housing unit in the case of multifamily housing, on two or more occasions within any thirty (30) day period shall be liable and responsible for, and required to reimburse the city for, all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with those police service calls. Such costs and expenses shall be assessed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 1.12.210, 1.12.220 and 1.12.230. (Prior code § 1.36)

1.12.250 Civil penalties.
A.    In addition to any other costs and expenses assessed pursuant to this chapter, any person or entity who, within the time period stated in the notice to abate pursuant to Section 1.12.140, or any order or decision pursuant to Section 1.12.170 or 1.12.180, whichever is later, fails or refuses to abate any nuisance or violation of any requirement of this chapter shall be required to pay civil penalties as follows:

1.    For each violation which the person or entity does not correct as directed by the city within the time given in the written notice by the city, the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).

2.    For each violation which results in the police department being called to the owner’s property, or to a housing unit in the case of multifamily housing, on two or more occasions within any thirty (30) day period, the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second police response, and the penalty shall increase by two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any additional response up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

B.    All penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be assessed and recovered pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 1.12.210, 1.12.220 and 1.12.230.

C.    If the imposition of civil penalties under this section is appealed pursuant to Section 1.12.210(B), the city council may, in its discretion, reduce or excuse the penalty based on findings concerning any of the following factors:

1.    The nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation;

2.    The extent to which the violation was willful and/or intentional;

3.    Whether and to what extent the violation can and will be promptly corrected and/or abated, and all city costs and expenses incurred in abating the violation reimbursed. (Prior code § 1.37)

Chapter 1.16
APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Sections:

1.16.010    Right to appeal administrative decisions.

1.16.020    Time within which an appeal shall be filed.

1.16.030    Hearing—Notice.

1.16.040    Statutory provisions.

1.16.010 Right to appeal administrative decisions.
Except for employment decisions or as otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, may appeal in writing to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth the specific grounds thereof. (Ord. 02-5 § 3 (part): prior code § 2.40)

1.16.020 Time within which an appeal shall be filed.
Such notice shall be filed with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after the date of such action. (Prior code § 2.41)

1.16.030 Hearing—Notice.
The city clerk shall forthwith set the matter for hearing before the city council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Prior code § 2.42)

1.16.040 Statutory provisions.
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 are applicable to the city of St. Helena. (Prior code § 2.110)

Chapter 1.20
GENERAL PENALTY
Sections:

1.20.010    General penalty.

1.20.010 General penalty.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is made a misdemeanor by ordinance or by state law.

B.    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.    Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

D.    Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punishable accordingly. (Prior code § 1.26)

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.08    Mayor

2.12    City Manager

2.16    City Clerk

2.20    Director of Public Works

2.24    Director of Finance/Treasurer

2.28    Director of Planning

2.32    Library Director

2.36    Recreation Director

2.40    Chief of Police

2.44    Officers and Employees Generally

2.48    Fire Department

2.50    Adoption by City Council Resolution of Protocols for the Establishment, Membership and Operation of City Boards, Commissions and Committees

2.52    Board of Library Trustees

2.56    Parks and Recreation Commission

2.60    Planning Commission

2.64    Emergency Services

2.68    Peace Officer Standards and Training

2.72    Employees’ Retirement System

Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.04.010    Municipal elections.

2.04.020    Meeting place designated.

2.04.030    When regular meetings to be held.

2.04.040    Vacancy filling.

2.04.050    City council salary.

2.04.060    Powers vested in city council as redevelopment agency.

2.04.010 Municipal elections.
Beginning with elections held after March, 2005, the general municipal election for the city council shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year beginning November, 2006. (Ord. 04-3: prior code § 2.131)

2.04.020 Meeting place designated.
Meetings of the city council shall be held in the Vintage Hall Board Room, 465 Main Street, St. Helena, which place the city council designates as its meeting place. (Ord. 11-8 § 1: prior code § 2.1)

2.04.030 When regular meetings to be held.
A regular meeting of the city council shall be held at the time established by city council resolution on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month. (Ord. 11-3 § 1: prior code § 2.2)

2.04.040 Vacancy filling.*
If a vacancy occurs on the city council, the council shall, within thirty (30) days from the commencement of the vacancy, either fill the vacancy by appointment or call a special election to fill the vacancy. The special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than ninety (90) days from the call of the special election. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy holds office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 93-17 § 1: prior code § 2.70)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 93-17 is included in the code as of April 2013, having previously been left out due to an oversight during the original 1993 codification.

2.04.050 City council salary.
Each member of the city council shall receive three hundred dollars ($300.00) each month as salary. (Prior code § 2.71)

2.04.060 Powers vested in city council as redevelopment agency.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency and to have all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by law. (Prior code § 11A.3)

Chapter 2.08
MAYOR
Sections:

2.08.010    Mayor’s term of office and duties.

2.08.010 Mayor’s term of office and duties.
A.    As determined by the electors in the general municipal election held on November 2, 1976, the city shall have an elected mayor who shall serve a two-year term of office. Except where the city council may provide otherwise by ordinance that the instruments described in subsections (A)(1), (2) and (3) of this section be signed by an officer other than the mayor, the mayor shall sign:

1.    All warrants drawn by the city treasurer.

2.    All written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city.

3.    All instruments requiring the city seal.

B.    The mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, take affidavits, and certify them under his hand.

C.    The mayor may acknowledge the execution of all instruments executed by the city and required to be acknowledged.

D.    The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall make all appointments to boards, commissions, and committees unless otherwise specifically provided by state law. (Ord. 11-1 § 1: prior code § 2.130)

Chapter 2.12
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.12.010    Purpose.

2.12.020    Office created—Qualifications.

2.12.030    Eligibility of councilmembers.

2.12.040    Appointment, tenure and removal.

2.12.050    Compensation and expenses.

2.12.060    Powers and duties.

2.12.070    Administrative relationships.

2.12.080    Limitation imposed.

2.12.090    Standards of performance.

2.12.010 Purpose.
The council finds and determines that the administrative affairs of the municipal government of the city would be handled more expeditiously, efficiently, and satisfactorily through an officer who, acting on behalf of the council, would attend to such administrative affairs, correlate and coordinate various municipal activities, compile data, prepare reports relating to the affairs of city government and generally act as the agent of the council in the discharge of administrative duties. (Prior code § 2.4.00)

2.12.020 Office created—Qualifications.
There is created in the service of the city the position of city manager. The city manager shall be selected by the council on the basis of his or her professional experience, administrative qualifications, and education with special reference to his or her actual experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of his or her office as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 11-6: prior code § 2.4.01)

2.12.030 Eligibility of councilmembers.
No person elected to membership on the council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after he or she has ceased to be a member of the council. (Prior code § 2.4.03)

2.12.040 Appointment, tenure and removal.
A.    The city manager shall be appointed by the council and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the council; provided, however, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election in the city at which election a member of the council is elected, except by a unanimous vote of the council.

B.    The purpose of this provision is to permit any newly elected member of the council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. (Prior code § 2.4.04)

2.12.050 Compensation and expenses.
A.    The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the council shall, from time to time, determine, and such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council designates.

B.    The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of, or with the express consent of, the council. Reimbursement shall be made only in accordance with an itemized claim setting forth the sums expended or obligation incurred in the manner provided by the council for the presentation of claims for reimbursement of expenses of other city officers and employees. (Prior code § 2.4.05)

2.12.060 Powers and duties.
A.    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city, under the direction and control of the council. The manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city, which affairs are under his or her control.

B.    In addition to the general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, the city manager shall have the following powers and duties:

1.    General Supervision. To execute on behalf of the council, its administrative supervision and control of such affairs of the city as may be placed in his or her charge, or which are not otherwise provided for the council;

2.    Personnel and Organization. To appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to all positions in city employment except the city attorney and the fire chief; to dismiss, suspend and discipline such officers and employees in accordance with such policies as may from time to time be set forth by the council; to transfer such employees from one department to another consistent with the policies of the council; to recommend to the council such reorganization of officers, departments or divisions as may be indicated in the interests of the efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business, and to effect such reorganization when authorized by appropriate ordinance, resolution or motion of the council. The city manager shall have the authority to appoint department heads other than the city attorney and fire chief subject to ratification by the council at its next regular meeting;

3.    Authority over Officers and Employees. To control, order, and give direction to all heads of departments and subordinate officers and employees of the city, except in matters which by state law are confined to their exclusive and uncontrolled jurisdiction, and except the city attorney. Department heads shall include: public works director/city engineer, finance director, planning director, police chief, library director, recreation director, fire chief;

4.    Rules and Regulations. To prescribe such rules, regulations and polices as he or she deems necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative services, and to revoke, suspend, or amend any rule, regulation or policy established by any officer, department head or other person in administrative service;

5.    Shift Work. To temporarily direct any department or division of the city to perform work for any other department, division or office of the city;

6.    Compensation Plan. To prepare and to recommend to the council, from time to time, desirable revisions of the compensation plan of the city;

7.    Assist the Council. To attend meetings of the council and to report upon and discuss any matters concerning the affairs of the departments, services or activities under his or her supervision upon which, in his or her judgment, the council shall be informed, or upon which his or her views or opinions are requested by the council;

8.    Carry Out Council Decision. To carry out, on behalf of the council, its policies, rules, regulations and laws relating to the administration of the affairs of the city, its departments, divisions and services;

9.    Budget. To supervise the preparation of a detailed, proposed municipal budget and submit the same to the council on or before May 15th of each year, and to offer his or her recommendations as to such increases, decreases, cancellations, transfers, or changes in any of the items included in the proposed budget as in his or her judgment should be made before adoption of the budget after its final adoption; and to keep the council informed with respect thereto;

10.    Public Improvements. To supervise public improvement projects and programs, and to aid and assist the council and the various departments, services, and offices of the city in carrying the same through to a successful conclusion;

11.    Recommendations to the Council. To recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient;

12.    Studies and Reports. To make such surveys, studies, reports and recommendations as he or she may deem desirable on any matter affecting the interest of the people or city as budgeted or as may be requested by the council;

13.    Council Agenda. To supervise the preparation of the agenda for all regular, special, or adjourned meetings of the council in accordance with the laws establishing rules for the council meetings;

14.    Other City Offices. To serve in any appointed office within the city government to which he or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the council, and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the council and without further compensation except as expressly provided by the council at the time of such appointment or thereafter;

15.    Mail. To supervise the receipt and opening of all mail addressed in whole or in part to the council, or the mayor or mayor pro tem by title only, and to give immediate attention thereto, to the end that all administrative business referred to in such communications, and not necessarily requiring action by the council, may be disposed of in an expeditious manner; provided, however, all actions taken pursuant to such communications shall be reported to the council at its next regular meeting thereafter or by separate communication to each member of the council;

16.    Enforcement of Laws. To see to the enforcement within the city of the laws of the state and the city;

17.    Contracts, Franchises, Permits and Licenses. To investigate and see to the faithful performance and observation of all contracts of the city and of all franchises, permits, licenses, and privileges granted by the city;

18.    Citizens’ Complaints. To appropriately investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of city government; to adjust all proper grievances within the scope of authority provided by city laws and policies, and to report to the council all injustices suffered by reason of defects or omissions in the laws, policies, or practices of the city which he or she is not authorized to rectify;

19.    Public Property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the council, when the general supervision thereof is not specifically delegated to a particular officer;

20.    Community Relations. To explain to the public the actions, purposes and policies of the city government;

21.    Contracts. To execute in the name of the council and city any contract authorized or approved by the council unless the council expressly provided for another manner of execution of such contract;

22.    Other Powers and Duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are necessary, incident to the powers set forth in this section or as may be assigned or delegated to him or her from time to time, by action of the council;

23.    Treasurer Functions. Assume all functions of the treasurer as set forth in this code and in California Government Code Sections 41000 to 41007; and

24.    Execute Settlements, Waive Fees and Resolve Specified Disputes and Appeals. To execute settlement agreements, waive otherwise applicable fees and penalties up to $2,000, and resolve appeals subject to Chapter 1.16 and other disputes involving city codes. (Ord. 18-1 § 1 (Exh. A): Ord. 14-14 § 1; Ord. 02-5 § 3 (part); Ord. 00-4 (part); prior code § 2.4.06)

2.12.070 Administrative relationships.
The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry to other departments for informational background. Department heads will receive council direction regarding his or her department from the manager. The city manager will receive his or her direction and instructions from the council as a body. An individual councilperson does not have the authority to order or instruct the city manager without prior approval of the council. (Prior code § 2.4.07)

2.12.080 Limitation imposed.
The city manager shall not establish general policy which is the province of the council to determine, nor shall he or she commit or bind the council, or any member thereof, to any action, plan or program requiring official council action. It is not intended by the provisions of this chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon the city manager, which is now, or hereafter may be vested in or imposed by general state law or any other city commission, departments, officer or employee. (Prior code § 2.4.08)

2.12.090 Standards of performance.
In the discharge of his or her duties, the city manager shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience, and courtesy in his or her contacts with the public, with the council, and with all city commissions, boards, departments, officers and employees, and shall use his or her best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship among all personnel employed in the government of the city to the end that the highest possible standards of public service shall be continuously maintained. Pursuant to this goal, the city manager shall receive full cooperation of the city staff. (Prior code § 2.4.09)

Chapter 2.16
CITY CLERK
Sections:

2.16.010    Appointment.

2.16.020    Supervision.

2.16.030    Compensation.

2.16.040    Powers and duties.

2.16.050    Deputy city clerks.

2.16.060    Bond.

2.16.010 Appointment.
The city clerk shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). The city clerk shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her administrative qualifications. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.24)

2.16.020 Supervision.
The city clerk is subject to the supervision of the city manager except in matters which by state law are confined to the city clerk’s exclusive and uncontrolled jurisdiction. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.25)

2.16.030 Compensation.
The city clerk shall receive such compensation as the city council shall, from time to time, determine. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.26)

2.16.040 Powers and duties.
The city clerk shall have such powers and perform all duties prescribed by the laws of the state, this code, the city council, or the city manager. Without limiting the forgoing, the powers and duties of the city clerk include:

A.    Duties at council meetings: to attend all meetings of the city council and act as clerk thereof. The city clerk shall keep a full, true and correct record of all proceedings of the council;

B.    Records and files to be kept: to keep a copy of every city ordinance in a book marked “Ordinances”; a file of all official bonds; and a record or file of all books, reports and documents which may be required by law, including this code, to be recorded or filed;

C.    Notices: to post all notices required to be posted by law, including this code, or ordered posted by the council, unless it is specifically provided that it shall be a duty of another officer to post such notices;

D.    Publications: to cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city all franchise ordinances and all notices and other writings required to be published by law, including this code, or ordered published by resolution of the council;

E.    Seal, authentication of documents: to keep the seal of the city and authenticate his or her signature and seal all ordinances, and when directed to do so by law, including this code, or order of the council or city manager, to authenticate bonds, contracts, and any other documents;

F.    Administrative assistant to the city manager: to provide administrative and clerical support to the city manager;

G.    Transferred duties: to hold such powers and perform such duties as may be transferred to the city clerk from other offices by the city manager. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.27)

2.16.050 Deputy city clerks.
The city clerk shall appoint deputies only with the prior approval of the city manager. Any such deputy shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager and receive such compensation as is provided by the city council. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.28)

2.16.060 Bond.*
The city clerk, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall execute a bond to the city as required elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 02-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 2.28.01)

*    Editor’s Note: See Section 2.44.010 of this title.

Chapter 2.20
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sections:

2.20.010    Office created.

2.20.020    Powers and duties.

2.20.030    Definitions.

2.20.040    Capacities.

2.20.050    Rules and regulations.

2.20.060    Full-time duties.

2.20.010 Office created.
There is created the office of director of public works. The director shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). The director shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her engineering, executive and administrative qualifications. The director shall at all times during his or her tenure possess a valid certificate of registration as a civil engineer issued by the California State Board of Registration for Civil Engineers. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.16)

2.20.020 Powers and duties.
A.    Subject to policy prescribed by the city council, the director of public works shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty to plan, organize, supervise and perform engineering work for municipal public works; to supervise the repair, maintenance and construction of public works; to supervise the enforcement of existing zoning ordinances, but not to act in the capacity of a planner for the city, the city council or the planning commission; to act as staff to the city tree committee and other committees as directed by the city manager; and to supervise the maintenance of city trees and parks.

B.    The director of public works shall attend all regular meetings of the city council, and present to the council regular and special oral and written reports requested by the council or as necessary to inform the council of matters under the director’s discretion. The director shall, at the direction of the city manager or the council, attend special meetings of the council and meetings of the planning commission and other bodies considering matters related to the city’s public works. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.17)

2.20.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Engineering and supervision” includes, without limitation, designing streets, sidewalks, sewer systems, drainage structures and other public works; surveying and drafting; field inspections; compiling estimates; preparing contracts and specifications; evaluating need for and planning and scheduling long-range public works programs; recommending design, material and processes proposed to be used by the city for public works; and maintaining records, maps and files of the city relating to public works.

“Public works” includes, without limitation, all parts of the municipal water system, sewage system, drainage structures, streets and sidewalks, all land, buildings and other improvements owned by the city and all equipment used by the city in the repair, maintenance and construction of public works. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.18, 2.19)

2.20.040 Capacities.
The director of public works shall be the superintendent of streets, superintendent of the water department, floodplain administrator, and the property officer. He or she shall also serve as city engineer, if he or she is so designated by the city manager. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.20)

2.20.050 Rules and regulations.
The director of public works shall, subject to the approval of the city council, promulgate such rules and regulations, as he or she deems necessary to carry out his or her duties. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.21)

2.20.060 Full-time duties.
The director of public works shall devote his or her full time to the duties of his or her office. (Ord. 01-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 2.22)

Chapter 2.24
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE/TREASURER
Sections:

2.24.010    Office created.

2.24.020    Powers and duties.

2.24.030    Quarterly statement to city manager and council.

2.24.040    Withholding payment when money owed city.

2.24.010 Office created.
The office of director of finance/treasurer is created. The director shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). The director shall execute the same form of bond as required to be executed by the city clerk pursuant to California Government Code Section 36518. (Ord. 01-10 § 5 (part): prior code § 2.115)

2.24.020 Powers and duties.
The director of finance/treasurer shall:

A.    Exercise general supervision over the city’s finances;

B.    Maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city;

C.    Keep such accounts, receipts, and records as shall be prescribed by the city manager;

D.    Be responsible for the safekeeping of money received by the city;

E.    Prepare and publish a summary of the city’s annual financial report as required by California Government Code Sections 53891, 40804 and 40805;

F.    Countersign all city warrants or checks, or to authorize signature by a deputy;

G.    Audit all demands against the city for money or damages;

H.    Certify or approve payrolls or attendance records of city officers and employees or to authorize approval by a deputy;

I.    Disburse funds of the city treasury on checks which have been allowed either by the council, law, or city officers authorized to allow the same;

J.    Issue checks on the treasury for all debts and demands against the city when the amounts are fixed by law, for interest and redemption of bonds issued by the city, upon surrender and cancellation of such bonds or interest coupons, for salaries of officers and employees of the city who are legally entitled to such salaries, and for all other demands authorized by law. Salary checks are to be drawn on the dates specified by the city and at least twice monthly;

K.    Collect all money due the city unless in any given case the duty of collection is by this code given to another officer;

L.    Be responsible for the investment of city funds in accordance with this code and applicable state statutes;

M.    Retain the records of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies, unless this duty is assigned to another officer by the city manager;

N.    Attend regular meetings of the city council, and present to the council regular and special oral and written reports requested by the council or necessary to inform the council of matters under the director’s discretion. The director shall, at the direction of the city manager or the city council, attend special meetings of the city council and meetings of other bodies considering matters related to the city’s finances;

O.    Assume all functions of the treasurer as set forth in this code and in California Government Code Sections 41000 to 41007; provided, however, that the city manager may instead assume such duties pursuant to Section 2.12.060(B), upon notice to the city council;

P.    Possess such other powers and perform such additional duties otherwise imposed upon the city clerk by California Government Code Sections 37200 through 37210, including any amendments thereto, which are hereby transferred to the director of finance/treasurer. The director is authorized and required to perform all of such transferred duties;

Q.    Possess such other powers and perform such other functions as the city council or city manager may from time to time specify. (Ord. 14-14 § 2; Ord. 01-10 § 5 (part): prior code § 2.116)

2.24.030 Quarterly statement to city manager and council.
The director of finance/treasurer shall deliver to the city manager and to the council at a regularly scheduled council meeting a budget report showing the budget status at the end of the preceding quarter. (Ord. 01-10 § 5 (part): prior code § 2.117)

2.24.040 Withholding payment when money owed city.
The director of finance/treasurer shall allow no payment:

A.    Without first deducting any indebtedness due from the claimant to the city, if notice of the indebtedness has been received;

B.    In favor of any officer, employee, or individual having custody of any funds or collections for the city, who is delinquent in making the required accounting. (Ord. 01-10 § 5 (part): prior code § 2.118)

Chapter 2.28
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING
Sections:

2.28.010    Office created.

2.28.020    Duties.

2.28.010 Office created.
The office of director of planning is created. The director shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 01-10 § 6 (part): prior code § 2.140)

2.28.020 Duties.
The director of planning shall:

A.    Service as staff to the city manager, city council, city planning commission, and other city committees;

B.    Make recommendations to the city council for the periodic revision and continuing effectuation of the city’s general plan, zoning ordinance, and California Environmental Quality Act guidelines;

C.    Ensure that development proposals conform to the city’s general plan, any other planning documents or policies of the city, and any applicable environmental statutes. The planning director shall report on the relation of the general plan and other applicable plans or ordinances to any development proposal submitted to the city;

D.    Make recommendations on the preliminary maps of all subdivisions submitted to the city and make recommendations on the subdivision of any land in the city and in the unincorporated area surrounding the city limits as provided for by state law, in coordination with the city engineer;

E.    Prepare studies relating to environmental, social, or economic data as he or she deems necessary or as directed by the city council or city manager, and report the findings and conclusions to the city council when requested;

F.    Interpret planning documents and planning related ordinances and advise interested citizens. The planning director shall assist property owners and builders in meeting the city’s planning requirements;

G.    Review all engineering projects for conformance with the city’s general plan and zoning ordinance and coordinate engineering plans with the city engineer;

H.    Supervise the employees and duties of the building department;

I.    Attend regular meetings of the city council and planning commission, and present regular and special oral and written reports requested or necessary to inform the city council or planning commission of matters under the director’s discretion. The director shall, at the direction of the city manager or city council, attend any special meetings;

J.    Perform such other functions as the city council or city manager may from time to time specify. (Ord. 01-10 § 6 (part): prior code § 2.141)

Chapter 2.32
LIBRARY DIRECTOR
Sections:

2.32.010    Office created.

2.32.020    Duties.

2.32.010 Office created.
The office of library director is created. The director shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 01-10 § 7 (part): prior code § 2.150)

2.32.020 Duties.
The library director shall:

A.    Plan, organize, administer, review and evaluate the activities of the library professional and support staff; select staff and provide for their training and professional development;

B.    Direct the preparation and administration of the library budget and oversee administrative programs and procedures;

C.    Establish a collection development policy and act as final authority on selection of titles and materials to be added or deleted from the collection;

D.    Direct and guide the library or organization to change as necessary to remain responsive to community needs;

E.    Ensure that the library fully utilizes current information systems and keeps abreast of new advances in library-related technologies;

F.    Serve as staff to advise and support the library board of trustees as well as advise and support the Wine library board of trustees and serve as liaison for the Silverado Museum with the city of St. Helena;

G.    Perform such other functions as the city council, library board or city manager may from time to time specify. (Ord. 01-10 § 7 (part): prior code § 2.151)

Chapter 2.36
RECREATION DIRECTOR
Sections:

2.36.010    Office created.

2.36.020    Powers and duties.

2.36.010 Office created.
The office of recreation director is created. The director shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 01-10 § 8 (part): prior code § 2.155)

2.36.020 Powers and duties.
The recreation director shall:

A.    Coordinate recreation staff in the development and implementation of community recreation program;

B.    Supervise classes, workshops and activities for persons engaged in recreation programs and co-sponsored programs;

C.    Select, plan and implement cultural arts, physical activities and special interest activities;

D.    Prepare for publication a variety of brochures, calendars, letters, posters, news releases, flyers, and related communications regarding recreation programs;

E.    Coordinate sports programs, registers children for teams, collects fees, acquires coaches, assigns practice times, distributes and collects uniforms;

F.    Schedule games and umpires for basketball, softball and other league sports;

G.    Schedule and runs various tournaments throughout the year, such as basketball tournaments, men’s slow pitch, tennis and coed volleyball;

H.    Provide professional advice to staff, presentations to supervisors, city council, boards, commissions, civic groups and general public;

I.    Assure that assigned areas of responsibility are performed within budget; performs cost control activities, monitors revenue and expenditures in assigned area to assure sound fiscal control; prepares annual budget, assures effective and efficient use of budgeted funds, personnel, materials, facilities, and time. Order all new and replacement equipment;

J.    Coordinate the recreation program with the parks program, other city departments, and outside organizations such as the school district and various community-based organizations;

K.    Prepare reports and maintain necessary operating records;

L.    Receive the public and answers questions; respond to inquiries from employees, citizens and others;

M.    Procure department materials and supplies;

N.    Schedule use of parks and community buildings;

O.    Perform such other functions as the city council, parks and recreation commission or city manager may from time to time specify. (Ord. 01-10 § 8 (part): prior code § 2.156)

Chapter 2.40
CHIEF OF POLICE
Sections:

2.40.010    Office created.

2.40.020    Police department.

2.40.030    Powers and duties.

2.40.040    Discretionary powers.

2.40.010 Office created.
There is created the office of chief of police. The chief shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her law enforcement, executive and administrative qualifications, and shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 01-10 § 4 (part): prior code § 2.100)

2.40.020 Police department.
There is created a police department for the city which shall consist of a chief of police and as many employees as the city manager may designate, as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 01-10 § 4 (part): prior code § 2.101)

2.40.030 Powers and duties.
The chief of police shall:

A.    Exercise the powers of control over the police department including but not limited to control and custody of police facilities and their equipment, books, records and all other property authorized for use of the police department;

B.    Appoint one or more police officers subject to the approval of the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2);

C.    Make, prescribe, review and evaluate such department rules and regulations as he or she deems advisable not in conflict with any applicable federal or state statute or city ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall be binding, on all members of the department and shall provide for, but not be limited to, the conduct of members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or used, hours of service, manpower deployment schedules, vacation schedules, leaves of absence, training, suspension and discipline and other matters necessary or desirable for efficiency of the department;

D.    Appoint special, temporary or reserve police officers to preserve public order, who may be entitled to compensation from the city, upon authorization of the city manager. Special or temporary police officers shall obey all rules, regulations and orders of the police department;

E.    Keep the city jail and maintain custody of all persons incarcerated therein, and maintain an accounting of, and method of safekeeping of, any money and property removed from each person incarcerated therein;

F.    Assure that all members of the police department enforce all ordinances of the city, and all federal and state statutes applicable to, or delegating the power of enforcement thereof to, the police department of the city;

G.    Preserve order and prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof, and be responsible for the suppression of riot, public tumult, disturbance of the peace, or resistance against laws or public authorities to the lawful exercise of their functions. The chief of police shall also be entitled to the powers conferred upon sheriffs by general law and in all respects is entitled to the same protection;

H.    Direct a sufficient number of police officers to attend and keep order at any public meeting in the city at which, in his or her opinion, a breach of the peace may occur;

I.    Perform any license fee or tax collection services prescribed by law;

J.    Take custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered in the city, and maintain an accurate accounting thereof. He or she shall also assure the safety and protection of the property, and if the rightful owner is not found, he or she shall turn the property or proceeds thereof over to an appropriate city officer, or otherwise dispose of such unclaimed property in the manner as may be prescribed by law;

K.    Keep a detailed and current record of all fees received for service of process or other money collected by his or her department or paid to him or her in his or her official capacity. Such record shall be open for public inspection during office hours;

L.    Deposit with the city finance director/treasurer or other designated authority all money collected by his or her department as required by law;

M.    Establish and maintain such other records pertaining to the conduct of police business as required by law, ordinance, resolution, competent authority, or efficient operation of the police department;

N.    Require that all officers receive at least as much recruit and in-service training as the minimum prescribed by the California Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission;

O.    Appoint and designate a commanding officer to act in his or her place whenever he or she is absent from the city on authorized leave of absence or vacation, or otherwise so incapacitated or disabled from illness or injury as to preclude effective performance of his or her duties. Such commanding officer shall possess all of the authority and be responsible for the performance of all of the duties of the chief of police, and shall be subject to approval of the city manager;

P.    Perform such other services as city regulations require;

Q.    Make and maintain crime reports and other reports he or she deems advisable, and file copies of such reports, where required, with other public agencies as may be prescribed by law;

R.    Investigate all charges made against officers and civilian employees by his or her subordinate officers, by citizens, or by higher authority. He or she shall assure that all evidence relating to alleged offenses is discovered and properly documented;

S.    Conduct staff meetings and inspections to evaluate and improve police department performance and efficiency;

T.    Provide information to and maintain external relations with the public;

U.    Provide advice to the city manager and city council on matters relating to law enforcement. (Ord. 01-10 § 4 (part): prior code § 2.102)

2.40.040 Discretionary powers.
The chief of police may, in his or her discretion:

A.    Establish such divisions as provided by ordinance or as may be necessary to discharge the duties of his or her office;

B.    With approval of the city manager, designate personnel as necessary to assist him or her in the administration and supervisory discharge of his or her duties. (Ord. 01-10 § 4 (part): prior code § 2.103)

Chapter 2.44
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Sections:

2.44.010    Bonds of certain city officials.

2.44.020    Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment.

2.44.010 Bonds of certain city officials.
A.    The city clerk, treasurer and any other city officer required by the city council shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, each execute a bond to the city, which shall be approved by the city council after the city attorney has examined the bond, and found it meets with the requirements of the law. The penal amount of each bond of the city officers, shall be as set by resolution of the city council.

B.    The city council shall have power by resolution to order and require any city officer in addition to those specifically mentioned in subsection (A) of this section and any deputy city officer, police officer or employee of the city who handles funds or property of the city to also execute a bond to the city, each in the penal amounts as the city council may fix by resolution. (Prior code § 2.3)

2.44.020 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment.
A.    No person convicted of a felony (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) or a misdemeanor (including pleas of guilty) involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment by any department of the city; provided, however, that the city manager may waive this requirement if mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of conviction, or the fact that the employment classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction.

B.    The mayor, the city council, city clerk, director of public works, chief of police and city attorney are authorized to have access to the “State Summary Criminal History Information” as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California when it is required to assist them to fulfill employment responsibilities set forth in this section. (Ord. 02-5 § 3 (part): prior code § 2.104)

Chapter 2.48
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.48.010    Establishment of fire department.

2.48.020    Fire chief.

2.48.030    Monthly drills.

2.48.040    Ownership of fire department equipment.

2.48.050    Duties of chief.

2.48.060    Primary responsibility to city.

2.48.070    Fire marshal.

Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 5A.2, 5A.3, 5A.4 and 5A.6.

2.48.010 Establishment of fire department.
A department to be hereafter known as the “St. Helena Fire Department” of the city, hereinafter called the fire department, the primary purposes of which shall be the prevention and suppression of fire and the protection of life and property within the city limits is created. The fire department shall consist of the fire chief, the fire marshal, and as many employees as the city manager may designate, as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 5A.1)

2.48.020 Fire chief.
There shall be a chief of the fire department who shall be appointed by the city council. The chief shall be appointed every three years in February of the three-year cycle. The fire department may recommend to the city council prior to appointment of a chief its choice or choices for chief. The chief shall report directly to and be supervised by the city manager as set forth in Section 2.12.060(B)(2). (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

2.48.030 Monthly drills.
The fire department shall conduct, at least twice a month, suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to the safety of life and property from fire. (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 5A.5. Formerly 2.48.050)

2.48.040 Ownership of fire department equipment.
All the equipment now owned or which may be acquired hereafter by the fire department shall belong to the city. (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 5A.7. Formerly 2.48.070)

2.48.050 Duties of chief.
The duties of the chief shall include all of the following: (A) be responsible for the morale and general efficiency of the fire department, (B) take charge of any fire that may occur, (C) see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, (D) serve as the head of the fire department with responsibility for supervising department employees, making recommendations to the city manager regarding personnel actions pursuant to Section 2.12.060(B)(2), and taking personnel actions as authorized by the city’s personnel policies and rules, and (E) perform all duties imposed upon the chief by all applicable laws, and rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of the chief, the next ranking officer of the fire department shall discharge the chief’s duties and exercise the chief’s powers. (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 5A.8. Formerly 2.48.080)

2.48.060 Primary responsibility to city.
The primary responsibility of the fire department is to provide fire protection and suppression to the territory within the city; provided, however, the city council may enter into agreements with the county or other public agencies to provide fire suppression services outside the city limits and to provide for mutual aid. (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 5A.9. Formerly 2.48.090)

2.48.070 Fire marshal.
The fire chief shall recommend to the city manager the appointment of a fire marshal to administer the uniform fire code inspection program. The fire marshal shall have power to inspect all premises within the city at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining if any state laws, provisions of this code or any ordinances of the city, or any regulations of the city council are being violated, or any conditions exist, which, in the fire marshal’s judgment, create fire hazards. (Ord. 16-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

Chapter 2.50
ADOPTION BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION OF PROTOCOLS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT, MEMBERSHIP AND OPERATION OF CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Sections:

2.50.010    Findings and purpose.

2.50.020    Authority to adopt protocols for the establishment, membership and operation of city boards, commissions and committees.

2.50.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds that the St. Helena Municipal Code provides in various sections for the establishment, membership, terms, procedures and operation of the city’s various boards, commissions and committees. The welfare and interests of the public would be served by allowing the city council to act by resolution to adopt, and to amend from time to time, protocols governing the establishment, membership, terms, procedures and operations of the city’s various boards, commissions and committees. The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the city council to do so. (Ord. 14-12 § 1 (part))

2.50.020 Authority to adopt protocols for the establishment, membership and operation of city boards, commissions and committees.
The city council shall have the authority to act by resolution to adopt, and to amend from time to time, protocols governing the establishment, membership, terms, procedures and operations of the city’s various boards, commissions and committees. Such protocols shall govern in the event of any conflict between the protocols and any other section or provision contained in the municipal code. (Ord. 14-12 § 1 (part))

Chapter 2.52
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
Sections:

2.52.010    Library established—Composition, and appointment of members—Term of board of library trustees.

2.52.020    Meetings of board—Quorum—Officers—Records.

2.52.030    Powers of board.

2.52.040    Annual report of board.

2.52.050    Library fund.

2.52.060    Free use of library.

2.52.070    Contract for lending books.

2.52.080    Title to library property.

2.52.010 Library established—Composition, and appointment of members—Term of board of library trustees.
The free public library heretofore established and now maintained by the city shall be known as the “Dr. George J. Wood and Elsie M. Wood Library,” and shall be managed by a board of library trustees, consisting of seven members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Trustees shall hold office for two years, with the term of office to expire at the end of the fiscal year. The city council may establish one-year terms for the purpose of staggering term expirations. Trustees shall be residents of the city; provided, that the mayor reserves the authority to appoint nonresidents as trustees on a case-by-case basis, with the consent of the city council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments are made. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 14-6 § 1: prior code § 8.1)

2.52.020 Meetings of board—Quorum—Officers—Records.
The board of library trustees shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time by four trustees, by written notice served upon each member at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall appoint one of their number chairperson, who shall serve for one year and until his or her successor is appointed, and in his or her absence, shall select a chairperson pro tem or vice-chairperson. The board shall cause a proper record of their proceedings to be kept. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.2)

2.52.030 Powers of board.
The board of library trustees shall have the power:

A.    Subject to approval and confirmation thereof by the city council, to make and enforce all rules, regulations and bylaws necessary for the administration, government and protection of the public library, and all property belonging thereto;

B.    To administer any trust declared or created for such library, and to receive by gift, devise or bequest and hold in trust or otherwise, property situated in the state or elsewhere, and where not otherwise provided, dispose of the same for the benefit of such library;

C.    To advise the city council in fixing the duties and powers of the library director;

D.    To review and approve the library’s annual budget and to make recommendations to the city council, which may adopt, reject or modify the recommendation when it makes the final budget decision, and to purchase necessary books, journals, publications and other personal property;

E.    To require the Secretary of State and other state officials to furnish such library with copies of any and all reports, laws and other publications of the state not otherwise disposed of by law;

F.    To borrow books from, lend books to and exchange the same with other libraries, and to allow nonresidents to borrow books upon such conditions as they may prescribe. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.3)

2.52.040 Annual report of board.
The board of library trustees shall, on or before the first Monday in April in each year, make a report to the legislative body of the municipality, giving the condition of the library on the first Monday in April, together with a statement of their proceedings for the year then ended, and forward a copy thereof to the state library at Sacramento. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.4)

2.52.050 Library fund.
All money acquired by gift, devise, bequest, or otherwise, for the purposes of the library, shall be apportioned to a fund to be designated the library fund, and be applied to the purpose authorized by this chapter. The library fund may consist of any combination of bank accounts, municipal budget accounts or trust funds. If such payment into the treasury should be inconsistent with the terms of any such gift, devise or bequest, the board shall provide for the safety and preservation of the same, and the application thereof to the use of the library, in accordance with the terms and conditions of such gift, devise or bequest. Payments from the fund shall be ordered by the board of library trustees in the manner provided for the payment of other demands against the municipality. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 02-5 § 10: prior code § 8.6)

2.52.060 Free use of library.
The public library shall be forever free to the inhabitants and nonresident taxpayers of the city, subject always to such rules, regulations and bylaws as may be established by the board of library trustees, with the approval and confirmation thereof by the city council. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.7)

2.52.070 Contract for lending books.
The board of library trustees may contract for lending the books of such library to residents of counties or neighboring municipalities upon a reasonable compensation to be paid by such counties or neighboring municipalities. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.8)

2.52.080 Title to library property.
The title of all property acquired for the purpose of such library, when not inconsistent with the terms of its acquisition or otherwise designated, shall vest in the municipality in which the library is, and in the name of the municipal corporation, may be sued for and defended by action at law or otherwise. (Ord. 16-6 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): prior code § 8.9)

Chapter 2.56
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:

2.56.010    Membership.

2.56.020    Meetings.

2.56.030    Duties.

2.56.040    Budget submittal.

2.56.010 Membership.
The parks and recreation commission shall consist of five members. Commissioners shall be residents of the city; provided, that the mayor reserves the authority to appoint nonresidents to the commission on a case-by-case basis, with the consent of the city council. Commissioners shall serve for a term of two years, with the term of office to expire at the end of the fiscal year. The city council may establish one-year terms for some trustees for the purpose of staggering term expirations. Each commissioner shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council and may be removed without cause by the city council. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. The superintendent of schools of the St. Helena Unified School District shall be an ex officio member of the commission. (Ord. 14-6 § 2: prior code § 2.120)

2.56.020 Meetings.
The commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time by three commissioners, with written notice served upon each commissioner at least three hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The commissioners shall appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson from their number, each of whom shall serve for one year and until his or her successor is appointed. The commission shall cause a proper record of their proceedings to be kept and shall file minutes of all meetings with the city clerk. (Prior code § 2.121)

2.56.030 Duties.
The duties of the commission shall be as follows:

A.    To act in an advisory capacity to the city council and its recreation director in all matters pertaining to the public parks and recreation and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound parks and recreation planning and programming;

B.    To formulate policies on recreation services for approval by the city council;

C.    To advise with the city council and its recreation director on problems of administration, development of parks and recreation areas, facilities, programs and improved recreation services;

D.    To recommend the adoption of standards on organization, personnel, areas and facilities, program and financial support;

E.    To make periodic inventories of recreation services that exist or may be needed and interpret the needs of the public to the city council;

F.    To aid in coordinating the recreation services with the programs of other governmental agencies and voluntary organizations. (Prior code § 2.122)

2.56.040 Budget submittal.
The commission shall submit annually a budget to the city council for its approval in whole or in part. The budget should provide not only for recreation services and operating costs for the ensuing year, but should also contain estimates and recommendations for such long-term capital outlay as may be necessary to provide for an orderly and coordinated development program. (Prior code § 2.123)

Chapter 2.60
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:

2.60.010    Created—Composition—Appointment and terms of members—Vacancies.

2.60.020    Removal of members—Compensation of members.

2.60.030    Chairperson—Meetings—Records—Subordinate officers and employees.

2.60.040    Adoption of general city plan.

2.60.050    Powers and duties generally.

2.60.010 Created—Composition—Appointment and terms of members—Vacancies.
There is created a city planning commission to consist of five members, not officials of the county or city, who shall reside within the St. Helena city limits. The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall make all appointments to the city planning commission. One term of office shall expire on June 30, 1990; two terms of office shall expire on June 30, 1992; and two terms of office shall expire on June 30, 1993. Except as so provided for, the terms of members shall be four years. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 11-1 § 2: prior code § 2.8)

2.60.020 Removal of members—Compensation of members.
Any appointed member of the planning commission may be removed by resolution of the city council. Each member of the commission shall be paid the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. (Prior code § 2.9)

2.60.030 Chairperson—Meetings—Records—Subordinate officers and employees.
The commission shall elect a chairperson from among the appointed members for a term of one year, and subject to other provisions of law may elect such other officers as it may determine. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The city council shall appoint such other officers and employees and contract for such services as it may deem necessary for the accomplishment of the commission’s work, subject to all provisions of law; and provided, that all expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. (Prior code § 2.10)

2.60.040 Adoption of general city plan.
It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt, subject to the provisions of law, a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the city, and of any land outside the boundaries thereof, which, in the commission’s judgment, there is relation to the planning of the city. (Prior code § 2.11)

2.60.050 Powers and duties generally.
The planning commission shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed by law and shall be governed by the procedures provided by law. (Prior code § 2.12)

Chapter 2.64
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sections:

2.64.010    Purposes.

2.64.020    Emergency defined.

2.64.030    Emergency council membership.

2.64.040    Emergency council powers and duties.

2.64.050    Director and assistant director of emergency services.

2.64.060    Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services.

2.64.070    Emergency organization.

2.64.080    Emergency plan.

2.64.090    Expenditures.

2.64.100    Punishment of violations.

2.64.010 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Prior code § 5.1)

2.64.020 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Prior code § 5.2)

2.64.030 Emergency council membership.
The St. Helena emergency council is created and shall consist of the following:

A.    The mayor, who shall be chair;

B.    The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chair;

C.    The assistant director of emergency services;

D.    Members of the city council;

E.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

F.    Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Prior code § 5.3)

2.64.040 Emergency council powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the St. Helena emergency council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The emergency council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairperson. (Prior code § 5.4)

2.64.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B.    There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The chief of police shall be the assistant director of emergency services. (Prior code § 5.5)

2.64.060 Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services.
A.    The director is empowered to:

1.    Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2.    Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3.    Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4.    Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5.    Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

6.    In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered:

a.    To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

b.    To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c.    To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or in the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d.    To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

e.    To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the director by this chapter by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

B.    The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

C.    The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Prior code § 5.6)

2.64.070 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.64.060(A)(6)(C), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of St. Helena. (Prior code § 5.7)

2.64.080 Emergency plan.
The St. Helena emergency council shall be responsible for the development of the city of St. Helena emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 5.8)

2.64.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of St. Helena. (Prior code § 5.9)

2.64.100 Punishment of violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person during any emergency to:

A.    Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of such inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.    Wear, carry, or display without authority, any means of identification specified by the city or the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 02-5 § 6: prior code § 5.10)

Chapter 2.68
PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Sections:

2.68.010    Declaration.

2.68.020    Adherence to standards.

2.68.010 Declaration.
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Prior code § 2.30)

2.68.020 Adherence to standards.
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city, while receiving aid from the state of California, pursuant to said Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission of Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Prior code § 2.31)

Chapter 2.72
EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Sections:

2.72.010    Authorization.

2.72.020    Execution.

2.72.010 Authorization.
A contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California State Employees’ Retirement System is authorized, a copy of said contract being marked “Exhibit A,” and set out at the end of this chapter, and by such reference made a part of this section as though set out in full. (Prior code § 11B.1)

2.72.020 Execution.
The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute the contract for and on behalf on said agency. (Prior code § 11B.2)

EXHIBIT “A”

CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BOARD OF ADMINISTRATION PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ST. HELENA.

In consideration of the covenants and agreement hereafter contained and on the part of both parties to be kept and performed, the CITY COUNCIL, of the CITY OF ST. HELENA, hereafter referred to as “Public Agency” and the Board of Administration, Public Employees’ Retirement System, hereafter referred to as “Board” hereby agree as follows:

1.    All words and terms used herein which are defined in the Public Employees’ Retirement Law shall have the meaning as defined therein unless otherwise specifically provided. “Normal retirement age” shall mean age 60 for miscellaneous members and age 55 for local safety members.

2.    Public Agency shall participate in the Public Employees’ Retirement System from and after March 1st, 1968, making its employees as hereinafter provided, members of said System subject to all provisions of the Public Employees’ Retirement Law except such as apply only on election of a contracting agency and are not provided for herein and to all amendments to said Law hereafter enacted except such as by express provisions thereof apply only on the election of contracting agencies.

3.    Employees of Public Agency in the following classes shall become members of said Retirement System except such in each such class as are excluded by law or this agreement: (a) Local firemen (herein referred to as local safety members); (b) Local policemen (herein referred to as local safety members); (c) Employees other than local safety members (herein referred to as miscellaneous members).

The following employees shall be excluded from membership in said Retirement System:

(Exclude Recreation Department Employees—Exclude Persons Compensated on an Hourly Basis)

4.    The fraction of final compensation to be provided for each year of credited service as a miscellaneous member upon retirement at normal retirement age shall be 1/60 and shall be applied as provided in Section 212511.1 of said Retirement Law and reduced to 1/90 for members covered under Federal Social Security in accordance with Section 21251.14 of said Retirement Law.

5.    The fraction of final compensation to be provided for each year of credited service as a local safety member shall be determined in accordance with Section 21252.4 and shall be reduced for members covered under Federal Social Security in accordance with Section 21252.45 of said Retirement Law.

6.    Benefits on account of prior service shall be 100% of the fraction of final compensation specified for miscellaneous members in Paragraph 4 above, but computed in accordance with Section 21253 of said Retirement Law, and for local safety members shall be 100% of the fraction established in accordance with Paragraph 5; provided, however, as to both miscellaneous and local safety members that said fraction shall be reduced by one-third for application to the first $400.00 per month of final compensation of any member whose position is covered by Federal Social Security for all prior service of such member, whether or not the service is included in Federal Social Security.

7.    The retirement benefits payable upon retirement for ordinary disability shall not be affected by the modification provided in Paragraph 4 and 5 of this contract except that for the purposes of the limit on any such allowance imposed under Section 21297, Government Code, allowances for retirement for service shall be computed according to the modified formula set out in Paragraph 4 and 5 of the contract. All other provisions of this contract shall be fully applicable to the computation of allowances upon retirement for disability.

8.    Contributions for miscellaneous and local safety members shall be subject to Sections 20601.5 and 20612 of said Retirement Law respectively, said sections providing for a reduction in rates of contribution as such rates relate to the first $400.00 of monthly compensation and 100% of such rates as they apply to the remainder of the monthly compensation. Members whose positions are excluded from Social Security coverage shall contribute in accordance with Sections 20601 and 20607.5 of said Retirement Law.

9.    The following additional provisions of the Public Employees’ Retirement law which apply only upon election of a contracting agency shall apply to the Public Agency and its employees:

(a)    Section 20024.01 (defining “final compensation” on the basis of a period of three consecutive years).

(b)    Section 21258 (b) (providing a minimum retirement allowance of $720.00 per year under certain conditions).

(c)    Section 21367.51 (providing a $400.00 death benefit upon death after retirement).

(d)    Section 20025 (providing for inclusion of compensation without limit in computations where compensation is a factor).

(e)    Section 21365.5 (providing a monthly allowance in lieu of the basic death benefit for certain survivors of a member who dies in employment after qualifying for voluntary service retirement).

10.    Public Agency shall contribute to said Retirement System as follows:

(a)    With respect to miscellaneous members, the city shall contribute the following percentages of monthly salaries earned as miscellaneous members of said System:

(1)    3.850 percent until June 30, 1993 on account of the liability for prior service benefits.

(2)    4.218 percent on account of the liability for current service benefits.

(3)    8.645 percent on account of the liability for current service benefits.

(b)    With respect to local safety members, the city shall contribute the following percentages of monthly salaries earned as local safety members of said System:

(1)    6.945 percent until June 30, 1993 on account of the liability for prior service benefits.

(2)    8.645 percent on account of the liability for current service benefits.

(c)    A reasonable amount per annum, as fixed by Board to cover the costs of administering said System as it affects the employees of Public Agency, not including the costs of special valuations or the periodical investigations and valuation required by law, provided that said amount shall be determined on the basis of the number of employees of Public Agency who are reported as members on a payroll to be designated by this System covering one month of each year, or with respect to the first year of participation on the effective date of said participation.

(d)    A reasonable amount as fixed by the Board, payable in one installment as the occasions arise, to cover costs of special valuations on account of employees of Public Agency, and costs of the periodical investigation and valuation required by law.

11.    Contributions required of Public Agency and its employees shall be subject to adjustment by Board on account of amendments to the State Employees’ Retirement Law, and on account of the experience under the Retirement System, as determined by the periodical investigation and valuation required by said Retirement Law.

12.    Contributions required of Public Agency and its employees shall be paid by Public Agency to the Retirement System within thirty days after the end of the period to which said contributions refer. If more or less than the correct amount of contributions is paid for any period, proper adjustment shall be made in connection with subsequent remittances, or adjustments on account of errors in contributions required of any employee may be made by direct cash payments between the employee and Board. Payments by Public Agency to Board may be made in the form of warrants, bank checks, bank drafts, certified checks, money orders, or cash.

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.04    Purchase of Supplies, Equipment and Services, and Procedures for Public Works Projects

3.08    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.12    Miscellaneous Fiscal Provisions

3.16    Assessment and Collection of Taxes Generally

3.20    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.24    Uniform Sales and Use Tax

3.25    Transactions and Use Taxes

3.28    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.32    Development Impact Fees

Chapter 3.04
PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES, AND PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
Article 1

Generally

Sections:

3.04.010    Purpose—Objectives—Scope—Responsibilities.

3.04.020    Definitions.

3.04.030    Staging prohibited.

3.04.040    Appeals.

Article 2

Supplies, General Services and Equipment

Sections:

3.04.050    Purchasing officer—Powers and duties.

3.04.060    Requisitions.

3.04.070    Purchase orders.

3.04.080    Contracts.

3.04.090    Encumbrance of funds.

3.04.100    Bidding procedures for various purchase amounts.

3.04.110    Departmental purchases.

3.04.120    Informal bid procedure.

3.04.130    Formal bid procedure.

3.04.140    Special equipment/supplies, sole source purchases, and bid exceptions.

3.04.150    Cooperative purchasing with other agencies.

3.04.160    Recycled supply products specification.

3.04.170    Emergencies.

3.04.175    Declared emergencies.

3.04.180    Surplus supplies and equipment.

3.04.190    Inspection and tests.

Article 3

Public Works Projects

Sections:

3.04.200    Uniform construction cost accounting procedures.

3.04.210    Bidding procedures for various project amounts.

3.04.220    Negotiate contract or purchase order procedures.

3.04.230    Informal bidding procedures.

3.04.240    Formal bidding procedures.

3.04.250    Bonds.

3.04.260    No bids received.

3.04.270    Tie bids.

3.04.280    Rejection of bids.

3.04.290    Emergencies.

3.04.300    Prevailing wages required.

3.04.310    Pre-qualification of bidders.

Article 4

Professional Services

Sections:

3.04.320    Award of professional service contracts based upon competence.

3.04.330    Request for proposal/qualification.

3.04.340    Contracting authority.

Article 1

Generally

3.04.010 Purpose—Objectives—Scope—Responsibilities.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient procedure for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services, and to establish a procedure for performing or contracting for the construction of public works consistent with state law. These procedures are intended to allow the city to obtain the best professional services, to acquire quality supplies, general services and equipment, to construct public works at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, and to exercise positive financial control over purchases and also to define authority for the purchasing function. These procedures apply to all city employees. These procedures apply to all purchases of supplies, equipment and services, including purchases made online or over the phone. Employees are responsible for reading and understanding the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.90.010)

3.04.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Bidder’s list” means a list of responsible prospective vendors capable of providing the items being bid upon.

“Contract” means an agreement, regardless of how titled, for the procurement of supplies, equipment or services, including without limitation a verbal or written agreement between the city and a contractor, the city and a service provider, and/or the city and a vendor.

“Emergency” means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services.

“Equipment” means furnishings, machinery, vehicles, rolling stock, and other personal property used in the city’s business.

“General services” are services such as janitorial, uniform cleaning, maintenance work and other services which do not require any unique skill, special background, or training. Obtaining such services at the lowest cost is the single most important factor in selection, as opposed to personal performance.

“Maintenance work” means:

1.    Routine, recurring, and usual work for the cleaning, preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes;

2.    Minor repainting;

3.    Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch;

4.    Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems;

5.    Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water or waste disposal systems including, but not limited to, dams and reservoirs.

“Professional or special services” means any work performed by an attorney, doctor, architect, engineer, land surveyor, construction manager, appraiser, expert, accounting firm, planner, consultant or those services such as computer services, and other services which require special performance criteria, specific experience, training, personal judgment, quality of work or factors other than simply obtaining the service at the lowest cost to the city.

“Public work” means a type of public construction project subject to the regulation of the California Public Contract Code, such as:

1.    The erection, construction of, alteration, major painting, repair, or demolition of public buildings, streets, walkways, water and sewer facilities, drainage facilities, or other public facilities, whether owned, leased, or operated by the city;

2.    Furnishing supplies for any of the above works or projects;

3.    Public work does not include “maintenance work” as defined in this chapter.

“Purchase” includes the renting, leasing, purchasing, licensing, or a trade of equipment or supplies.

“Purchase order” is a written contract for equipment, supplies, or services with a specified consultant, contractor, or vendor and is initiated by a purchase order requisition. A purchase order submitted by an authorized person becomes a legally binding contract. It can stand alone or include attachments for clarification purposes. A purchase order encumbers the specified amounts to provide specified equipment, supplies, services, and/or fixed assets. Regular purchasers may be paid through a one-time payment of an amount up to the purchase order amount at the conclusion of performance (delivery of supplies, services, etc.), and/or incremental (progress) payments as provided in the contract for each time items are purchased.

“Purchasing officer” means the finance director or his or her designated representative.

“Requisition” is a request to authorize the acquisition of equipment, supplies or services from a specified consultant, contractor, or vendor.

“Services” means the furnishing of labor, time or effort to perform or complete a designated task.

“Special equipment/supplies” means unique supplies, machinery, computers, or other equipment which are not generally and regularly ordered in bulk by the city and which must perform complex tasks, or integrate efficiently with existing equipment or supplies.

“Supplies” means office supplies, janitorial supplies, materials, goods, tools, or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city’s business, excepting supplies for a public work which is regulated under Section 3.04.210.

“Uniform construction cost accounting procedures” means those procedures and rules established by the State Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission pursuant to California Public Contract Code Section 22030 et seq. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.90.020)

3.04.030 Staging prohibited.
Purchases and public works contracts shall not be knowingly staged or separated into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive formal or informal bidding requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.90.030)

3.04.040 Appeals.
Any dispute, contention, or disagreement relative to interpretation, application or enforcement of this chapter shall be submitted to the city council for determination in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.90.040)

Article 2

Supplies, General Services and Equipment

3.04.050 Purchasing officer—Powers and duties.
The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those duties of any other officer or position in the city. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to:

A.    Purchase needed city supplies, general services, equipment and special equipment/supplies which are not included within the construction contract or proposed specifications for a construction contract of a public work being administered by any other city department;

B.    Investigate, keep knowledgeable about, negotiate, and recommend on the execution of contracts or the purchasing of supplies, general services, and equipment pursuant to the procedures of this chapter and such administrative rules and regulations as prescribed by the city;

C.    Keep informed of current developments concerning purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products;

D.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the proper operation of this purchasing system;

E.    Supervise the inspection of all supplies, general services, and equipment purchased under this chapter in order to assure conformance with city specifications;

F.    Supervise the transfer of surplus and unused supplies and equipment or sale or disposal of such;

G.    Maintain up-to-date bidder’s list, vendors’ catalogs, files and such other records as needed to perform these duties;

H.    Ensure that purchasing specifications are open and nonrestrictive to encourage full competition; and

I.    Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper conduct of purchasing of supplies, general services, and equipment. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.010)

3.04.060 Requisitions.
Except as authorized under Section 3.04.100(A), any department requesting supplies, general services, equipment, or special equipment/supplies shall submit to the immediate supervisor a requisition on the purchasing officer’s approved form prior to initiating any procurement. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.020)

3.04.070 Purchase orders.
Except for departmental purchases as authorized in Section 3.04.100(A), purchases of supplies, general services, most special equipment/supplies and general equipment not covered within a construction contract or public works specification may be made only by purchase orders issued by the purchasing officer and any other contractual document he or she determines is necessary. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.030)

3.04.080 Contracts.
The purchasing officer does not have the authority to sign contracts, nor to bind the city contractually. Contracts may only be entered into by the city manager. Subject to Section 3.04.340 contracts may only be entered into by the city manager; contracts in excess of city manager authority require city council approval, without which such contract is not valid. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.040)

3.04.090 Encumbrance of funds.
Except in case of an emergency or where specific authority is first obtained from the city council or the city manager, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for purchasing of supplies, general services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.050)

3.04.100 Bidding procedures for various purchase amounts.
Except as authorized in Sections 3.04.140 and 3.04.150, or in the case of emergencies as described in Sections 3.04.170 and 3.04.175, the purchase of supplies, general services, equipment and special equipment/supplies not included in a construction contract or bid specification for a public work, shall be made as follows:

A.    A purchase of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less may be made by departmental purchase in accordance with Section 3.04.110.

B.    A purchase greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be made by an informal bid procedure in accordance with Section 3.04.120.

C.    A purchase of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made by formal bid procedure in accordance with Section 3.04.130. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.060)

3.04.110 Departmental purchases.
A department may, independently of the purchase officer, purchase specified and limited supplies, equipment, special equipment/supplies and general services not included in a construction contract or bid specification for a public work, as follows:

A.    Purchases of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less: requestor receives a verbal/written approval from supervisor, department keeps a record of such purchases and exercises reasonable prudence in seeking price quotes and purchasing such items. All purchases shall be made with funds in an unencumbered appropriation. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.070)

3.04.120 Informal bid procedure.
The purchase of supplies, equipment, special equipment/supplies and general services not included in a construction contract or bid specification for a public work with the estimated value greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but not exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall be made by a purchase order as required by this chapter. Said purchases, subject to the department head’s discretion, based upon a small amount, or urgent need and timeliness, may be let without the formal bidding procedures described in Section 3.04.130. In such case, the following procedures shall be followed:

A.    Solicitation of Bids. If it is determined that the request is of a sufficient size and time allows, the purchasing officer or designee, before issuing the purchase order to a specific contractor/vendor, shall: for purchases greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), obtain at least three written bids or price quotes. The purchasing officer or designee may negotiate to obtain the lowest possible contract amount from any vendor contacted who can provide supplies, general service, or equipment within the time constraints of the department’s request. The purchasing officer or designee may solicit or determine bids of prospective vendors by written request, telephone, or may base award recommendations upon current catalogs or advertisements.

B.    Local Preference. Quality and service being equal, a local preference of one percent shall be given to local bidders located within the city, the difference being the sales tax the city would receive on the sale in the case of vendors.

C.    Maintenance of Records. After placing the order, a written record of the contract, bids, quotes or advertisements used or received shall be open public records and maintained by the purchasing officer or the department for a period of two years.

D.    Award. The purchasing officer or designee shall award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, vendor or offeror whose quote, bid, or proposal fulfills the purpose intended, provided the amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item, or reject such bids or proposals, or negotiate further for terms more favorable to the city. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.080)

3.04.130 Formal bid procedure.
For supplies, equipment, special equipment/supplies and general services not included in a construction contract or bid specification for a public work with an estimated value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), purchases shall be made in accordance with the following formal written bid procedures:

A.    Published Notices. A notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of the opening of bids. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, and also in appropriate trade publications, if any, circulated within the general area. Such other notice as the purchasing officer or designee deems appropriate shall be made.

B.    Notices Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the goods, articles, services or equipment to be purchased, any required bidder’s security or performance bonds, state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for the opening of bids.

C.    Bidder’s List. The purchasing officer or designee shall maintain a list of responsible bidders for various categories of supplies, equipment, and general services. A solicitation for a bid shall be sent to all responsible prospective contractors or suppliers whose names are on the bidder’s list for the category of equipment, supplies or general services subject to the bid request.

D.    Bidder’s Security/Failure to Sign Contract. If the city requires a bidder’s bond or other form of security, the bidder’s security shall be prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the bid amount. Bidder’s security shall be either a cash deposit with the city, a cashier’s or certified check payable to the city, or a bidder’s bond. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within sixty (60) days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of its bid security, as may be determined by the city council, upon the bidder’s refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the date of the award of the contract. On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to execute the contract, the council may award the contract to the next lowest responsive, responsible bidder.

E.    Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk’s office and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and “Bid” on the envelope. Bids shall be opened by city staff in public at the time and place stated and as described in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation shall be made at that time of all bids received, and shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of two years after the bid opening.

F.    Local Preference. Quality and service being equal, a local preference of one percent shall be given to local bidders located within the city, the difference being the sales tax the city would receive on the sale in the case of vendors.

G.    Bid Evaluation Procedures. All bids and bidders shall be analyzed by purchasing officer or designee and the responsible department for bidder’s qualifications and compliance with bid specifications. The purchasing officer or designee shall prepare a recommendation to the department for award or rejection; the department shall then prepare a recommendation for award or rejection to the city council.

H.    Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject all bids and readvertise. If no bids are received, the city council may proceed with the procurement without further complying with this chapter using whatever method it deems appropriate, such as rebid, abandon acquisition, or negotiate a contract.

I.    Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid fulfills the purpose intended according to criteria designated in the solicitation, provided the award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item. The city council may waive any minor bid irregularities.

J.    Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the council may accept either bid or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tied bidders.

K.    Performance Bonds. The city may require a performance bond in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. If the city requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.090)

3.04.140 Special equipment/supplies, sole source purchases, and bid exceptions.
A.    Special Equipment/Supplies. In purchasing any special equipment or supplies needed to be compatible with existing equipment, or to perform complex or unique functions, the purchasing officer or department head may:

1.    Limit bidding to a specific product type, or a brand name product; or

2.    Utilize a request for proposal approach where warranties, servicing obligations, and product performance will be evaluated in addition to the price of the product, and the award of the contract is made by the council to the proposer it deems is in the best public interest.

B.    Sole Source Purchases. Commodities or services that can be obtained from only one vendor, or one distributor authorized to sell in this area, are exempt from the competitive bidding requirements in Section 3.04.100 and are deemed sole source purchases. Sole source purchases may include proprietary items sold direct from the manufacturer. All sole source purchases shall be supported by written documentation indicating the facts and nature supporting the determination of a sole source, signed by the appropriate department head and forwarded to the purchasing officer. Approval of any sole source acquisition shall be obtained from the city council for an award of a contract or purchase order greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).

C.    Bid Exceptions. The competitive bid process is not applicable to certain purchases. The following are exempt from bid processes of this chapter:

1.    Departmental purchases, as defined in Section 3.04.110;

2.    Subscriptions;

3.    Trade circulars or books;

4.    Newspaper advertisements and notices;

5.    Utility payments;

6.    Land. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.100)

3.04.150 Cooperative purchasing with other agencies.
The bidding requirements of Section 3.04.100 shall not apply to the purchasing of any equipment or supplies which the purchasing officer decides to obtain through a cooperative competitive bidding procedure prepared by and processed through another public, local, state, or federal governmental agency. If it is determined to be in the best interest of the city, the purchasing officer is authorized to “piggy-back” onto or join into an existing written purchase contract, which contract was obtained within the last twelve (12) months through a competitive bidding process prepared by and awarded by another public, local, state or federal government agency. However, the city council’s approval shall be required prior to and for the joining of a “piggy-back” purchase or cooperative purchase for a purchase greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.110)

3.04.160 Recycled supply products specification.
If in procuring supplies a recycled product can achieve the necessary city performance standard, and if such recycled product is readily available, specifications should, if economically feasible, require products made with recycled materials be bid. If the department head determines that: (A) a recycled product lacks performance capabilities or needed quality levels; or (B) a sufficient amount of such recycled or reusable product is not currently available in the market, then a reduced percentage can be required, or the supply specification can be limited to nonrecycled or virgin materials. When recycled products are required, reasonable efforts shall be made to label the products as containing recycled materials. As used in this section, “recycled products” does not mean used products, but is limited to new products made with materials which have been recycled. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.120)

3.04.170 Emergencies.
Bidding procedures may be dispensed with in the case of an emergency. The city council delegates to the city manager the authority to declare a public emergency and enter into contracts for any purchase in accordance with Section 3.04.175. The city manager’s authority is subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting for any purchase in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.130)

3.04.175 Declared emergencies.
A.    Purpose. This section modifies the city’s normal purchasing practices only during a proclaimed emergency. With this revised policy, the city is able to acquire goods and services required to address an immediate threat to life, public health or safety, or an immediate threat of significant damage to improved public and private property while maintaining an effective purchasing policy.

B.    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions are applicable:

A “proclaimed disaster” or “emergency” exists if (1) the Governor has declared a state of emergency for an area which includes the geographic territory of the city, or (2) the city manager or his or her designee has declared an emergency in the city.

“Exigent circumstances” are situations in which (1) a disaster or emergency has been proclaimed, and (2) the public exigency for goods and services required to address an immediate threat to life, public health or safety, or improved public and private property will not permit competitive solicitation.

C.    Delegation of Purchasing Authority in Exigent Circumstances. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that goods and services must be procured before the city council is to assemble and approve purchases, the city manager or his or her designee has the authority, subject to the limitations set forth below, to approve the immediate rental and/or purchase of any equipment, supplies, services, or other items necessary to respond to an immediate threat to life, public health or safety, or improved public and private property.

1.    Limits of Single Purchase Authority. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to make individual purchases up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on his or her signature alone. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to make purchases in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) up to a maximum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) when countersigned by the mayor or, in the mayor’s absence, countersigned by another council member.

2.    Limits of Aggregate Purchase Authority. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to make aggregate purchases up to one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) on his or her signature alone per disaster declaration. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to make aggregate purchases in excess of one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) and up to a maximum of two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) per disaster declaration when countersigned by the mayor or, in the mayor’s absence, countersigned by another council member.

a.    Sub-delegation to the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) Director. The EOC director shall be a designee of the city manager at any time that the city manager is not available to approve purchases as allowed in this section.

b.    Sub-delegation of Purchasing Authority to Department Heads. If neither the city manager or his or her designee nor the EOC director is available, then any city department head has the authority to rent or purchase from the nearest source, any equipment, supplies, services, or other items necessary for any department to respond to an immediate threat to health, safety, or improved property, up to a maximum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

c.    Sub-delegation of Purchasing Authority to Mid-Managers. If neither the city manager or his or her designee, EOC director, or any department head is not available, then any employee classified as a mid-manager has the authority to rent or purchase from the nearest source any equipment, supplies, services, or other items necessary for any department to respond to an immediate threat to health, safety, or improved property, up to a maximum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).

D.    Administrative Procedures and Reporting Requirements.

1.    As soon as possible after purchases are made under subsection C of this section, the city manager or his or her designee, EOC director, department head or midmanager shall submit to the finance director or designee a purchase order requisition and a notation that the commodity has been ordered on an emergency basis from the vendor designated.

2.    The finance director will inform the city manager or his or her designee and the city council of any individual purchase under this section with a contract amount greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), and also whenever the aggregate of purchases under this section is greater than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).

3.    The finance director will obtain the city manager’s or his or her designee’s (or EOC director as the city manager’s designee) approval prior to any purchase by a department head if the amount is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more.

4.    If the city manager or his or her designee and the EOC director are unavailable, and the delay in getting his or her signature would imperil life, public health or safety, or improved public or private property, then any department head (except the requestor) may approve the emergency purchase of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more.

5.    The finance director or designee shall have the authority to approve all disaster-related purchases under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

6.    The finance director or designee will expedite the verification of funds available and complete the preparation of the purchase order.

E.    Procurement Procedures in Exigent Circumstances. Upon receipt of the requisitions under subsection D of this section, the finance director or designee shall prepare purchase orders for emergency equipment, supplies, services or other items in accordance with the requirements of this section.

1.    Exempt Purchases. Purchases of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or less shall not be required to be formally bid. Purchases greater than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) may be made following the procedures specified in this section. The signature(s) of the city manager or his or her designee, finance director, or department head are still required as provided in subsections C and D of this section.

2.    Justification of “Sole Source” or “No Bid” Contracts. Where exigent circumstances require immediate procurement from the nearest available source, the finance director or designee shall justify the emergency sole source purchase or no bid purchase on the purchase order.

a.    Procurement should be limited to that portion of the work that must be performed immediately, and subsequent procurement by competitive proposal for the remainder of the work under the city’s normal purchasing policy (this chapter).

b.    “Sole source” or “no bid” acquisitions shall be necessary for one of the following reasons: placement of emergency protective measures; procurement of scarce commodities, goods, or services; or acquisition or rental of emergency equipment, emergency consulting services, emergency road clearance, or other emergency requirements.

3.    Provision for Alternate Bid Solicitation Procedures. The city’s normal requirements for quotes, sealed bids, or local preference shall not apply to this section (Declared emergencies). However, the finance director or designee shall conduct telephonic or other electronic bid solicitation from potential vendors or suppliers, in lieu of written and/or sealed bids, in an effort to obtain multiple competitive proposals when and if time allows in light of the exigent circumstances.

4.    Posting Locations for Requests for Proposals or Solicitations of Bids. The finance director or designee may waive normal requirements for public posting of requests for proposals or solicitation of bids for the procurement of emergency equipment, goods or services. Notices soliciting bids or requests for proposals shall be posted, at minimum, at the emergency operations center or the alternate emergency operations center, if the primary emergency operations center is not being used.

5.    Length of Time for Posting Requests for Proposals or Solicitation of Bids. The finance director or designee shall determine the posting period. The finance director or designee will make reasonable efforts to ensure that multiple suppliers are able to place a bid during the shortened time period.

F.    Notification and Ratification.

1.    Posting of Contract Awards. All contracts awarded that exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be presented to the city council for ratification and thereafter shall be publicly posted within sixty (60) days of the award.

2.    Authority to Cancel Emergency Procurements. The city manager has the absolute authority to rescind a contract for nonperformance within twenty-four (24) hours when a contractor or vendor, once awarded a contract, is unable to perform under the terms of the contract and the resulting delay or nonperformance presents an immediate threat to life, public health or safety, or improved public or private property.

3.    Notification Requirement for Emergency Services. For any purchase in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the city manager shall report all such purchases to the city council within thirty (30) days of the onset of the disaster.

4.    Requirement for Separate Invoicing. All purchases or rentals made during the proclaimed emergency or disaster conditions shall require separate invoicing from routine (nondisaster) purchases. All invoices must state the goods, services, or equipment provided and must specify the location where the goods or services were delivered.

5.    Limitations of Declared Emergencies Purchasing Policy. Any purchases that do not meet the standard of being necessary for responding to an immediate threat to life, public health or safety, or improved public or private property as outlined in this section shall follow the city’s regular purchasing provisions. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 16-5 § 1 (Exh. A))

3.04.180 Surplus supplies and equipment.
All departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such forms as he or she may prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer may direct that the designated supplies or equipment be:

A.    Transferred to another city department or agency;

B.    Exchanged or traded in on new supplies and equipment; or

C.    Disposed of in some other suitable manner, which may include sale at auction or deposit at a landfill. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.140)

3.04.190 Inspection and tests.
The purchasing officer or designee or department requesting the item shall inspect all deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the contract or order specifications. The purchasing officer or designee, at his or her discretion, may require such reasonable chemical and physical tests of samples of supplies and equipment as he or she deems necessary to determine the quality in conformance with those specifications. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.91.150)

Article 3

Public Works Projects

3.04.200 Uniform construction cost accounting procedures.
The city council has elected to become subject to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act and procedures as established by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in California Public Contract Code Section 22000 et seq. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.010)

3.04.210 Bidding procedures for various project amounts.
A.    A public work project of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less may be performed by city force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order in accordance with Section 3.04.220.

B.    A public work project greater than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) and less than or equal to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) may be let to contract by informal bid procedures in accordance with Section 3.04.230.

C.    A public work project of more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure in accordance with Section 3.04.240.

The described project cost limits of subsections A through C of this section shall be increased automatically as authorized pursuant to the adjustments made by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission under California Public Contract Code Section 22034. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.020)

3.04.220 Negotiate contract or purchase order procedures.
For those projects qualifying under Section 3.04.210(A), the applicable department head shall obtain a cost estimate from the project engineer or architect prior to issuing a purchase order or negotiating a contract with a responsible contractor. For any city force account work, the department head shall first comply with the guidelines established by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in determining the cost of the public work. The city manager shall have the authority to award and to execute any contract for the public work qualifying under Section 3.04.210(A). (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.030)

3.04.230 Informal bidding procedures.
For those projects which qualify under Section 3.04.210(B) for informal bidding, the following procedures shall be used:

A.    Bidder’s List. The city shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development and maintenance of the contractors’ list shall be consistent with the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act rules.

B.    Notice. The city clerk shall prepare a notice inviting bids.

1.    Contents of Notice. The notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the services and/or articles to be purchased, where bid blanks and specifications may be obtained, the time and place for bid openings, and whether bid deposit or bond and faithful performance and/or warranty bond will be required.

2.    Mailing of Notice. Unless the product or service is proprietary, all contractors on the city’s list for the category of work being bid shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids, or an announcement/advertisement shall be placed in all construction trade journals, or both such mailing and advertising. The trade journals shall be those identified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as appropriate for this area, in accordance with California Public Contract Code Section 22036.

3.    Ten (10) Day Notice. Notices inviting informal bids shall be posted at the city hall and mailed at least ten (10) calendar days before the due date of submission of bids to all firms or suppliers on the bidder’s list for the category of work being bid and to such other vendors as the public works director deems appropriate.

4.    Proprietary Products or Services. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

C.    Award. The city council shall award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid or proposal fulfills the purpose intended according to criteria designated in the solicitation. The council may waive any minor bid irregularities.

D.    Bids in Excess of Statutory Amount. If all bids received are in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), the city council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder up to an amount not to exceed two hundred twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($212,500.00) if it determines the cost estimate of the city was reasonable. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.040)

3.04.240 Formal bidding procedures.
For those projects which qualify under Section 3.04.210(C) for formal bidding, the following procedures shall be used:

A.    Adoption of Plans. Prior to soliciting bids, unless otherwise delegated by the city council to the public works director, the city council shall approve and adopt the plans, specifications and working details, and authorize the bid request for all public work projects in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).

B.    Notice. The city clerk shall prepare a notice inviting bids.

1.    Contents of Notice. The notice inviting bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project.

2.    Publication of Notice. The notice shall be published at least once fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, which is circulated within the jurisdiction of the city.

3.    Mailing of Notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as appropriate for the area. The notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the date of opening the bids.

4.    Other Notice. In addition to notice required by this section, the city may give other notice as it deems proper.

C.    Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk’s office and shall be identified as to bidder, project and bid on the envelope. Bids shall be opened by the city clerk’s staff in public at the time and place stated and as described in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation shall be made at that time of all bids received, and shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of two years after the bid opening. The public works director shall make an analysis of the bids for compliance with bid specifications and thereafter make a recommendation for award or rejection.

D.    Award. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid fulfills the purpose intended, according to criteria designated in the solicitation. The council may waive minor bid irregularities. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.050)

3.04.250 Bonds.
A.    The city shall require payment bonds for projects in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in accordance with California Civil Code Section 9550, as may be amended from time to time. The city council may require bid security or bid bonds and performance and/or warranty bonds from an acceptable surety in such amounts as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. If the city requires a bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

B.    Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within sixty (60) days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of its bid security, as may be determined by the council, upon the bidder’s refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the date of the award of the contract. On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to execute the contract, the city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.060)

3.04.260 No bids received.
If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by city employees by force account or by negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.070)

3.04.270 Tie bids.
If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept either bid or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tied bidders. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.080)

3.04.280 Rejection of bids.
In its discretion, the council may reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, the city shall state the reasons for the rejection and after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of any of the following:

A.    Abandoning the project;

B.    Readvertising for bids in the manner described in this chapter; or

C.    By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this chapter. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.090)

3.04.290 Emergencies.
A.    In cases of emergency as defined in this chapter, the city, pursuant to a four-fifths vote of the council, may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes, without adopting plans, specifications, working details, or giving notice for bids to provide contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two.

B.    The city manager may order any action under this section subject to the provisions of California Public Contract Code Section 22050. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.100)

3.04.300 Prevailing wages required.
Public works contracts are subject to prevailing wage requirements as set forth in California Labor Code Section 1720 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.110)

3.04.310 Pre-qualification of bidders.
Prospective bidders on a public works contract may be required to be pre-qualified in accordance with procedures adopted by city council resolution, subject to the provisions of California Public Contract Code Section 20101. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.92.120)

Article 4

Professional Services

3.04.320 Award of professional service contracts based upon competence.
In contracting for those professional services as defined in Section 3.04.020, contracts should only be awarded to firms or persons who have demonstrated an adequate level of experience, competence, staffing and other professional qualifications necessary for more than a satisfactory performance of the services required. Once the department requesting the service has determined a firm has an adequate level of competence, the cost of the service may be considered. However, the lowest cost may not be the sole factor in deciding which firm or who shall be awarded the contract. It may be in the city’s best interest to award the contract to a higher priced professional services provider based on the scope of services available, unique skills, staffing levels, timing, prior experience, past working relationship and other factors required by the department or proposed by that professional services provider. The information needed for determining that level of competence, other qualifications and the procedure for selecting such services shall be determined by each city department responsible for recommending the professional service contract. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.93.010)

3.04.330 Request for proposal/qualification.
The acquiring of professional services shall be procured through negotiated contract and may include requests for proposals/qualifications. Contracting for professional services is decentralized and shall be the responsibility of the department head requesting the service. (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.93.020)

3.04.340 Contracting authority.
The city manager shall approve professional service or consulting contracts up to and including twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The city council shall approve professional service or consulting contracts greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. 19-7 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 15-8 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 01-14 (part): prior code § 2.93.030)

Chapter 3.08
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections:

3.08.010    Created.

3.08.020    Deposits into fund.

3.08.030    Expenditures in fund.

3.08.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of sections 181 to 208 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, with particular reference to Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Prior code § 2.13)

3.08.020 Deposits into fund.
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of sections 181 to 208 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the fund created by this chapter. (Prior code § 2.14)

3.08.030 Expenditures in fund.
All moneys in the fund created by this chapter shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of sections 181 to 208 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 2.15)

Chapter 3.12
MISCELLANEOUS FISCAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

3.12.010    Claims against the city.

3.12.020    Unclaimed property.

3.12.010 Claims against the city.
A.    Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code.

B.    Claims Required. All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this section, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that Part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this section.

C.    Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing, shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910, and shall be signed by the claimant or the claimant’s representative.

D.    Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city manager prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this section.

E.    Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Section 950-951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 01-12: prior code § 1.8)

3.12.020 Unclaimed property.
All abandoned, found, recovered or otherwise unclaimed property coming into the possession of the police department, ownership to which cannot be determined, shall be held for a period of six months and upon the expiration of the six months’ period title to the property shall vest in the city and shall not be redeemable by the owner. Thereafter such property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, notice of such sale being given by the chief of police at least five days before the time therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county if the city council determines that any such property proposed to be sold is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. (Prior code § 2.60)

Chapter 3.16
ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES GENERALLY
Sections:

3.16.010    Duties of city treasurer and tax collector transferred to county.

3.16.020    Extent of transfer of duties of city treasurer.

3.16.030    Offices of city assessor and tax collector abolished.

3.16.040    Agreement with county.

3.16.010 Duties of city treasurer and tax collector transferred to county.
Pursuant to Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 5, Division 1, Part 2, of the Government Code of the state, the duties of the city treasurer, and the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the tax collector of the city are hereby transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county. (Prior code § 14.1)

3.16.020 Extent of transfer of duties of city treasurer.
The duties of the city treasurer are transferred to the county treasurer only to the extent as shall be necessary to have city taxes upon collection paid into the county treasury and for the payment by warrant on the county treasury to the city, of the net amount of the taxes of the city, after deduction of the county’s compensation for the services of its treasurer, assessor and tax collector, as provided by Section 51513 of the state Government Code, and all duties of the city treasurer excepting those herein specified shall remain in the city treasurer, and the office of the city treasurer is not abolished. (Prior code § 14.2)

3.16.030 Offices of city assessor and tax collector abolished.
The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished and all the duties of the city assessor and city tax collector, other than the duties of assessing city property and collecting taxes, and hereby transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk. (Prior code § 14.3)

3.16.040 Agreement with county.
The city council shall forthwith enter into an agreement with the board of supervisors of the county, pursuant to Section 51514 of the state Government Code, fixing the compensation to be paid to the county for assessing and collecting taxes for the city. (Prior code § 14.4)

Chapter 3.20
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

3.20.010    Short title.

3.20.020    Imposition of tax.

3.20.030    Persons obligated.

3.20.040    Exception—Instrument security debt.

3.20.050    Not applicable to United States.

3.20.060    Exception—Bankruptcy.

3.20.070    Exception for orders of the Securities and Exchange Commission.

3.20.080    Exception—Partnerships.

3.20.090    County recorder as administrator.

3.20.100    Refunds.

3.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of city of St. Helena.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California). (Prior code § 12A.1)

3.20.020 Imposition of tax.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which and lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city of St. Helena shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyor to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 12A.2)

3.20.030 Persons obligated.
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 12A.3)

3.20.040 Exception—Instrument security debt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 12A.4)

3.20.050 Not applicable to United States.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this municipal code chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Prior code § 12A.5)

3.20.060 Exception—Bankruptcy.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyance to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation;

C.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation; or

D.    Whereby a mere exchange in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 02-5 § 14 (part): prior code § 12A.6)

3.20.070 Exception for orders of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (A) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B.    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C.    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 02-5 § 14 (part): prior code § 12A.7)

3.20.080 Exception—Partnerships.
A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this section by reason of any transfer of an interest in the partnership or other entity or otherwise, if both of the following occur:

1.    The partnership or other entity treated as a partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and

2.    The continuing partnership or other entity treated as a partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.    If there is a termination of any partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, for purposes of this chapter, the partnership or other entity shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by the partnership or other entity at the time of the termination.

C.    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by a county, city and county or city by reason of a termination described in Subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by a partnership or other entity treated as a partnership at the time of the termination.

D.    No levy shall be imposed pursuant to this section by reason of any transfer between an individual or individuals and a legal entity or between legal entities that results solely in a change in the method of holding title to the realty and in which proportional ownership interests in the realty, whether represented by stock, membership interest, partnership interest, cotenancy interest, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, remain the same immediately after the transfer. (Ord. 02-5 § 14 (part): prior code § 12A.8)

3.20.090 County recorder as administrator.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 12A.9)

3.20.100 Refunds.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division I of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 12A.10)

Chapter 3.24
UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.24.010    Short title.

3.24.020    Purpose.

3.24.030    Contract with state.

3.24.040    Sales tax.

3.24.050    Use tax.

3.24.060    Rate.

3.24.070    Place of sale.

3.24.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.24.090    Limitations on adoption of state law.

3.24.100    Permit not required.

3.24.110    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.24.120    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.24.130    Violations—Penalties.

3.24.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Prior code § 14.5)

3.24.020 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 14.6)

3.24.030 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 14.7)

3.24.040 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.060 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on or after the operative date. (Prior code § 14.8)

3.24.050 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.060 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 14.9)

3.24.060 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be .855 percent. Commencing October 1, 1990, the rate shall be .93 percent and commencing October 1, 1991, the rate shall be .95 percent. (Prior code § 14.10)

3.24.070 Place of sale.
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 14.11)

3.24.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as in effect or as later amended are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. This chapter also adopts by reference Sections 7202 and 7203 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as in effect as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. (Prior code § 14.12)

3.24.090 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named and referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under such provisions of that Code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. The substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Prior code § 14.13)

3.24.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Prior code § 14.14)

3.24.110 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Prior code § 14.15)

3.24.120 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 14.16)

3.24.130 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 14.17)

Chapter 3.25
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAXES
Sections:

3.25.010    Title.

3.25.020    Operative date.

3.25.030    Purpose.

3.25.040    Contract with state.

3.25.050    Transactions tax rate.

3.25.060    Place of sale.

3.25.070    Use tax rate.

3.25.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.25.090    Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.25.100    Permit not required.

3.25.110    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.25.120    Amendments.

3.25.130    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.25.140    Violations—Penalties.

3.25.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the city of St. Helena transactions and use taxes. The city of St. Helena hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.020 Operative date.
“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city of St. Helena transactions and use taxes authorized pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7285.9 for general purposes, and submitted to the city of St. Helena electorate at an election called for November 8, 2016. If approved by a majority of the electors voting on the measure, then the effective date of this chapter shall be ten (10) days following the date the vote on the measure is declared by the city council in accordance with Elections Code Section 9217. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.030 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To impose retail transactions and use taxes in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be effective if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the taxes at an election called for that purpose.

B.    To adopt retail transactions and use taxes that incorporate provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C.    To adopt retail transactions and use taxes that impose a tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

D.    To adopt retail transactions and use taxes that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and, at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use taxes law; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.050 Transactions tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.070 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one half of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A.    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1.    The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

2.    The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

3.    In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a.    Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

b.    Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4.    In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B.    The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1.    Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2.    Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a.    With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code, by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

b.    With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3.    The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4.    A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5.    For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C.    There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1.    The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax law.

2.    Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

3.    If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4.    If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5.    For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6.    Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7.    “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property, the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.120 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

3.25.140 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16-10 § 1 (part))

Chapter 3.28
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.28.010    Definitions—Hotel defined.

3.28.020    Tax imposed.

3.28.030    Exemptions.

3.28.040    Operator’s duties.

3.28.050    Registration of hotels.

3.28.060    Reporting and remitting.

3.28.070    Penalties and interest.

3.28.080    Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.

3.28.090    Appeals.

3.28.100    Records required—Right to inspect.

3.28.110    Refunds.

3.28.120    Actions to collect.

3.28.130    Violations—Penalties.

3.28.010 Definitions—Hotel defined.
As used in this chapter:

“Hotel” means any structure, or improved land areas or any portion thereof, which are occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, campgrounds space, recreational vehicle use space, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or improved land areas or portions thereof.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or improved land areas, or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator forms his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be in compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

“Tax administrator” means the director of finance.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Prior code § 14A.1—14A.7)

3.28.020 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent (12%) of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 14A.8)

3.28.030 Exemptions.
No tax hereunder shall be imposed upon:

A.    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

B.    Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 14A.9)

3.28.040 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 14A.10)

3.28.050 Registration of hotels.
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.    The address of the hotel;

C.    The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    “This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the municipal code of the city of St. Helena pertaining to the uniform transient occupancy tax by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Prior code § 14A.11)

3.28.060 Reporting and remitting.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 14A.12)

3.28.070 Penalties and interest.
A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.    Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

C.    Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the delinquency penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 1.67 percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent.

E.    Penalties and Interest Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Prior code § 14A.13)

3.28.080 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.090. (Prior code § 14A.14)

3.28.090 Appeals.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 14A.15)

3.28.100 Records required—Right to inspect.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. If the records are deemed to be inadequate by the tax administrator or through inspection or audit, the operator shall have sixty (60) days after notice given by the tax administrator to install adequate recordkeeping procedures. If, after that time, records or recordkeeping procedures are not improved sufficiently to be audited successfully, the operator shall be liable to the city for the cost of all subsequent audits of the hotel by the city or its representatives until the records and recordkeeping are sufficient to be audited in accordance with generally accepted auditing practices. (Ord. 10-1: prior code § 14A.16)

3.28.110 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B.    An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 14A.17)

3.28.120 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 14A.18)

3.28.130 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 14A.19)

Chapter 3.32
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:

3.32.010    Findings.

3.32.020    Description of fees.

3.32.030    Limited use of fees.

3.32.040    Imposition of fees.

3.32.050    Public safety impact fees.

3.32.060    Civic improvement impact fees.

3.32.065    Park impact fees.

3.32.070    Water impact fees.

3.32.080    Sewer impact fees.

3.32.090    Storm drainage impact fees.

3.32.100    Traffic mitigation impact fees.

3.32.110    Developer construction of facilities.

3.32.120    Fee adjustment.

3.32.130    Definitions.

3.32.140    Development agreements.

3.32.150    Inflationary fee increases.

*    Code reviser’s note: Section 3 of Ordinance 13-2 provides: “Every person who paid Development Impact Fees at the rates established in Ordinance No. 96-2 shall be given a refund equal to the difference, if any, between the aggregate fees paid and the aggregate fees established by this ordinance; except no refunds will be paid to persons who received City Council approval of a fee adjustment or waiver during the relevant time period.”

3.32.010 Findings.
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan of the city of St. Helena and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development within the city, certain public improvement projects must be or had to be constructed. The city council determines that development impact fees are needed to finance these public improvements and to pay for development’s fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fees described in the following sections, the city council finds the fees adopted to be consistent with state law (California Government Code Section 66000 et seq.) and with the city’s general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fees and determines that the fees are not material with respect to the city’s housing needs as established in the housing element of the St. Helena general plan. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.1)

3.32.020 Description of fees.
A.    Development impact fees are hereby established on new development or conversions within the city of St. Helena to pay for public improvements related to civic improvement projects, public safety, sewer projects, water projects, traffic mitigation, parks and storm drainage. In the following sections, the city council sets forth the specific amount of the development fee for each type of public improvement project.

B.    At least every five years, the city council shall review these fees to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the public improvement projects described in the city’s capital improvement projects list are still needed. Failure to undertake this review shall not invalidate the imposition of the fees. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.2)

3.32.030 Limited use of fees.
The revenues raised by payment of these development impact fees shall each be placed in separate and special impact fund accounts, and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on each separate account, shall be used solely to:

A.    Pay for the city’s future construction of those public improvement projects at least partially allocable to new development or conversions as described in the city’s capital improvement projects list; or

B.    Reimburse the city for those described or listed projects constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

C.    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.32.110 to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.3)

3.32.040 Imposition of fees.
A.    Development impact fees shall be imposed on:

1.    New development; and

2.    Conversions, as provided in this chapter.

B.    Development impact fees shall be paid by the owner of the property on which new development or conversion is to occur. The fees shall be collected by the city prior to the issuance of the building or development permit(s) for such development or conversion, whichever occurs later, unless payment at a later time is mandated by Government Code Section 66007.

C.    Except as otherwise provided herein, square footage of residential and nonresidential buildings shall be measured by exterior dimensions. Unfinished attics, crawlspaces, and basements shall not be assessed until converted and finished as usable floor space.

D.    A building or structure consisting of nonusable floor space, e.g., a garage, carport or storage shed, shall not be deemed to be part of the residential building for the purpose of determining the square footage of the residential building. Such ancillary structures shall require the payment of storm drainage and public safety impact fees; additional impact fees shall not be required until converted to usable floor space.

E.    Each single-family residential unit within a multifamily residential building or development project shall be deemed to be a separate building for which a fee is imposed and shall be paid.

F.    Additions to an existing building shall be deemed to occur whenever the amount of usable floor space is increased, or whenever new building space is constructed where no structures existed as part of the existing building, whether or not the total building floor area is increased by the new construction.

G.    The first seventy (70) square feet of additions or conversions to an existing building in a two-year period shall be exempt from all fees except public safety impact fees and storm drainage impact fees.

H.    No development impact fee shall be imposed more than once for the same floor space.

I.    Each tenant space in a multi-use building or development project shall be deemed to be a separate use for which a fee is imposed and shall be paid. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.4)

3.32.050 Public safety impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    Numerous items of capital equipment are urgently needed for the city’s police and fire protection facilities to maintain the existing level of police and fire protection services to all areas of the city of St. Helena.

2.    New development or conversions within the city of St. Helena result in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby increases the service requirements and the capital equipment requirements of the city’s police and fire safety services. Such increased usage does not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development or conversions.

3.    The city must continue to fund capital additions to its public safety system. These capital improvements include expanding the police and fire department facilities and equipment. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of public safety service within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a public safety impact fee upon all building permits, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of public safety services for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

5.    New development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

6.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for the fire and police department and other public safety improvements and the impacts of the types of new development or conversions for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development or conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Public Safety Impact Fees. A public safety impact fee of one dollar four cents ($1.04) per square foot shall be imposed on all new development or conversions. The same impact fee rate shall apply to both residential and nonresidential construction within the city of St. Helena.

C.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “public safety impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The public safety impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of facilities and equipment and other capital purposes needed for the city’s fire department and the city’s police department in providing police and fire protection services. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.5)

3.32.060 Civic improvement impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    Numerous items of civic improvements are needed to maintain an acceptable level of the existing and future civic activities for all areas of the city of St. Helena.

2.    New development or conversions within the city of St. Helena result in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby increases the service requirements and the capital equipment requirements of the city’s library, administrative facilities, and other civic facilities. Such increased usage does not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development or conversions.

3.    The city must continue to fund civic improvements within the city. These civic improvements include expanding the city hall and the library. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of the civic activities available in St. Helena within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a civic improvement impact fee upon new development or conversions, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of civic services for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

5.    New development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

6.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for libraries, city administration, and other civic improvements and the impacts of the types of new development or conversions for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development or conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Civic Improvement Impact Fees.

1.    A civic improvement impact fee of one dollar ninety-five cents ($1.95) per square foot shall be imposed on all new residential development or conversions.

2.    A civic improvement impact fee of one dollar ninety-five cents ($1.95) per square foot shall be imposed on all new commercial/retail development and conversions.

3.    A civic improvement impact fee of one dollar ninety-five cents ($1.95) per square foot shall be imposed on all new office development and conversions.

4.    A civic improvement impact fee of one dollar ninety-five cents ($1.95) per square foot shall be imposed on all new industrial development and conversions.

5.    A civic improvement impact fee of one dollar ninety-five cents ($1.95) per square foot shall be imposed on all new lodging development and conversions.

C.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “civic improvement impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The civic improvement impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of city hall, the St. Helena library, community facilities, and equipment and other capital purposes needed for providing civic services. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.6)

3.32.065 Park impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    Additional park facilities are needed to accommodate future growth and maintain an acceptable level of the existing park and recreational facilities for all areas of the city of St. Helena.

2.    New development or conversions within the city of St. Helena result in increased usage of the existing park and recreational facilities throughout the city, which thereby increases the service requirements and the capital equipment requirements of the city’s parks and recreation facilities. Such increased usage does not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development or conversions.

3.    The city must continue to fund park and recreation improvements within the city. These park and recreation improvements include developing additional parklands, open spaces, and recreational facilities. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain the public health, safety, and welfare by assuring an acceptable level of the park and recreation facilities is available in St. Helena within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a park improvement impact fee upon new development or conversions, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of civic services for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

5.    New development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

6.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for parks and other recreation facilities and the impacts of the types of new development or conversions for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development or conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Park and Recreation Impact Fees.

1.    A park and recreation impact fee of seven dollars sixteen cents ($7.16) per square foot shall be imposed on all new low density (single-family) residential development or conversions.

2.    A park and recreation impact fee of twelve dollars eighteen cents ($12.18) per square foot shall be imposed on all new medium and higher density (multifamily) residential development and conversions.

C.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “park and recreation impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The park and recreation improvement impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of playgrounds, community facilities, recreation facilities and equipment and other capital purposes needed for providing park and recreation services.

D.    The park and recreation impact fees imposed by this section shall not apply to residential development that is subject to the dedication of parkland or the imposition of in-lieu fees, or a combination of both, for park and recreational purposes, as a condition of approval of a tentative map or parcel map pursuant to Section 16.28.040, adopted in accordance with Government Code Section 66477(a), otherwise known as the “Quimby Act.” (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part))

3.32.070 Water impact fees.*
A.    Findings. The city council finds that:

1.    Numerous water system improvements are needed to maintain the existing level of water services for all areas served by the city of St. Helena water enterprise.

2.    New development or conversions within the service area of the city of St. Helena water enterprise results in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby increases the water service requirements and the capital equipment requirements for the storage, treatment and transmission of the city’s water supply. Such increased usage does not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development or conversions.

3.    The city must continue to fund capital improvements to its water system. These capital improvements include updating or replacing water distribution lines, and improving current treatment and storage capabilities. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of water service within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a water impact fee upon new development or conversions, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of water service for the entire service area of the city of St. Helena water enterprise would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the service area of the city of St. Helena water enterprise.

5.    New development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the service area of the city of St. Helena water enterprise.

6.    Part of the costs associated with the capital improvements to the water system and the debt service on earlier funded water projects are apportioned to new development or conversions to accommodate increased demand for water by new residents and businesses and the increased need for water for fire protection purposes for the new structures associated with new development or conversions.

7.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for the water system improvements and the impacts of the types of new development for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development and conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Water Impact Fees.

1.    Every person connecting to the city’s water system or converting unusable to usable floor space in or adding to existing buildings which are already connected to the city’s water system shall pay to the city a water impact fee in accordance with the following schedule:

Single-Family:

$1.68 per sq. ft.

Multifamily:

$1.35 per sq. ft.

Office:

$1.72 per sq. ft.

Industrial:

$2.29 per sq. ft.

Commercial:

$3.33 per sq. ft.

Lodging:

$3.36 per sq. ft.

2.    Every person converting an existing use from one use category (residential, commercial, industrial or office) to another use category shall pay a water impact fee equal to the difference, if any, between the fees calculated for the existing and new uses as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section, except no water impact fee shall be assessed if a “water-oriented” connection fee had been paid for the building or development project pursuant to the city’s former water connection ordinances.

3.    No water impact fee shall be assessed on conversions to another use within the same use category. No person shall be entitled to a refund on conversions from a higher rate use category to a lower rate use category.

C.    In addition to the above charges, all expenses and costs of making a water connection shall be borne by the person making the connection. No connection shall be made to a public water supply except by the city or by written permission from the city.

D.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “water impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The water impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for equipment, infrastructure, and other capital facilities needed for the acquisition, storage, treatment, and transmission of water for the city of St. Helena water enterprise, to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction or reconstruction of water projects or facilities, and to repay federal and state loans or advances made to the city for the construction or reconstruction of water supplies facilities or infrastructure. (Ord. 15-7 § 2: Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.7)

*    Code reviser’s note: Section 3 of Ord. 15-7 provides: “Every person who paid Water System Impact Fees at the rates established in Ordinance No. 2013-2 shall be given a refund equal to the difference, if any, between the aggregate Water System Impact fees paid and the aggregate Water System Impact fees established by this ordinance; except no refunds will be paid to persons who received City Council approval of a fee adjustment or waiver during the relevant time period.”

3.32.080 Sewer impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    St. Helena has a sewer system that consists of a collection system including public sewers and interceptors leading to the wastewater treatment plant and to the disposal system.

2.    New development or conversions in the city of St. Helena have a significant impact on the sewer system. St. Helena was previously under a sewer connection moratorium where the state of California effectively prohibited any new development and conversions in the city since no new sewer connections were allowed. In order to have the moratorium lifted and to allow for more development in the city of St. Helena, the city incurred debt to upgrade and expand the capacity of the wastewater treatment plant.

3.    The city must continue to fund capital improvements to its sewer system. These capital improvements include updating or replacing sewer lines, improving current treatment capabilities, and promoting the use of reclaimed water. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of sewer service and wastewater treatment within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    New development or conversions within the city result in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby increases the service requirements and the capital equipment requirements for the city’s sewage treatment and disposal system. Such increased usage does not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development or conversions.

5.    In the absence of the imposition of a sewer impact fee upon new development or conversions, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of sewer service and wastewater treatment for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

6.    New development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

7.    Part of the costs associated with the capital improvements to the sewer system as well as payments on the wastewater debt service are apportioned to new development and conversions to accommodate increased usage of the sewer system and treatment plant by new residents and businesses.

8.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for the sewer system improvements and the impacts of the types of new development or conversions for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development or conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Sewer Impact Fees.

1.    Every person connecting to the city’s sewer system or converting unusable to usable floor space in or adding to existing buildings which are already connected to the city’s sewer system shall pay to the city a sewer impact fee in accordance with the following schedule:

Single-Family:

$0.45 per sq. ft.

Multifamily:

$0.66 per sq. ft.

Office:

$0.44 per sq. ft.

Industrial:

$0.59 per sq. ft.

Commercial:

$0.88 per sq. ft.

Lodging:

$0.87 per sq. ft.

2.    Every person converting an existing use from one use category (residential, commercial, industrial or office) to another use category shall pay a sewer impact fee equal to the difference, if any, between the fees calculated for the existing and new uses as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section, except no sewer impact fee shall be assessed if a “water-oriented” sewer connection fee had been paid for the building or development project pursuant to the city’s former sewer connection ordinances.

3.    No sewer impact fee shall be assessed on conversions to another use within the same use category. No person shall be entitled to a refund on conversions from a higher rate use category to a lower rate use category.

C.    In addition to the above charges, all expenses and costs of making a sewer connection shall be borne by the person making the connection. No connection shall be made to a public sewer except by the city or by written permission from the city.

D.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “sewer impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The sewer impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of sanitation and sewage facilities, to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction or reconstruction of such sanitary or sewage facilities, and to repay federal and state loans or advances made to the city for the construction or reconstruction of sanitary or sewage facilities and infrastructure. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.8)

3.32.090 Storm drainage impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    Numerous items of capital infrastructure are urgently needed for the city’s drainage system to maintain an acceptable level of storm drainage from all areas of the city of St. Helena.

2.    New development within the city of St. Helena results in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby increases the amount of impervious surfaces and irrigation of landscaping which create greater need for and usage of drainage systems within the city. Such increased drainage and usage of the system do not ordinarily result from mere subdivision or parcel map divisions of existing properties in the absence of new development.

3.    The city must continue to fund capital improvements to its storm drainage system. These capital improvements include constructing storm drains and storm sewers within the city and conducting a storm drainage and monitoring study. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of storm drainage within the city in the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a storm drainage impact fee upon new development, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain an acceptable level of the city’s drainage system for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

5.    New development without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

6.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for the drainage improvements and the impacts of the types of development for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of development for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Storm Drainage Impact Fees.

1.    A storm drainage impact fee shall be imposed on new construction of buildings, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, walkways, patios, decks, and other similar structures, and upon any construction of additions or conversions to an existing building that increase the impervious surface footprint of the parcel.

2.    The storm drainage impact fee for new development or conversions shall be as follows:

Single-Family:

$0.73 per sq. ft.

Multifamily:

$0.69 per sq. ft.

Office:

$1.65 per sq. ft.

Industrial:

$1.65 per sq. ft.

Commercial:

$1.65 per sq. ft.

Lodging:

$1.28 per sq. ft.

C.    New development constructed, added or converted in the area required to pay the drainage fees imposed under Chapter 17.108 shall not be required to pay the storm drainage impact fee required under this section.

D.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “storm drainage impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The storm drainage impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of facilities and equipment and for other capital purposes needed for the city’s storm drainage system and for additional drainage and monitoring studies. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.9)

3.32.100 Traffic mitigation impact fees.
A.    Findings. The city council finds:

1.    New development or conversions within the city of St. Helena result in increased usage of residential, commercial, industrial, and other affected properties, which thereby generates additional traffic within the city and will contribute to the usage and degradation of the existing street infrastructure in the city of St. Helena.

2.    The purpose of this fee is to finance circulation improvements to reduce the impacts of traffic generated by new development within the city.

3.    The city must continue to fund capital improvements to its traffic circulation system. These capital improvements include building new roads, bridges, and traffic control facilities and equipment. These additional capital expenditures are necessary to maintain an acceptable level of traffic circulation and the city’s roadway system within the next fifteen (15) years.

4.    In the absence of the imposition of a traffic mitigation impact fee upon new development or conversions, the additional capital expenses necessary to maintain acceptable traffic circulation for the entire city would be unfairly imposed upon the owners and residents of the existing buildings and improvements within the city of St. Helena.

5.    The construction of new development or conversions without the payment of fees imposed by this section would not be fair to the owners and occupants of existing buildings within the city of St. Helena.

6.    The facts and evidence presented in the city’s impact fee study establish that there exists a reasonable relationship between the need for the traffic improvements and the impacts of the types of new development or conversions for which a corresponding fee is charged. A reasonable relationship or nexus also exists between the fee’s use and the type of new development or conversions for which the fee is charged.

B.    Schedule of Traffic Mitigation Impact Fees.

1.    A traffic mitigation impact fee shall be imposed on new development or conversions within the city of St. Helena.

2.    The traffic mitigation impact fee for new development or conversions shall be as follows:

Single-Family Development, Conversions, Additions:

$1.94 per square foot

Multifamily Development, Conversions, Additions:

$2.36 per square foot

Industrial Development, Conversions, Additions:

$3.40 per square foot

Office Development, Conversions, Additions:

$5.36 per square foot

Commercial Development, Conversions, Additions:

$20.89 per square foot

Lodging:

$7.98 per square foot

3.    Every person converting an existing use from one use category (residential, commercial, industrial or office) to another use category shall pay a traffic mitigation impact fee equal to the difference, if any, between the fees calculated for the existing and new uses as set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

4.    No traffic mitigation impact fee shall be assessed on conversions to another use within the same use category. No person shall be entitled to a refund on conversions from a higher rate use category to a lower rate use category.

C.    There is hereby established and created a fund of the city entitled “traffic mitigation impact fund” and all revenues derived from and monies collected under this section, including accrued interest thereon, shall be deposited in such fund. The traffic mitigation impact fund is established for the sole purpose of providing monies for the construction and reconstruction of facilities and equipment and other capital purposes needed for traffic circulation improvements in and around the city of St. Helena. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.10)

3.32.110 Developer construction of facilities.
A.    Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, development permit or building permit, to construct a public facility described in the capital improvement projects list, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed to address the impacts of that development, and when construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the applicable impact fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development.

B.    A developer who installs an off-site improvement as a special mitigation measure for a project which is identified on the capital improvement projects list to be funded at least partially by impact fees may claim credit on such a fee not to exceed the impact fee payable for the development project. The city’s public works director is authorized to allow such credit.

C.    If a developer is dissatisfied with the decision of the city’s public works director regarding a reimbursement agreement or a credit of development impact fees, the developer shall appeal for relief to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the disputed decision. The appeal shall state in sufficient detail the basis for the claimed credit. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.11)

3.32.120 Fee adjustment.
A.    A developer of any project, including any new building or addition to or conversion of any existing building, subject to the fees described in Sections 3.32.050 through 3.32.100 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment of the fee(s), or a waiver of the fee(s), based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship between the nature of the impact of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed.

B.    The application for a fee reduction, adjustment, or waiver shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than twenty (20) days after the filing of the application for a building permit.

C.    The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at a hearing held within thirty (30) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the city council shall be final.

D.    If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.12)

3.32.130 Definitions.
A.    “Building permit” shall mean the permit required or issued by the city of St. Helena for the construction, improvement or remodeling of any structure pursuant to the city of St. Helena’s building codes.

B.    “City” shall mean the governmental body managing the administrative operations of the city of St. Helena.

C.    “City of St. Helena” shall mean all property located within the geographical area within the city of St. Helena’s city limit line.

D.    “City of St. Helena impact fee study” shall mean the study, including any amendments or revisions thereto, for the financing of facilities and services designated under the capital improvement projects list for the city of St. Helena. This study includes, but is not limited to, a designation of those facilities to be constructed with the impact fees collected under this chapter, the estimated costs of constructing those facilities or providing the services designated therein, and the total use factors or other criteria utilized to arrive at an allocation of the cost of the facilities to the different types of land uses and to new development.

E.    “Conversion” shall mean converting from unusable to usable floor space, or converting the existing use to another use.

F.    “Developer” shall mean any person who is the owner or authorized agent of an owner of any new development within the city of St. Helena.

G.    “Dwelling unit” shall mean a residential dwelling within the city of St. Helena. Each single-family residential unit within a multifamily residential building or development project shall be deemed to be a separate dwelling unit.

H.    “New development” shall mean the original construction of residential, commercial, industrial or other nonresidential buildings, or the addition of usable floor space within existing residential or nonresidential buildings, or the construction of new accessory buildings.

I.    “Owner” shall mean the legal owner(s) or the authorized agent(s) for any owner of property being developed.

J.    “Usable floor space” shall mean any interior space constructed or converted to be used for human occupancy in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.13)

3.32.140 Development agreements.
The terms of any development approvals or building permit(s) may be negotiated as part of a development agreement which may require a developer to provide or finance any public projects deemed agreeable to both the developer and the city council. Development constructed under the terms of a development agreement approved pursuant to Chapter 17.156 may be exempted from the payment of any of the impact fees required under Sections 3.32.050 through 3.32.100. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.14)

3.32.150 Inflationary fee increases.
Due to the increases in costs of construction, developing and designing the projects to be financed by the development impact fees set forth herein, such fees shall be automatically adjusted annually commencing July 1, 1998, and every July 1st thereafter. The fee adjustments shall be based on the increase, if any, in the Engineering News Record U.S. twenty (20) city average construction cost index for the June preceding the increase and the June one year prior thereto. (Ord. 13-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-6 § 2 (part): prior code § 22.15)

Title 4
RESERVED
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.04    Introductory Provisions and Definitions

5.08    Business Licenses Generally

5.12    Business License Fees and Schedules

5.16    Bingo

5.20    Cable Television Franchise

5.24    Film Permits

5.28    Peddlers and Solicitors

5.32    Residential Rental Units

5.36    Vehicles for Hire

5.40    Permits for Elder and/or Dependent Adult Caregivers

Chapter 5.04
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Article I
In General

Sections:

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.020    Rules of construction.

Article I
In General

5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Arcade” means one general enclosure in which is conducted the business of operating or exhibiting any phonograph, graphophones, kinetoscope, biograph, projectoscope or any other instrument or machine of like character, or exhibiting, showing or letting the use of any microscope, lung testor, muscle testor, galvanic battery, weighing machine or similar machine of like character, or letting the use of coin machines, simulating the playing of soccer, baseball, basketball, boxing and similar games.

“Auto Parking Lot.” The business of conducting an “auto parking lot” includes the rental of vehicle parking spaces, but shall not include the providing of parking spaces for vehicles in connection with the business of a new or used car auto dealer for the storage of his or her vehicles, and shall not include the maintenance of parking spaces for the benefit and use of customers, clients or patrons of a business, profession or vocation licensed under this title.

“Auto wrecking business” means the business of buying, selling or trading in secondhand, used or wrecked vehicles or vessels and reselling the parts thereof for use in, or the building of vehicles or vessels from the salvaged parts of vehicles or vessels, or the wrecking or salvaging of vehicles or vessels on a contract basis.

“Average number of employees” means the average number of employees employed in the applicant’s business for the twelve (12) month period ending December 31st next preceding the date of application; provided, however, part-time employees shall be counted as a fractional part of one employee based upon the number of hours worked per a twelve (12) month period divided by two thousand (2,000) hours. If the applicant is commencing business, the average number of employees for the remainder of the year shall be estimated by the city clerk on the basis of applying the foregoing rules to information furnished by the applicant.

“Business” means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.

“Carnival” means a collection of six or more shows, exhibitions, feats of strength, merchandise booths, games of skill, games of chance, wheels of fortune or amusement concessions presented or offered upon the streets or vacant property within the city.

“City” means the area within the territorial city limits of the city of St. Helena.

“City clerk” means the city clerk of the city of St. Helena.

“Contractor” means a person licensed by the state as a contractor and who in any capacity, other than as an employee of another for compensation, undertakes, offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake or submits a bid to perform contractual services. Each contractor shall furnish to the city his or her state contractor’s license number which shall be shown on the face of the license.

“Council” means the city council of the city of St. Helena.

“Employee” means each person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business.

“Fire and bankrupt sales” include the management, conduct or carrying on of a sale of goods damaged by fire or water, or a bankruptcy, but shall not include official sales conducted by an officer of the federal or state government or any subdivision thereof when acting pursuant to his or her official duties.

“Fixed place of business” means a place of business in the city regularly kept open, with someone in charge thereof, for the transaction of the particular business engaged in during the hours customary to transact such business. A fixed place of business must be located in a proper zone under the zoning ordinance.

“Itinerant vendor or photographer” means and includes all persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary or transient business in the city of selling goods, wares, merchandise or photographs, or taking, soliciting or securing orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or photographs with the intention of continuing such business in the city for a period of not more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases or occupies any room, building or structure for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, or the taking of such photographs and the person or firm so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this title providing for license fees, by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader or merchant, or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with, or as part of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader or merchant. Itinerant vendor shall not apply to commercial travellers or selling agents, selling their goods to dealers, whether selling for present or future delivery by samples or otherwise, or to hawkers on the streets or peddlers from vehicles, nor to persons selling fruit, vegetables, butter, eggs or other farm or ranch products.

“Junk dealer” means any person having a fixed place of business within the city, who buys or sells either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or other articles of junk.

“Lockboxes” includes boxes for the storage of property, operated by the insertion of coins.

“Manufacturer” or “processor” means the business of making raw or partially finished materials into wares suitable for use and the processing and mixture of materials such as feed mixes, the processing and picking of poultry, the candling and cleaning of eggs and processing of grapes into wine.

“New business” means a business commencing operations.

“Peddler” means any person engaged in the business of peddling, selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, either by going from place to place with such property for the purpose of selling or offering the same for sale in or along any street, upon or along any sidewalk or parkway, or in any doorway or entrance way of any building, or upon any unenclosed lot or parcel of land.

Peddlers shall not include veterans who satisfy the requirements of the Business and Professions Code Section 16001.

The license required under this title for peddlers shall be in addition to any license payable for any business conducted by the applicant for the license.

“Persons” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs and individuals transacting and carrying on any business, profession, trade, calling or occupation in the city.

“Police chief” means the police chief of the city.

“Rental unit” means an apartment in the case of apartment houses, a room in the case of a rooming house, hotel or motel, and a trailer space in the case of a trailer camp.

“Retail business” means every business conducted for the purpose of selling, or offering to sell, any goods, wares or merchandise other than as a part of a wholesale business or jobbing business.

“Solicitors” includes all persons engaged in the canvassing or taking orders, from house to house or from place to place in the city, for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or any other article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed or for the manufacture, maintenance, servicing or repairing of any article, but shall not include any person pursuing a wholesale business who has paid a license fee therefor under this title. The license required under this title for solicitors shall be in addition to any license payable for any business conducted by the applicant for the license.

“Unlicensed independent contractor” means a person not licensed by the state as a contractor and who, in any capacity other than as an employee of another, for compensation, undertakes to perform contractual services.

“Vending machines” includes machines for the vending of goods, wares or merchandise, including gum, foodstuff, candy, potable drinks, cigarettes and stamps, by the insertion of coins and tokens for the operation thereof.

“Wholesale business” means every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods, wares, merchandise or services in wholesale lots to retailers or other business establishments. (Prior code § 9.1 (part))

5.04.020 Rules of construction.
A.    “Shall and may.” As used in this title, “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

B.    “Singular, Plural, Masculine and Feminine.” Whenever the singular is used, it also includes the plural; and whenever the masculine is used, it also includes the feminine. (Prior code § 9.1 (part))

Chapter 5.08
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Sections:

5.08.010    License required.

5.08.020    License to constitute debt to city.

5.08.030    Conviction for failure to obtain license does not relieve liability.

5.08.040    Duties of director of finance—Generally.

5.08.050    Mistakes not to prejudice collection—Refunds of overcharges.

5.08.060    Transfer of licenses.

5.08.070    Separate license for each place of business.

5.08.080    Maximum license period to be one year.

5.08.090    Application for licenses.

5.08.100    When and where payable.

5.08.110    Proration of licenses.

5.08.120    Exemptions.

5.08.130    Exhibition of licenses.

5.08.140    City not bound by affidavits.

5.08.150    Procedure when licenses may constitute burden on interstate commerce.

5.08.160    Additional requirements for peddlers and solicitors.

5.08.170    Business license fee a tax.

5.08.010 License required.
No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, or any body corporate, or as an officer for any corporation, or otherwise shall commence or carry on any business, trade, calling, profession or occupation, in this title specified, in the city, without first having procured a license from the city to do so. The carrying on of any business, trade, calling, profession or occupation mentioned in this title without first having procured a license from the city so to do shall constitute a separate violation of this title for each and every day that such business, trade, calling, profession or occupation is so carried on. (Ord. 02-5 § 11 (part): prior code § 9.2)

5.08.020 License to constitute debt to city.
The amount of any license imposed by this title shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any trade, calling, business, profession or occupation mentioned in this title without having a license from the city to do so, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of license imposed on such trade, business, calling, profession or occupation. (Prior code § 9.3)

5.08.030 Conviction for failure to obtain license does not relieve liability.
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade, calling, business, profession or occupation without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 9.4)

5.08.040 Duties of director of finance—Generally.
It shall be the duty of the director of finance under this title to:

A.    Prepare and, upon the collection of the license fee payable under this title, issue a license under this title to every person liable to pay a license hereunder, and to state in each license the amount thereof, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation licensed, the number of the section of this title under which such license is issued and the location or place of business where such trade, calling, profession or occupation is to be carried on;

B.    Make a charge of one dollar ($1.00) for each duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of this title which has been lost or destroyed;

C.    Refer to the county health department, prior to issuing a license, each application for a license to conduct any business regulated or supervised in any way by the county health department;

D.    Refer to the chief of police any application for a business license for a peddler or solicitor prior to issuance of such license. (Prior code § 9.5)

5.08.050 Mistakes not to prejudice collection—Refunds of overcharges.
In no case shall any mistake made by the city in stating the amount of a license prevent or prejudice the collection made by the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a trade, calling, profession or occupation subject to a license under this title. Refunds may be made of overcharges; provided, that a claim is filed with the city clerk within six months after the overcharge has been paid. (Prior code § 9.6)

5.08.060 Transfer of licenses.
A license granted or issued under any provision of this title shall not be in any manner transferred or assigned or authorize any person, than is therein mentioned or named, to do business, without the written authorization of the city clerk endorsed thereon. At the time any such license is transferred or assigned, the person applying for such transfer shall pay to the city clerk a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each such transfer or assignment. Licenses issued to peddlers and solicitors shall not be transferable. (Prior code § 9.7)

5.08.070 Separate license for each place of business.
If two or more businesses or vocations are conducted on the same premises by the same person and such businesses or vocations are subject to license tax under sections 5.12.010 to 5.12.040 of this title, only one license shall be required, based upon the total number of employees employed at such location, and under the fee schedule applicable to the business employing the largest number of employees at such location.

If two or more businesses are conducted on the same premises by the same person and such businesses are subject to license tax under sections 5.12.050 to 5.12.070 of this title, only one license shall be required based upon the highest license applicable to one of such businesses and adding thereto fifty percent (50%) of the license tax applicable to each of the other businesses.

If two or more businesses are conducted on the same premises by the same person and one or more of such businesses are subject to a tax under sections 5.12.010 to 5.12.040 of this code and the other businesses are subject to a tax under sections 5.12.050 to 5.12.070, then such person shall pay a tax for those businesses subject to a tax under sections 5.12.010 to 5.12.040 based upon the total number of employees at such location, according to the schedule applying to the business using the largest number of employees, plus an amount equal to the highest applicable fee under sections 5.12.050 to 5.12.070, plus fifty percent (50%) of the license fee payable under sections 5.12.050 to 5.12.070 for any additional business. (Prior code § 9.9)

5.08.080 Maximum license period to be one year.
No license shall be issued for a period of more than twelve (12) months beginning January 1st and ending December 31st, and no license shall be issued for any period extending beyond December 31st of the year in which such license is issued. (Prior code § 9.10)

5.08.090 Application for licenses.
All persons subject to license tax shall file an application with the city clerk for such license during the month of January for the tax year, commencing January 1958, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, which application shall contain a statement of all of the facts necessary to determine the amount of tax to be paid.

Any person starting business after January 1, 1958, and subject to license tax under sections 5.12.010 to 5.12.040 of this code, shall apply for licenses and pay a prorated license for the balance of the year, based upon an estimated number of employees. (Prior code § 9.11)

5.08.100 When and where payable.
All licenses due under the provisions of this chapter shall be payable in advance at the office of the city clerk, as follows:

A.    Licenses are due on January 1st of each year and delinquent on January 31st thereafter; provided, however, for new businesses the licenses are due on the date of commencement of operation and are delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter.

B.    To all delinquent licenses shall be added a penalty of ten percent (10%) per month, or fractional part of a month, of the amount of the license. (Prior code § 9.12)

5.08.110 Proration of licenses.
No proration of any license due under this chapter shall be made for any portion of the period for which a license is payable, except in the case of a first license under sections 5.12.010 to 5.12.040 of this code, and in the case where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the license tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, in which expected cases the fee shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the license period at the date of application for license or expiration of such license previously issued, whichever event is sooner. For the purpose of proration, a fractional part of a month shall be considered as a full month. (Prior code § 9.13)

5.08.120 Exemptions.
No license payable under this title shall be payable by:

A.    Any charitable institution, organization or association, organized for charitable purposes and selling merchandise or services or conducting or staging for charitable purposes only; any concert, exhibition, lecture or entertainment within the city, where no admission is charged or where the receipts from admission charged are due exclusively for charitable or benevolent purposes and no part thereof is used for the purpose of private gain of an individual;

B.    Any organization conducting or staging any concert, exhibition, lecture or entertainment, where the proceeds from admissions charged are used for the furtherance of education, art or music within the city, and where no part of the profits derived therefrom is used for the purpose of private gain of any individual;

C.    No license for street vending or entertaining shall be payable by any blind person or indigent person who by reason of the infirmities of age, loss of limb or other disabling cause is unable to obtain a livelihood by other means than such street vending or entertaining. The exemption granted hereunder shall not exceed two days in any one month and shall only be granted after the city clerk is satisfied that the applicant for such exemption has qualified therefor;

D.    Any person whose total net income for the preceding year, and whose estimated net income for the ensuing year shall be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, that such person can produce proof satisfactory to the city clerk that such net income for such preceding year was less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the estimated net income for the ensuing year will be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00);

E.    Any person acting without personal compensation or profit on behalf of a religious, nonprofit or charitable organization recognized as such by the United States Internal Revenue Service or the state. (Prior code § 9.15)

5.08.130 Exhibition of licenses.
A.    Every person having a license under the provisions of this title and carrying on a trade, calling, business, profession or occupation at a fixed place of business shall keep such license posted and exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of the place of business.

B.    Every person having a license issued under this title, and not having a fixed place of business, shall carry such license with him or her at all times while carrying on the trade, calling, business, profession or occupation for which the same was granted. Every person having a license under the provisions of this title shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses.

This list must be furnished by the city clerk to the police chief before the license can be issued.

C.    In addition to subsection A or B of this section, all contractors, as defined in Section 5.04.010, and all persons having no fixed place of business within the city and operating from vehicles (Section 5.12.070), and all solicitors or peddlers operating from vehicles, shall display on all vehicles operating in conjunction with that business in the city a sticker evidencing that the business has a valid business license. Such sticker(s) shall be provided by the city and shall be affixed to the left rear bumper of the vehicle, or such other location on the left rear of the vehicle where they are readily visible at all times. (Prior code § 9.16)

5.08.140 City not bound by affidavits.
No statement or affidavit filed shall be conclusive upon the city or upon any officer thereof as to the matters therein set forth, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the city to recover any amount that may be ascertained to be due from such person in addition to the amount shown by such statement to be due in case such statement should be found to be incorrect. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the place of business, the records or books of any person subject to the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 9.17)

5.08.150 Procedure when licenses may constitute burden on interstate commerce.
None of the license fees provided for by this title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the city council for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00) to cover cost of investigation and may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city council may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city council shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant’s business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he or she shall determine whether the fee fixed by this title is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to applicant’s business and shall fix as the license for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city council shall have the power to base the fee upon any method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by this title; provided, that no additional fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license as prescribed in this section. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city council in the assessing of the fee as provided in this section shall have the right to appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing to be held at a regular council meeting within thirty (30) days of receipt by council of notice of appeal, shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 9.18)

5.08.160 Additional requirements for peddlers and solicitors.
The provisions of Chapter 5.28 of this code are in addition to the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter regarding a business license for solicitors and peddlers shall not be construed as exempting such persons from the provisions of Chapter 5.28 of this code. (Prior code § 9.19)

5.08.170 Business license fee a tax.
Business license fees established by this title shall be considered taxes imposed for revenue generating purposes and not reimbursement of expenses incurred in regulation of businesses. Payment of a business license tax or possession of a business license shall not be considered permission to engage in any business activity contrary to any other law, ordinance or regulation. (Prior code § 9.20)

Chapter 5.12
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES AND SCHEDULES
Sections:

5.12.010    Schedule for retailers, wholesalers and utilities.

5.12.020    Schedule for manufacturers, food processors and wineries.

5.12.030    Schedule for certain professionals.

5.12.040    Schedule for certain semi-professionals.

5.12.050    Schedule for miscellaneous business, professions and callings generally.

5.12.060    Schedule for certain entertainment and amusements.

5.12.070    Schedule of businesses operated with vehicles by persons having no fixed place of business within the city.

5.12.080    Schedule for businesses engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire.

5.12.010 Schedule for retailers, wholesalers and utilities.
Persons having a fixed place of business within the city and engaged in selling or furnishing, at retail or wholesale, goods, wares and merchandise, including foodstuffs, wearing apparel, furniture and gas, electricity, water and telephone or telegraph service, at wholesale or retail, and the other businesses listed in this section, and also including selling vehicles, vehicle parts, conducting restaurants, lunchrooms, cafeterias, soda fountains and drugstores, garages, service stations, petroleum products distributors, bakeries, printers, furniture repair, upholstering, paint stores, photographers, sheet metal works, machine shops, florists, nurseries, appliances, bookstores, shoe stores, jewelry, building materials, feed, furniture stores, dairies, dairy products distribution, detective agency, newspapers, radio broadcasting, pumps, machinery, tractors, auto rental, auto painting, auto repair, bicycle repair, refrigeration service, cold storage warehouse, cold storage lockers, dry cleaners, carpenter repair, shoe repair shop, janitor service, window cleaners, linen and towel supply service, laundries and other businesses selling goods, wares, merchandise or services and not otherwise classified under this title shall pay annual license fees, in advance, based upon the average number of employees employed in the city, according to the following schedule:

Sixty dollars ($60.00) for the first employee;

Seven dollars ($7.00) for each additional employee.

(Prior code § 9.21)

5.12.020 Schedule for manufacturers, food processors and wineries.
Every person engaged in the business of manufacturer, or of processor of eggs, poultry, fruit, vegetables or dairy products, or of meat packer, hatchery or fabricator of materials, and not otherwise classified, shall pay annual license fees, in advance, based upon the average number of persons employed in the city, according to the following schedule:

Sixty dollars ($60.00) for the first employee;

Seven dollars ($7.00) for each additional employee.

(Prior code § 9.22)

5.12.030 Schedule for certain professionals.
An annual license tax in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid, in advance, for each person, or in the case of a firm, one hundred dollars ($100.00), in advance, for each practicing member of the profession, engaged in the following professions and vocations in the city, plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each employee employed by such person or firm: architect, attorney, advertising counsel, bacteriologist, chemist, chiropodist, chiropractor, civil engineer, electrical engineer, mining engineer, construction engineer, structural engineers, consulting engineers, mechanical engineer, hydraulic engineer, dentist, draftsman, drugless practitioner, electrologist, engraver, geologist, landscape architect, masseur, mortician, oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopath, physician, surgeon, surveyor, taxidermist, veterinarian, x-ray laboratory and any profession or semi-profession not otherwise classified under this title. (Prior code § 9.23)

5.12.040 Schedule for certain semi-professionals.
An annual license tax in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid, in advance, for each person or firm, plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each employee engaged in the following semi-professions and vocations in the city: accountant, auditor, appraiser, assayer, blueprinter, real estate broker, stock or bond broker, broker of goods, wares and merchandise, certified public accountant, collection agency, credit reporting bureau, dental technician, employment agency, designer or decorator, feed, grain and fruit broker, illustrator or shop card writer, insurance or claims adjuster, lapidary, lithographer, money lender or broker or selling obligations (not including bank, pawnbrokers or building and loan), mercantile agency, sign painter and clinical laboratory. (Prior code § 9.24)

5.12.050 Schedule for miscellaneous business, professions and callings generally.
Every person engaged in any of the miscellaneous businesses, professions or callings described and referred to in this section shall pay, in advance, the license tax provided for as follows:

1.    Advertising by means of a display advertisement towed by a vehicle, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month;

2.    Advertising by means of handbills, dodgers, stickers, advertising samples, excepting political advertising by a candidate for office, eighty dollars ($80.00) per person, per year, or three dollars ($3.00) per person, per day;

3.    Auctioneers, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) for the first day and thirty-three ($33.00) for each subsequent day;

4.    Auto parking, forty-two dollars ($42.00) per year for each parking lot. This subsection shall not apply to a parking lot conducted in connection with the business of a new or used car auto dealer for the storage of his or her cars nor to a lot maintained for the benefit of customers, clients or patrons of a business licensed under this title;

5.    Auto racetrack, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) per year;

6.    Auto wrecking, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year;

7.    Bail bond brokers, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) per year;

8.    Barbers, sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for first barber, plus seven dollars ($7.00) per year for each additional barber;

9.    Barber and beauty schools, sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for each school of barbers and/or of cosmetology, plus seven dollars ($7.00) per year for each barber, instructor, employee, operator or student operator, when fees are charged for the student operator’s service;

10.    Baths (public), eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year;

11.    Beauty parlors, sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for first operator, plus seven dollars ($7.00) per year for each additional operator;

12.    Boot blacks, thirty-three dollars ($33.00) per year for first employee, plus seven ($7.00) dollars per year for each additional employee;

13.    Building and loan associations, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year;

14.    Christmas tree and fireworks vendors, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per month, per person;

15.    Contractors—general, electrical, painting, paving, plumbing, sewer and other contractors, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for each contractor or firm, plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each additional employee;

16.    Dancing and music lessons, forty dollars ($40.00) per year;

17.    Directories—compiling, publishing or selling, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year;

18.    Electrical motor and appliance repair, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year;

19.    Electrical sign installation and maintenance, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year;

20.    Fire and bankruptcy sales, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) per month for first three months, and eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per day thereafter, no license shall be required under this subsection from any person, firm or corporation licensed under this title until the expiration of one month after the commencement of a fire or bankruptcy sale;

21.    Hospitals, sanitariums, rest and nursing homes, eight dollars per year, per bed, with a minimum of sixty dollars ($60.00) per year;

22.    Hotels, motels, apartments and rooming houses having at least three rental units: sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for three to nine rental units, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for ten (10) to twenty-four (24) rental units, one hundred thirty-three dollars ($133.00) per year for twenty-five (25) to sixty (60) rental units, two hundred seventeen dollars ($217.00) per year for more than sixty (60) rental units;

23.    Itinerant vendors and photographers, one hundred sixty-seven dollars ($167.00) per year for first vendor or photographer, plus eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year for each additional vendor or photographer;

24.    Junk collectors and dealers:

For persons having no fixed place of business within the city, one hundred sixty-seven dollars ($167.00) per year for first vehicle, plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for each additional vehicle,

For persons having a fixed place of business in the city, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year for first vehicle and thirty-three dollars ($33.00) per year for each additional vehicle;

25.    Lockboxes, seven dollars ($7.00) per year, per box;

26.    Pawnbrokers, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) per year;

27.    Peddlers, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) per year for each person;

28.    Retailers or wholesalers of concrete aggregates, rock, sand, gravel and plant mix, one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per truck based on the average number of vehicles used in the city each month, but not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year;

29.    Riding academy, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year;

30.    Scaffolding rental, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year;

31.    Solicitors not having a fixed place of business within the city:

(1)    Solicitors of subscriptions to or advertising for newspapers, magazines, radio or television station, sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for first solicitor plus seven dollars ($7.00) per year for each additional solicitor,

(2)    All other solicitors, three hundred thirty three dollars ($333.00) per year for each solicitor;

32.    Trailer courts and mobilehome parks: sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for one to nine units, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for ten (10) to twenty-four (24) units, one hundred thirty-three dollars ($133.00) per year for twenty-five (25) to sixty (60) units, two hundred seventeen dollars ($217.00) per year for more than sixty (60) rental units;

33.    Transportation of freight and baggage for hire: sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for each truck having not more than one and one-half ton capacity, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year for each truck between one and one-half and three ton capacity, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for each truck having more than three ton capacity, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year for each trailer having not more than one and one-half ton capacity, forty dollars ($40.00) per year for each trailer having between one and one-half and three ton capacity, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for each trailer having more than three ton capacity,

(1)    For the purpose of this section a tractor-semitrailer unit shall be considered as one truck,

(2)    No license shall be required of any carrier for hire exempted by the provisions of Section 5327 of the Public Utility Code;

34.    Unlicensed independent contractors, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year;

35.    Vending machines (this tax does not apply to any person operating a vending machine as an incident of any business licensed under this title): three dollars ($3.00) per year for each machine requiring one cent ($0.01) to operate, seven dollars ($7.00) per year for each machine requiring five cents ($0.05) to operate, thirteen dollars ($13.00) per year for each machine requiring ten cents ($0.10) to operate, twenty dollars ($20.00) per year for each machine requiring eleven cents to thirty cents ($0.11 – $0.30) to operate, forty dollars ($40.00) per year for each machine requiring thirty-one cents ($0.31) or more to operate;

36.    Itinerant artists and photographers engaged in business four days or less per year, waived for each artist or photographer. (Ord. 08-6; Ord. 02-5 § 11 (part); prior code § 9.25)

5.12.060 Schedule for certain entertainment and amusements.
Every person engaged in any of the entertainments or amusements described and referred to in this section shall pay, in advance, the corresponding license tax provided as follows:

A.    Amusement concessions for adults, including carousel, loop-o-plane, aeroplane, ferris wheel, ski flier, scooter, whip, motorcycle ride, globe of death, magic carpet, ride-in-the-dark, sideshows, mystery, telescope, animal, bird or minstrel shows and exhibits and similar concessions, except when part of a carnival licensed hereunder, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per month for each concession;

B.    Amusement concessions for children, including miniature train, merry-go-round, pony ride, speedway (small electric or gasoline autos), pig slides, shows, exhibits, etc., except when part of a carnival licensed hereunder, and except where no change is made, seventeen dollars ($17.00) per month for each concession;

C.    Arcade, two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year;

D.    Billiard rooms and poolrooms, forty dollars ($40.00) per year for each table;

E.    Bowling alleys, forty dollars ($40.00) per year for each alley;

F.    Boxing and wrestling exhibitions, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per exhibit;

G.    Carnival, three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00) for the first day and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each succeeding day thereafter;

H.    Mechanical or electronic amusement devices, for coin-operated or slug-operated games, contests of skill, ray-o-life or similar devices including pinball or marble machines, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year or fraction thereof for each machine or device, but not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or fraction thereof for each arcade or single business location where said machines or devices are operated;

I.    Mechanical music devices, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for each device;

J.    Miniature golf and driving range, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year;

K.    Motion picture and other theaters, eighty-three dollars ($83.00) per year;

L.    Public cardrooms, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year;

M.    Shooting galleries, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year;

N.    Skating rinks, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year. (Prior code § 9.26)

5.12.070 Schedule of businesses operated with vehicles by persons having no fixed place of business within the city.
Every person engaged in any of the businesses operated with vehicles by persons having no fixed place of business within the city as described and referred to in this section shall pay, in advance, the corresponding license tax provided for in such sections:

A.    For dry cleaners, whose place of business is outside the city, for soliciting and delivery of dry cleaning in the city, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per year;

B.    For laundries or solicitors for laundries, located outside the city, for soliciting for and delivering laundry in the city, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per year;

C.    For retailers, whose place of business is outside the city, selling and delivering to customers within the city, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per year;

D.    For storage houses or warehouses, forty-two dollars ($42.00) per year, seven dollars ($7.00) each additional employee;

E.    For wholesalers whose place of business is outside the city, selling and delivering to retailers within the city, fifty-eight dollars ($58.00) per year.

F.    For caterers, providing on-site food service, sixty-seven dollars ($67.00) per year. (Prior code § 9.27)

5.12.080 Schedule for businesses engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire.
A.    Tax Imposed. Every person whose business is engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire shall pay the license tax provided in this section if the business transports persons:

1.    Wholly within the city;

2.    From a place or places outside the city to a place or places within the city;

3.    From a place or places within the city to a place or places outside the city;

4.    From a place or places within the city to a place or places also within the city even though such transportation involves going outside the city in the course thereof.

B.    Measure of Tax.

1.    Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section, the license tax required to be paid by this section shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year (includes businesses engaged in the operation of tour buses, sightseeing buses, charter buses, limousines, taxicabs and other common carriers).

2.    The license tax required to be paid by this section by businesses that maintain a terminal or depot in the city for loading or unloading of passengers shall pay four percent of the gross receipts derived from the passengers loaded or unloaded in the city.

C.    Definitions.

1.    “Gross receipts” means the total of amounts actually received or receivable for transportation services. Included in “gross receipts” are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of equipment or materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” are cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, any tax required by law to be included in or added to the charges and collected from the passenger, receipts of refundable deposits not forfeited and taken into income of the business, food, beverages, and service charges.

2.    “Transportation of passengers for hire” means the transportation of passengers for gain or profit.

D.    Method of Reporting Gross Receipts.

1.    Where the amount of the license tax to be paid under this section is measured by gross receipts, the license applicant shall furnish to the director of finance for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid, a quarterly written statement under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as is required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant for the preceding quarter.

2.    Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder, he or she shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the director of finance as reasonable, may be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the director of finance with a sworn statement showing the gross receipts during the period of such license. The license tax for such period may be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this title for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time the first license was issued.

3.    The license tax is based upon the gross receipts of the business during the preceding calendar quarter and shall be delinquent on the thirtieth day of April, July, October, and January of each year. (Prior code § 9.28)

Chapter 5.16
BINGO
Sections:

5.16.010    Bingo defined.

5.16.020    Permit required.

5.16.030    Compliance.

5.16.040    Organizations eligible to conduct bingo.

5.16.050    Profits, wages and salaries prohibited.

5.16.060    Minors.

5.16.070    Staffing of bingo games.

5.16.080    Premises permitted for conduct of bingo.

5.16.090    Games open to the public.

5.16.100    Outside financial interests prohibited.

5.16.110    Commingling of profits.

5.16.120    Absentee participation prohibited.

5.16.130    Maximum prize value.

5.16.140    Audit.

5.16.010 Bingo defined.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.010)

5.16.020 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a bingo game without a permit from the city. A permit application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall establish compliance with the conditions of this chapter. The permit fee shall be as set forth in city council resolution.

The city clerk shall examine the application required and if the conditions of this chapter are complied with, a permit shall be issued by the city. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31st of each year and shall be renewable annually. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.020)

5.16.030 Compliance.
Bingo games conducted within the city shall be conducted only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.030)

5.16.040 Organizations eligible to conduct bingo.
Bingo games may be conducted in the city only by organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Tax Code sections 23701(A), 23701(B), 23701(D), 23701(E), 23701(F), 23701(G), and 23701(L) and by mobilehome park associations and senior citizens organizations; and only if the receipts from such games are used only for charitable purposes, except as otherwise provided in California Penal Code 326.5(k). (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.040)

5.16.050 Profits, wages and salaries prohibited.
No person shall receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game conducted in the city. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.050)

5.16.060 Minors.
No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game conducted in the city. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.060)

5.16.070 Staffing of bingo games.
Any bingo game operated within the city shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit, charitable organization that organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate the game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of the game. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.070)

5.16.080 Premises permitted for conduct of bingo.
A nonprofit, charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.080)

5.16.090 Games open to the public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public and not just to the members of the nonprofit, charitable organization. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.090)

5.16.100 Outside financial interests prohibited.
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.100)

5.16.110 Commingling of profits.
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.110)

5.16.120 Absentee participation prohibited.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.120)

5.16.130 Maximum prize value.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind or both for each separate game that is held. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.130)

5.16.140 Audit.
The finance director is authorized to audit the records of any organization to verify compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 02-3 § 17 (part); Ord. 01-9 § 2 (part): prior code § 11.8.140)

Chapter 5.20
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE*
Sections:

5.20.010    Purpose and application of this chapter.

5.20.020    State video franchise fees and public, educational and governmental (PEG) access fees.

5.20.030    Audit authority.

5.20.040    Late payments.

5.20.050    Public, educational and government access channel capacity, interconnection, and signal carriage.

5.20.060    Customer service penalties.

5.20.070    Emergency alert.

5.20.080    Notices.

5.20.090    Permits and construction.

*    Prior history: Prior code §§ 4A.1—4A.91.

5.20.010 Purpose and application of this chapter.
A.    This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city of St. Helena. On January 1, 2007, the state of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city of St. Helena shall receive a franchise fee from all state franchisees. In addition, the city shall receive from all state franchisees fees to support public, educational, and government (“PEG”) access channel facilities. DIVCA confirmed that the city may establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. DIVCA leaves unchanged the city’s authority to regulate the city’s current cable franchises and any city cable franchise(s) issued on or before January 1, 2008, until the expiration of any such franchise(s).

B.    This chapter is applicable to all cable service and video service providers who are eligible for, and have been awarded, a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006), to provide cable or video services to the city of St. Helena.

C.    Nothing contained in this Chapter 5.20 exempts a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., or obligations under any franchise previously issued by the city, insofar as those may be enforced under California Public Utilities Code Section 5800.

D.    The rights reserved to the city under this Chapter 5.20 are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this Chapter 5.20 or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city. The city reserves its rights to the lawful exercise of police and other powers the city now has or may later obtain. Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:

1.    Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services;

2.    Any permit or authorization, other than a state franchise, required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole attachment permits and street cut permits; and

3.    Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.020 State video franchise fees and public, educational and governmental (PEG) access fees.
A.    Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder.

B.    Each state franchisee shall pay a fee to the city equal to one percent (1%) of gross revenues (“PEG access facilities fee”) of that state video franchise holder to support public, education, and governmental (PEG) access channel facilities within the city.

C.    The state franchise fee required pursuant to subsection A of this section and the PEG fee required pursuant to subsection B of this section shall each be paid to the city quarterly, in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by check or other means specified by the city, a payment for the state franchise fee and a separate payment for the PEG fee not later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing how the payment was calculated, containing such information as the city manager or designee may require, consistent with DIVCA. Unless the city manager or designee provides otherwise, the summary statement shall identify:

1.    Revenues received from subscribers, by category, with service revenues broken out by service levels;

2.    Any charges to subscribers for which revenues were received, but on which a franchise fee was not paid; and

3.    Where the fee is paid on an allocated portion of revenues received, the total revenues received; the allocation factor; and how the allocation factor was calculated.

D.    Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.030 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the city manager or his designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 5.20.020 in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i). (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.040 Late payments.
In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent (1%). (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.050 Public, educational and government access channel capacity, interconnection, and signal carriage.
A.    PEG Channel Capacity.

1.    A state franchisee that has been authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide video service in the city shall designate and activate three PEG channels within three months from the date that the city requests that the state franchisee designate and activate these PEG channels. However, this three-month period shall be tolled for such a period, and only for such a period, during which the state franchisee’s ability to designate or provide such PEG capacity is technically infeasible, as provided in California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(a).

2.    A state franchisee shall provide an additional PEG channel when the standards set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(d) are satisfied by the city or any entity designated by the city to manage one or more of the PEG channels.

B.    PEG Carriage and Interconnection.

1.    State franchisees shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable by all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a state franchisee shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels (unless the PEG signal is provided to the state franchisee at a lower quality or with less functionality), shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) quality television signal, and shall be carried on the state franchisee’s lowest cost tier of service. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the lowest cost tier of service and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by any incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. After the initial designation of the PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the city unless federal law requires the change.

2.    The holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. If a state franchisee and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for PEG carriage, the city shall require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state franchisee to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator’s network at a technically feasible point on the state franchisee’s network as identified by the state franchisee. If no technically feasible point of interconnection is available, the state franchisee shall make interconnection available to the PEG channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchisee requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.060 Customer service penalties.
A.    Any holder of a state video service franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B.    The city will provide any holder of a state video franchise written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the state video franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the state video franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

1.    For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of a material breach.

2.    For the second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

3.    For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

C.    Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the city manager, or the city manager’s designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required.

D.    The state video service franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the city council. Any appeal must be made within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt by the state video service franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and the city manager in order to be placed on a city council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements.

E.    The city and any state video service franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, and an authorized representative of the state video franchise holder.

F.    Any penalty imposed on the state video franchise holder shall be paid to the city. As provided for in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900(g), the city shall submit one-half of all penalties received from a state video franchise holder to the digital divide account established in California Public Utilities Code Section 280.5. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.070 Emergency alert.
A.    Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder’s network.

B.    To the extent consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5880, each state franchise holder shall incorporate into its network the capability to permit the city to override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously in times of emergency. In addition, each state franchise holder may be required to designate a channel, which may be a PEG channel, to be used for audio and video emergency broadcasts. The state franchise holder shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of said emergency alert override system. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.080 Notices.
A.    Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

B.    Unless otherwise specified in this section, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this section or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to both the city manager and the city staff person in charge of cable and telecommunications, or their successors or designees. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

5.20.090 Permits and construction.
A.    Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by any provision of the St. Helena Municipal Code, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of the applicable code section and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act).

B.    The public works director shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder’s application for any permit required under subsection A of this section within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed permit application from the state franchise holder.

C.    If the public works director denies a state franchise holder’s application for a permit, the public works director shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial.

D.    A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the public works director may appeal the denial to the city council. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city council shall take one of the following actions:

1.    Affirm the action of the public works director without any further hearing; or

2.    Refer the matter back to the public works director for further review with or without instructions; or

3.    Set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council.

In rendering its decision on the appeal, the city council shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of the matter received from the public works director unless the city council is itself conducting a public hearing on the matter.

E.    Notification to Residents Regarding Construction or Maintenance. Prior to any construction, rebuild, or upgrade of a cable or video system, a state franchise holder shall establish procedures to notify city residents in the impacted area of construction schedules and activities. Such notices must be provided in English and the predominant languages spoken by those persons who work and/or reside in the impacted area. The notices shall be provided to the public works director for review and approval no later than twenty (20) days before commencement of construction, rebuild, or upgrade activities.

F.    At a minimum, the notice required in subsection G of this section shall be provided by the state franchise holder to impacted residents and occupants in the construction area not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the planned construction. The state franchise holder shall provide additional notice to the persons described in subsection G of this section on the day of construction. The notice may be in the form of door hangers that indicate, at a minimum, the dates and times of construction and the name and telephone number of a state franchise holder contact.

G.    The state franchise holder shall provide notice at least twenty (20) days prior to entering private property or public ways or public easements adjacent to or on such private property, public ways, or public easements, and provide a second notice three days prior to entering such property.

1.    Should there be aboveground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and cable paths) which will affect the private property, such notice shall be in writing and shall contain specific information regarding any aboveground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths) which shall affect the private property.

2.    To the extent practicable, aboveground or underground equipment placed on private property shall be placed at the location requested by the property owner. A state franchise holder shall provide the private property owner with at least twenty (20) days’ advance written notice of its plans to install such equipment, and shall obtain express written consent, in the form of a recorded easement agreement, from the private property owner before installing its appurtenances. The state franchise holder shall notify the property owner, in writing, that the property owner is not obligated to agree to the placement on their property or to enter into an easement agreement with the state franchise holder. Should property owner notify the state franchise holder of objection to placement of any such aboveground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths), the state franchise holder shall confer with the city public works department regarding appropriate location and placement of such appurtenances.

In addition to any other notice of proposed entry required under this subsection, a state franchise holder’s personnel shall make a reasonable attempt to give personal notice to residents immediately preceding entry on private property or public ways or public easements adjacent to or on such private property.

H.    Identification Required. A state franchise holder, its employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors shall be properly identified as agents of the state franchise holder prior to and during entry on private and public property. Identification shall include the name and telephone number of the state franchise holder on all trucks and vehicles used by installation personnel.

I.    Restoration of Private and Public Property. After performance of work, the state franchise holder shall restore such private and public property to a condition equal to or better than its condition prior to construction. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or other improvements upon private or public property shall, at the sole expense of the state franchise holder, be promptly repaired or restored (including replacement of such valuables as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner, in addition to the furnishing of camouflage plants on public property.

J.    Reports to the Public Works Director. Each state franchise holder, within sixty (60) days after the expiration of each calendar year, shall file a report with the public works director, which shall contain a street and highway map or maps of any convenient scale on which shall be plotted the location of the entire transmission and distribution system or systems covered by the report as of the last day of the calendar year, with the system or systems located in city highways indicated by distinctive coloration or symbols. (Ord. 12-3 § A (Exh. A))

Chapter 5.24
FILM PERMITS
Sections:

5.24.010    Short title.

5.24.020    Purpose.

5.24.030    Definitions.

5.24.040    Permit required.

5.24.050    Permit exemptions.

5.24.060    Deadline for filing application.

5.24.070    Application submittal requirements.

5.24.080    Permit approval/denial.

5.24.090    Permit conditions.

5.24.100    Fees.

5.24.110    Change of filming date.

5.24.120    Insurance.

5.24.130    Indemnification and liability.

5.24.140    Duties of permittee.

5.24.150    Appeals.

5.24.160    Violations—Penalties.

5.24.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “St. Helena Film Permit Ordinance.” (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.1)

5.24.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for rules governing the issuance of permits for filming activities on location within the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that motion picture, television, commercial, and nontheatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public health and safety and the protection of property. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.2)

5.24.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of St. Helena or his or her designee.

“Filming activity” means setup, teardown or striking of any sets, filming, video taping, photographing, or other similar process attendant to the making of motion pictures, television programs, commercial and nontheatrical productions, and advertisements.

“Film permit” means written authorization from the city manager to conduct the filming activity described in the permit.

“News purposes” means a filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting spontaneous unplanned news by reporters, photographers or camera operators.

“Studio” means a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises.

“Traffic control” means intermittent or continuous lane or road closures and/or diversion of traffic or parking. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.3)

5.24.040 Permit required.
It is unlawful to conduct a filming activity as defined in Section 5.24.030 without first obtaining a film permit from the city manager. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.4)

5.24.050 Permit exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities:

A.    Film activities conducted for news purposes as defined in Section 5.24.030;

B.    Filming activities conducted in a studio as defined in Section 5.24.030;

C.    Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or court civil or criminal proceeding;

D.    Filming activities determined by the city manager to have little or no impact on residents, businesses or city services. (Examples: (1) filming or videotaping solely for private family use; (2) filming activity as part of an educational curriculum of St. Helena area schools.) (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.5)

5.24.060 Deadline for filing application.
Applications for a film permit requiring no traffic control must be filed with the city manager’s office at least three business days in advance of the time that the proposed filming activity is to commence. Applications for a film permit requiring traffic control, must be filed with the city manager’s office at least, two weeks in advance of the time that the proposed filming activity is to commence.

In exceptional circumstances, application deadlines may be waived for good cause by the city manager. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.6)

5.24.070 Application submittal requirements.
A permit application shall be on a form furnished by the city manager. Such form shall require the applicant to provide the following:

A.    Name, business address, and telephone number of applicant;

B.    Name, business address and telephone number of person in charge on location;

C.    Location(s) and approximate daily call times of the proposed filming activity. Unless otherwise allowed by the city manager for good cause, the filming shall be restricted to Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and nonholidays, shall not conflict with crush or the Wine Auction, shall not be allowed from the day before Thanksgiving to January 2nd, nor last for more than three consecutive days in one location;

D.    Description of scenes to be filmed including details of any stunts, action, chase scenes, pyrotechnics, or special effects;

E.    A traffic plan showing any scheduled street closures, traffic closures, and how traffic will be routed around the filming activity;

F.    Description and location of all vehicles which will be parked on city streets during filming activities;

G.    A parking plan showing the location of off street parking to be utilized by the film and support crews;

H.    A publicity plan detailing where and when notices of the filming will be posted, published, and delivered by the film company to affected business owners and residents. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to filming, notices must be received by affected business owners and residents, posted at the filming location, and, if required by the city manager, published in the St. Helena Star or the Napa Valley Register;

I.    A statement from the applicant that adjacent merchants and residents were contacted and were asked for permission for any filming activity and identifying any businesses and residents affected by the filming activity. The statement will identify the affected businesses and residences, if any, that do not support the filming activity;

J.    Written permission by the property owner to film on private property within the city;

K.    Students and Nonprofit Films. Students shall supply a written certificate from the school of their attendance which shall state that they are bonafide and currently enrolled students of the school. Nonprofit organizations shall supply a certificate stating that they are exempt and classified under federal and state taxing statutes;

L.    Such other information as the city manager may require to determine whether to grant a film permit under this chapter. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.7)

5.24.080 Permit approval/denial.
A.    Where no traffic control is required, the application shall be approved or denied within three business days of receipt of the application completed pursuant to Section 5.24.070. Where traffic control is required, the application shall be approved within seven business days of receipt of the application completed pursuant to Section 5.24.070. The film permit shall be approved by the city manager unless he or she determines from consideration of the application or other pertinent information that any of the following conditions exist:

1.    The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area.

2.    The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with street maintenance work or a previously authorized excavation permit.

3.    The proposed permit location is on city-owned property and the filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions or other previously authorized activities on city property.

4.    The filming activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or property.

5.    The filming activity would permanently alter or destroy any existing building, landscaping or public improvement in the city.

6.    The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail.

7.    The particular filming activity would violate federal, state or local law including license or permit requirements.

8.    The filming activity does not have the approval of a majority of affected business owners in nonresidential areas, or property owners in residential areas.

9.    In the downtown core, the concerns of the Chamber of Commerce cannot be adequately mitigated.

B.    When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable permit conditions, the city manager shall impose such conditions rather than deny the permit. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.8)

5.24.090 Permit conditions.
The city manager may condition the issuance of a filming activity permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, and manner of filming activities including but not limited to the following:

A.    Requirements for the presence of St. Helena police department, fire department, or public works department employees when required for the particular filming activity at the applicant’s expense;

B.    Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs and placement of other traffic control devices by the applicant at the applicant’s expense;

C.    Restrictions on the use of gunfire, explosions, and other noise-creating or hazardous devices;

D.    Restrictions on hours of filming activity. Unless specifically approved by the city manager for a good cause, no filming activity shall occur in residential zoning districts or in a location within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential dwelling unit between nine p.m., and seven a.m.;

E.    Unless otherwise allowed by the city manager for good cause, the filming shall be restricted to Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and nonholidays, shall not conflict with the Wine Auction, shall not be allowed from the day before Thanksgiving to January 2nd, nor last for more than three consecutive days in one location;

F.    Requirements concerning notice to affected property owners of the filming activity;

G.    Requirements as to the temporary nature of any changes to existing storefronts, landscaping, signage or public improvements (i.e., street signs);

H.    Requirements concerning publication of filming dates and locations in the St. Helena Star or Napa Valley Register;

I.    Encroachment permit as required by the California Department of Transportation or the city. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.9)

5.24.100 Fees.
A.    A permit application processing fee in an amount established by city council resolution shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed.

B.    A schedule of fees for city services and use of city property shall be established by city council resolution. The applicant shall prepay such fees prior to issuance of the film permit.

C.    A refundable cash deposit, in an amount determined by the city manager but not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be posted with the city to cover any unanticipated costs incurred by the filming activity. Such deposit shall be refunded (minus applicable charges, penalties, and fines) within thirty (30) days after the filming activity has concluded. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.10)

5.24.110 Change of filming date.
Upon reasonable notice by the applicant in advance of the filming activity, the city manager is authorized to change the date for which the film permit has been issued without requiring a new application or application fee, provided sufficient notice can be provided to affected business owners, residents and, if necessary, the general public. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.11)

5.24.120 Insurance.
A.    The applicant for a film permit must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the filming activity. Such insurance shall name on the policy and endorsement as insured the city of St. Helena, its officers, employees and agents. The applicant shall also provide workers compensation insurance as required by the state of California. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the filming activity.

Coverage shall be provided by a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in the amount prescribed by city council resolution. The insurance coverage afforded by the policy shall be primary and shall provide at a minimum the equivalent of insurance coverage provided by Insurance Service Office (ISO) comprehensive general liability insurance coverage.

The applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

B.    A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the city prior to issuance of the film permit. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.12)

5.24.130 Indemnification and liability.
A.    The film permit shall require the applicant to reimburse the city of St. Helena for any costs incurred to repair or replace city property, which is damaged as the result of the filming activity.

B.    The permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, or employees from all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the filming activity or issuance of the film permit.

C.    The city shall not be responsible for filming on private property or any fee arrangements between the private party and the filming company. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.13)

5.24.140 Duties of permittee.
A.    Each permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit. Failure to comply with all permit terms and conditions is grounds for immediate permit revocation by the city manager.

B.    Each permittee shall clean and restore all city-owned property utilized during the filming activity to the same condition as existed prior to the filming.

C.    The person in charge of the filming activity shall retain a copy of the film permit on location. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.14)

5.24.150 Appeals.
The permit applicant may appeal a permit denial, permit condition, or permit revocation or refusal to waive a deadline under this chapter by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at its earliest regular meeting permitted by law. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.15)

5.24.160 Violations—Penalties.
The violation of any provision of this chapter or permit condition shall be an infraction which shall be punished by a fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the applicant shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation in an amount determined by the city manager based on findings concerning the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation; the extent to which the violation was wilful or intentional and the extent to which city enforcement costs are reimbursed. The civil penalty may be deducted from any deposit made by the applicant. Such violations may also be addressed in a civil action. (Ord. 00-8 § 1 (part): prior code § 21.16)

Chapter 5.28
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sections:

5.28.010    Definitions.

5.28.020    Permit required for peddlers and solicitors.

5.28.030    Application for permit.

5.28.040    Permit denial or revocation.

5.28.050    Appeals.

5.28.060    Duty to carry and exhibit permit.

5.28.070    Badges.

5.28.080    Identification required for solicitors of funds and peddlers or solicitors for nonprofits.

5.28.090    Rules and regulations.

5.28.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Peddler” means every person selling and making immediate delivery or offering for sale and immediate delivery of any goods, wares, merchandise or thing in possession of the seller at a public place within this city or by going uninvited to the residence or place of business of any person. “Peddler” shall not include a “peddler or solicitor for nonprofit purposes.”

“Peddler or solicitor for nonprofit purposes” means a peddler or solicitor who peddles or solicits, as defined in this section, for the benefit of an organization granted tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code and/or the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

“Solicitor” means any person selling or taking orders or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, or things for future delivery or for services to be performed, at a public place within the city or by going uninvited to the residence or place of business of any person. “Solicitor” shall not include a “peddler or solicitor for nonprofit purposes.”

“Solicitor of funds” means any person personally requesting in a public place, or by going uninvited to the residence or place of business of any person, funds represented to be used for a charitable, welfare, educational or religious purpose. The term shall not be construed to include fund solicitations by mail or by telephone. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.010)

5.28.020 Permit required for peddlers and solicitors.
Every peddler or solicitor (not including a solicitor of funds or peddler or solicitor for nonprofit purposes) shall pay a license tax pursuant to Section 5.12.050 of this code and obtain a permit issued by the chief of police prior to peddling or soliciting, except for veterans who satisfy the requirements of the California Business and Professions Code Section 16001. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.020)

5.28.030 Application for permit.
Prior to peddling or soliciting, every person requiring a permit under Section 5.28.020 shall make written application, signed under oath, to the chief of police on forms provided by the city. Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months and may be renewed by the chief of police upon payment of applicable fees and taxes. The application shall contain the following information:

A.    The name, address, and telephone number of the organization, business or person;

B.    The name, address and telephone number of the person filling out the form;

C.    The kind of goods offered for sale or the kind of services to be rendered;

D.    The manner, dates and locations of peddling and soliciting;

E.    The state resale number under which business is to be transacted;

F.    Prior convictions of a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance, the nature, place and date of such offense and disposition of same;

G.    A statement as to whether any city or licensing authority has ever refused to issue or renew or has revoked a license for the conduct of the business for which the permit and license is sought, together with an accurate statement of the reasons therefor;

H.    Two photographs of the applicant acceptable for use on United States passports taken within the past year;

I.    Such other business and personal information as the chief of police finds is reasonably necessary to protect the public. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.030)

5.28.040 Permit denial or revocation.
Permits may be denied or revoked by chief of police for any of the following reasons:

A.    Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement made in furnishing the information required by this chapter;

B.    Any violation of this chapter;

C.    Conviction of the permit holder of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude;

D.    Conducting the soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to be a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.040)

5.28.050 Appeals.
The decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the city manager and then to the city council pursuant to Section 1.12.180 of this code. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.050)

5.28.060 Duty to carry and exhibit permit.
The permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or a copy of the permit, must be carried by each peddler or solicitor at all times when peddling or soliciting and such person shall display the permit upon the demand of any person to whom such person is peddling or soliciting. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.060)

5.28.070 Badges.
At all times when peddling or soliciting in public, each peddler or solicitor shall wear a badge of a uniform type, subject to approval by the chief of police, stating his or her name and the name of the organization or business for which he or she is peddling or soliciting. The name of the organization or business shall be the same as disclosed under this chapter. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.070)

5.28.080 Identification required for solicitors of funds and peddlers or solicitors for nonprofits.
At all times when soliciting for funds or peddling or soliciting for nonprofits in public, each such peddler or solicitor shall carry documentation or wear clothing, such as a uniform, that evidences the name of the organization. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.080)

5.28.090 Rules and regulations.
All solicitors, peddlers, solicitors of funds and peddlers or solicitors for nonprofits shall comply with the following rules and regulations:

A.    Such persons shall peddle or solicit only between nine a.m. and one-half hour after sunset or eight p.m., whichever occurs first.

B.    No such person shall peddle or solicit by entering any yard, house, structure or private property where there is posted a sign stating “No Solicitors or Peddlers” or language of similar import. (Ord. 02-3 § 7 (part): prior code § 11.3.090)

Chapter 5.32
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS
Sections:

5.32.010    Residential rental units.

5.32.010 Residential rental units.
A.    It is declared a public nuisance for any person or entity owning, leasing out, renting out, occupying, or having charge or possession of any residential rental dwelling, property and/or unit(s) in the city to maintain such residential rental dwelling, property and/or unit(s) in such a manner as to permit the tenant(s), any member of the tenant’s household and/or their children and/or their guests and/or their visitors while on the premises, to create or permit a violation pursuant to this code, or to violate or to permit the violation of any lease provision required pursuant to this section. A violation of this code or of any lease provision required pursuant to this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, any criminal or other activity on such premises that threatens the health, safety, or right of peaceful enjoyment of the premises of the other residents or adjacent property owners and/or any drug-related or criminal activity on such premises, wherein the owner is aware of the aforesaid violations and fails to take all reasonable, legally and contractually permitted action(s) or to make reasonable expenditure(s) to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable period of time, which shall be designated as thirty (30) days after notice. Such violation may, in the city’s discretion, be abated pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.20 of this code and/or pursuant to the procedures for abatement which are conferred upon the city by Civil Code Section 3494, Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, Health and Safety Code Sections 11570-11579, Government Code Section 38773 and other lawful authority. Further, to the extent reasonable actions or reasonable expenditures by the owner would have averted the costs, any person or entity owning, leasing out, renting out, occupying, or having charge or possession of any residential rental dwelling, property and/or unit(s) in the city shall be responsible for the administrative costs and/or any other costs of the city in abating or causing the owner or other person responsible for the property to abate a violation of this code, pursuant to chapters 1.12 and 1.20 of this code.

B.    Any residential rental dwelling, property or complex having sixteen (16) or more rental units shall have an on-site resident manager reasonably available during normal business hours. If the residential rental dwelling property or complex has more than four, but less than sixteen (16) rental units, a notice stating the owner’s name and address, or the name and address of his or her agent in charge of the apartment complex shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The requirements of this section are intended to be declarative of, and consistent with, state law.

C.    Each owner and/or manager of each residential rental dwelling, property and/or unit(s) shall comply with the following:

1.    Provide each tenant, pursuant to the compliance schedule required by subsection D of this section, with a written agreement, in the form of a lease, rental agreement or, for any tenancy of less than one year, other enforceable written contract, signed by the tenant and owner, or his or her agent, or his or her designee, which rental agreement shall contain the following to the extent permitted by any applicable state or federal regulatory requirements:

a.    A provision in which the tenant(s) acknowledge(s) the responsibility for their actions and for the actions by household members, and/or their children, and/or their guests, and/or their visitors while on the premises;

b.    A provision prohibiting tenant(s), all household members, their children, guests, visitors, and other individuals under their control from being involved in any illegal activities on or near the premises including, but not limited to:

i.    Any criminal or civil activity that threatens the health, safety, or right of peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents or adjacent property owners, or

ii.    Any drug-related or criminal activity on or near such premises;

c.    A provision putting the tenant(s) on notice that any disturbance, criminal activity and/or violation(s) of the agreement attributable to any tenant(s) or household members, or their children, guests, or visitors shall constitute a serious and material lease violation and shall be cause for termination of tenancy and eviction from the unit in accordance and compliance with all applicable state, federal and local laws;

d.    A lease provision identifying how the property manager will assign and control all parking areas to ensure that activities occurring there do not constitute a public nuisance or disturbance problem. Such provision shall prohibit activities in parking areas which constitute a public nuisance, a disturbance of the peace or quiet enjoyment of the occupants of the property or neighboring properties, or a violation of any federal, state or local law, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, fighting, littering, consumption of alcohol or of any illegal drug, narcotic or controlled substance, prostitution, brandishment of any weapon, urination, defecation and intoxication.

2.    A copy of the signed lease agreements, or addenda containing the information required under this section, shall be kept in the office of the property manager. All lease agreements, rules and regulations shall be either in English or Spanish, according to the tenant’s native language, or shall be explained to the tenant(s) by an interpreter signing an affidavit.

D.    Each owner or manager of a residential dwelling, property or unit(s) which is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a residential tenant or tenants shall comply with the requirements of Subsection C1 of this section according to the following schedule:

1.    For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a new tenant or tenants subsequent to the effective date of this section, the owner or manager shall require the incorporation of all the information required by Subsection C1 of this section in a written lease addendum at such time as the property, dwelling or unit(s) is rented or leased to, or occupied by, such new tenant or tenants.

2.    For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is occupied pursuant to a written lease in effect as of the effective date of this section, the owner or manager shall not be required to incorporate the information required by Subsection C1 of this section in a new lease or lease addendum until such time as the existing tenancy is terminated and the property, dwelling or unit(s) is rented or leased to, or occupied by, a new tenant or tenants. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, for each such residential rental property, dwelling or unit which is rented or leased to, or occupied by, an existing tenant or tenants pursuant to a written lease in effect as of the effective date of this section, the owner and/or manager shall provide each such existing tenant with a copy of the house rules within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this section.

3.    For each residential rental property, dwelling or unit(s) which is occupied as of the effective date of this section on a month-to-month or other holdover basis, the owner or manager shall be required to incorporate the information required by Subsection C1 of this section in a new lease or lease addendum within thirty (30) days of the earlier of either:

a.    Notification to the existing tenant of any change in the terms or conditions of such month-to-month or other holdover tenancy, including, but not limited to, any rent modification; or

b.    One year subsequent to the effective date of this section.

E.    Responsibility for Property Maintenance.

1.    Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this code and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property.

2.    Every occupant, lessee, tenant, or holder of any interest in real property, other than the owner thereof, who has assumed responsibility for the maintenance of such property under the terms of a written lease, rental agreement, or other contractual arrangement, and to the extent of that legal responsibility, shall maintain the property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this code. At the request of the city manager, or his or her designated representative, the person claiming a limitation on his or her responsibility for maintenance shall produce for inspection the document establishing such limitation.

F.    The terms “owner” and “property owner,” as used in this section, and unless otherwise required by the context, mean the owner or owners of record of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of Napa County, or as otherwise known to the planning director or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager by virtue of more recent and reliable information. (Ord. 02-3 § 11; prior code § 11.5)

Chapter 5.36
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Article 1
In General

Sections:

5.36.010    Definitions.

5.36.020    Registration of rates.

5.36.030    Supervision of vehicles for hire—General maintenance standards.

Article 2
Operating Regulations

Sections:

5.36.040    Taximeter requirements.

5.36.050    Restriction on number of passengers.

5.36.060    Exclusive use by customer.

5.36.070    Drivers to take most direct route.

5.36.080    Receipts—Disputes as to fares.

5.36.090    Refusal to pay fare.

5.36.100    Refusal to carry passengers.

5.36.110    Hours of operation.

Article 3
Permits

Sections:

5.36.120    Permit required—Application—Fees—Investigation of applicant.

5.36.130    Issuance of permit—Grounds for denial.

5.36.140    Temporary permits.

5.36.150    Issuance, posting and contents of permit.

5.36.160    Driver to give notice of change of employment.

5.36.170    Duration of permit—Renewals.

5.36.180    Revocation generally.

5.36.190    Appeal from denial or revocation.

Article 4
Insurance Requirements

Sections:

5.36.200    Required—Limitations.

5.36.210    Scope of policy.

5.36.220    Effect of cancellation.

Article 5
Stands

Sections:

5.36.230    Designation.

5.36.240    Written permission of occupants adjacent to spaces required.

5.36.250    Contents of stand permit.

5.36.260    Revocation of stand permit.

5.36.270    Unlawful standing of taxicabs.

Article 6
Passenger Buses

Sections:

5.36.280    Operation of passenger buses.

5.36.290    Disembarking and embarking of passengers.

5.36.300    Parking of passenger buses.

5.36.310    Exemptions.

5.36.320    Signs and markers.

5.36.330    Violation—Penalty.

Article 1
In General

5.36.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Driver” means every person in charge of, or operating, taxicab or rent car, either as agent, employee or otherwise under the direction of the owner, or as owner.

“Owner” means every person, firm or corporation having use or control of any taxicab or rent car, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise.

“Passenger bus” means any motor vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) or more passengers and engaged in the transportation of persons for compensation.

“Rent car” means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, excluding taxicabs, operated at rates per hour, and not equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and not over a defined route and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of such passenger or of such person hiring the same.

“Street” means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel.

“Taxicab” means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle operated at rates per mile or for wait-time, or for both, and equipped with either a taximeter or some other device or apparatus by which the distance traveled can be measured or determined, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and not over a defined route and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of such passenger or of such person hiring the same.

“Taximeter” means any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon such instrument, appliance, device or machine such charge is indicated by figures. (Prior code § 15.1)

5.36.020 Registration of rates.
Every owner shall register with the city clerk a written schedule of rates for services which may be amended or revised by the owner at any time by registering with the city clerk the written amendment. It is unlawful for the driver or owner of any taxicab or rented automobile to charge or collect for services any rate more or less than the schedule rate for such service registered with the city clerk. (Prior code § 15.2)

5.36.030 Supervision of vehicles for hire—General maintenance standards.
All public passenger vehicles for hire shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police and he or she shall not permit any driver to operate any taxicab or rent car in the city, while same or any equipment used thereon, or therewith, shall be unsafe, defective or unsanitary condition, and every taxicab or rent car shall be at all times subject to the inspection of any police officer of the city. (Prior code § 15.3)

Article 2
Operating Regulations

5.36.040 Taximeter requirements.
Every taxicab permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be equipped with a taximeter which shall be kept operating at all times within such standards of accuracy as may be prescribed by the chief of police and which shall be installed in such a manner as to permit the passenger to see the amount of the fare as registered. (Ord. 02-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 15.12)

5.36.050 Restriction on number of passengers.
No driver shall permit more passengers to be carried in a taxicab or rent car than the rated seating capacity of each taxicab or rent car as fixed by the chief of police and set out in the individual taxicab permit. (Ord. 02-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 15.13)

5.36.060 Exclusive use by customer.
When a taxicab or rent car is engaged by a customer, that customer shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment from the time of engaging such taxicab or rent car until the customer is delivered to the designated destination, and no driver of a taxicab or rent car shall solicit or carry additional customers therein without the express consent of the original customer. (Prior code § 15.14)

5.36.070 Drivers to take most direct route.
Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the passengers to their destination. (Prior code § 15.15)

5.36.080 Receipts—Disputes as to fares.
If requested, every driver shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare. In case of a dispute, the matter shall be determined by the officer in charge at the police station. Failure to comply with such determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of misdemeanor. (Prior code § 15.16)

5.36.090 Refusal to pay fare.
It is unlawful for any person, except where credit is extended, to refuse to pay the lawful fare, as fixed by this chapter for the use of any taxicab or rent car, after hiring the same. (Prior code § 15.17)

5.36.100 Refusal to carry passengers.
It is unlawful for any driver, operating under a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter to refuse, when the vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged, to transport any person who presents himself or herself for carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose. (Prior code § 15.18)

5.36.110 Hours of operation.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab unless such person shall make a available the use and the rental of the taxicab to transport any person who represents himself or herself for carriage between the hours of eight o’clock a.m. to twelve midnight. (Prior code § 15.19)

Article 3
Permits

5.36.120 Permit required—Application—Fees—Investigation of applicant.
A.    It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate, and for any owner to permit the operation of any taxicab or rent car in the city unless both the owner and the driver have obtained a taxicab permit and paid any permit fee required by city council resolution.

B.    Every person engaging in the operation of a taxicab or rent car business shall apply for a taxicab permit on a form provided by the chief of police. In addition to any other information deemed necessary by the chief of police, the application shall contain the following information:

1.    The name and address of the applicant;

2.    A statement of whether applicant is the owner or driver, or both, of a vehicle(s) for hire;

3.    Applicant’s past experience in operating motor vehicles and names and addresses of his or her employers during the preceding three years;

4.    The number and type of existing driving licenses issued to applicant by the state Department of Motor Vehicles;

5.    Whether or not a driving license issued to applicant has ever been revoked;

6.    A list of all crimes of which applicant has been convicted other than minor traffic violations;

7.    If applicant is a driver, then the name and address of the owner or owners by whom applicant will be employed; and if the applicant is an owner, then the name and address of all drivers whom applicant employs within the city;

8.    The number of vehicles to be operated;

9.    The make, model, serial number, motor number and state license plate number of each taxicab or rent car;

10.    A description of the distinguishing color or identification scheme of the taxicab or rent car;

11.    Location of off-street parking stands;

12.    Proof of financial responsibility of the applicant and likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory;

13.    Any additional information which may be required.

C.    All applicants shall be fingerprinted by the police department and shall furnish with their application two recent photographs, size one and one-half inches by one and one-half inches, one to be filed with the application and one to be securely attached to the permit if applicant qualifies for the issuance thereof.

D.    It is unlawful for an owner or driver to make any false or misleading statements in the application for a taxicab permit.

E.    Identification and fingerprinting fees, as set by council resolution, shall be paid by each applicant at the time of submitting an application for a permit under this chapter.

F.    Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the city clerk shall forward it to the chief of police who shall conduct an investigation concerning the truth of the facts stated in the application, the character of the applicant, the condition of the premises upon which the proposed permitted activity is to take place, and whether the taxicab or rent car to be permitted conform to applicable state and local vehicle requirements. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.20)

5.36.130 Issuance of permit—Grounds for denial.
In determining whether to grant or deny an application, the police chief shall consider the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind and type of equipment; and the effect of the proposed service on the use of city streets and alleys.

The police chief may deny the permit application if he or she finds that:

A.    The applicant has been convicted of a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business, profession or occupation for which the permit is to be issued;

B.    The applicant has committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit himself or herself or another, or substantially injure another;

C.    The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for the permit, or in any amendment of report to be made thereunder;

D.    The applicant does not possess a valid drivers license issued by the state of California;

E.    The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter; or

F.    Issuance of the permit would be inconsistent with public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.21)

5.36.140 Temporary permits.
Pending investigation and issuance of a taxicab permit, the police chief is authorized and delegated to issue a temporary thirty (30) day permit for the operation of a taxicab or rent car business. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.22)

5.36.150 Issuance, posting and contents of permit.
A.    Upon approval of the application, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant a master taxicab permit and individual taxicab permits for each taxicab or rent car to be permitted. The master taxicab permit shall state the date of issuance, the term of the permit, and the information stated in the application. The individual taxicab permit shall be identical to the master taxicab permit except that it shall be of a size convenient for display in the taxicab or rent car and in addition shall state the motor number, state license plate number, and passenger seating capacity of the taxicab or rent car for which it is issued.

B.    The master taxicab permit and the individual taxicab permits shall be nontransferable and nonassignable.

C.    The taxicab permit shall be fixed in a conspicuous place in the taxicab or rent car so as to be seen from the passenger’s compartment. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.23)

5.36.160 Driver to give notice of change of employment.
If a driver changes his or her employment to a different owner, he or she shall, within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter, notify the chief of police for the purpose of having his or her taxicab permits changed so as to property designate the name of the new employer. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.24)

5.36.170 Duration of permit—Renewals.
A taxicab permit issued under this chapter shall continue in effect until suspended or revoked. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.25)

5.36.180 Revocation generally.
The chief of police may at any time after hearing, suspend, alter, amend or revoke any permit or permit upon any of the grounds on which it might have denied a permit in the first instance. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.26)

5.36.190 Appeal from denial or revocation.
A.    Any interested person may appeal a decision of the police chief under this chapter to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written statement of the grounds for appeal written fourteen (14) days after notice of the decision of permit denial, suspension, alteration, or revocation has been given.

B.    The city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing before the city council and shall give five days written notice of the hearing to the applicant. In the event that the appeal is relative to an owner application, notice shall also be given to all existing permitted taxicab and rent car businesses in the city. The city council shall hear all interested parties and, if in its determination, public convenience requires the granting of the permit and the granting of the permit to the applicant would be in the best interests of this city and its inhabitants, the city council shall grant such permit. The city council may deny a permit to any applicant on the grounds set forth in Section 5.36.130. (Ord. 02-2 § 3 (part): prior code § 15.27)

Article 4
Insurance Requirements

5.36.200 Required—Limitations.
Every owner of a vehicle used in the transportation of passengers for hire, including taxicabs or rent cars, shall maintain an automobile public liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized or admitted to do business in California that complies with the requirements of California Vehicle Code Section 16500. (Ord. 02-2 § 4: prior code § 15.28)

5.36.210 Scope of policy.
The policy of insurance required by the preceding section shall guarantee the payment to any and all persons suffering injury or damage to person or property of any final judgment rendered against such owner or driver, within the limits mentioned in Section 5.36.200, irrespective of the financial condition or any acts or omissions of such owner or driver, and shall inure to the benefits of such persons. (Prior code § 15.29)

5.36.220 Effect of cancellation.
If, at any time, the policy of insurance is cancelled by the company issuing the same, or the authority of the company to do business in the state shall be revoked, the city clerk shall require the owner to replace such policy with another policy satisfactory to the city attorney and in default thereof, the owner’s license to operate shall be revoked. (Prior code § 15.30)

Article 5
Stands

5.36.230 Designation.
The chief of police shall, with the consent of the council, designate, in writing, stands upon public streets to be occupied by taxicabs or rent cars, after the permit has been issued as in this chapter provided. (Ord. 02-2 § 5: prior code § 15.31)

5.36.240 Written permission of occupants adjacent to spaces required.
Before any designation of stands is made, the written consent must be obtained of the tenant of the ground floor fronting the space where such stand is to be located. In the event the ground floor is not occupied, the written consent of the owner must be first obtained. (Prior code § 15.32)

5.36.250 Contents of stand permit.
The stand permit shall specify the name and address of the permittee and the number of vehicles authorized thereunder, and it is unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle for hire, other than the permittee, to use the stand designated under such permit, and when such stand is occupied, no other vehicle shall loiter or wait nearby. (Prior code § 15.33)

5.36.260 Revocation of stand permit.
Any stand designated by the chief of police, as provided in this article, may be revoked by him or her and it is unlawful for any taxicab or rent car to occupy the stand after such revocation. (Prior code § 15.34)

5.36.270 Unlawful standing of taxicabs.
It is unlawful for a taxicab or rent car while awaiting employment to stand on any street or place other than upon a designated stand, nor shall any operator of a taxicab or rent car, while awaiting employment, drive so as to interfere vehicular traffic. (Prior code § 15.35)

Article 6
Passenger Buses

5.36.280 Operation of passenger buses.
A passenger bus is allowed to operate only within the central business zoning district, service commercial zoning district, business and professional office zoning district, industrial zoning district and winery zoning district. Within these zoning districts a passenger bus shall be allowed to operate on all public streets. Passenger buses shall not be allowed to operate within any residential zoning districts within the city limits except for the purpose of providing access to the zoning districts in which the passenger buses may operate. (Prior code § 15.36)

5.36.290 Disembarking and embarking of passengers.
Upon approval of a use permit reviewed by the planning commission and city council a passenger bus is allowed to embark and disembark passengers on private property. A passenger bus may embark and disembark passengers at designated public bus stops only on public streets within the zoning districts in which the passenger bus may operate. It is unlawful for passengers to embark or disembark at any other location within the zoning districts in which the passenger bus may operate as specified in this section. Approved locations for embarking and disembarking of passengers shall not be used for parking of passenger buses unless authorized by the city council. (Prior code § 15.37)

5.36.300 Parking of passenger buses.
Passenger buses shall park only within the commercial districts in which they are allowed to operate. When a passenger bus is parked it is unlawful to idle the engine or any other mechanical feature of the bus. (Prior code § 15.38)

5.36.310 Exemptions.
The restrictions contained in this article shall not apply to the following:

A.    A vehicle transporting school pupils conducted by or under contract with any public or private school;

B.    Any vehicle exempt under the provisions of state or federal law. (Prior code § 15.39)

5.36.320 Signs and markers.
The restrictions contained in this article shall not be enforced until appropriate signs, markers, or other official traffic-control devices have been established giving notice thereof. (Prior code § 15.40)

5.36.330 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction. (Prior code § 15.41)

Chapter 5.40
PERMITS FOR ELDER AND/OR DEPENDENT ADULT CAREGIVERS
Sections:

5.40.010    Adoption by reference.

5.40.020    Violation—Penalty.

5.40.030    Copy of county ordinance.

5.40.010 Adoption by reference.
Chapter 5.60 of Title 5 of the Napa County Code of Ordinances, relating to permit requirements for elder and/or dependent adult caregivers, is hereby adopted by reference. Any fees required by the county of Napa in the processing of the permit applications required by the ordinance shall be as imposed by the board of supervisors by board resolution and paid to the appropriate county-designated office. (Ord. 10-2 § 2)

5.40.020 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor or infraction, punishable by a fine, imprisonment in the county jail up to one year, or a combination of both. (Ord. 10-2 § 3)

5.40.030 Copy of county ordinance.
Consistent with the requirements of Government Code Section 50022.6, upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, one copy of the county’s ordinance adopted by reference shall be maintained by the city’s enforcement officer, the chief of police. (Ord. 10-2 § 4)

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.04    Animal Control Regulations

6.05    Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Animals

Chapter 6.04
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Sections:

6.04.010    Adoption of county regulations.

6.04.020    Administration—Subject to contract.

6.04.030    City not liable for destruction of animals.

6.04.040    Dog licenses.

6.04.050    Barking dogs.

6.04.060    Animals at large prohibited.

6.04.070    Removal of animal excrement.

6.04.010 Adoption of county regulations.
The council adopts by reference the Napa County ordinances codified in Chapter 6.04 of Title 6 of the Napa County Code relating to animal control, as modified in this chapter. A current copy of this chapter shall be kept on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.1)

6.04.020 Administration—Subject to contract.
The adopted county ordinances shall be administered in accordance with and subject to a contract by and between the city and county. A current copy of this contract shall be kept on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.2)

6.04.030 City not liable for destruction of animals.
In the event that the animal control officer as defined under the Napa County ordinance, or a St. Helena police officer injures or destroys any animal while discharging any firearm or tranquilizer gun, or using any weapon or device to control any animal in the exercise of the officer’s duties under this chapter or pursuant to the contract referred to in Section 6.04.020, the city shall have no liability. (Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.3)

6.04.040 Dog licenses.
Section 6.04.110 of the Napa County Code is modified for the purposes of this chapter to read as follows:

Sec. 6.04.110 Dog licenses—Required—Exceptions.

Subject to compliance with Section 6.04.130(A), every dog more than four months of age within the City shall be licensed annually by its owner, except that no dog licenses shall be required for:

(a)    A dog which is sent or brought into the City for a period not to exceed 60 days; or

(b)    A dog which is sent or brought into the City for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in a veterinary hospital, provided that the dog is kept at the hospital at all times.

(Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.4)

6.04.050 Barking dogs.
A.    No person shall knowingly keep or harbor any dog that habitually barks, howls or yelps and thereby causes great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or materially disturbs or annoys a reasonable person in the neighborhood. Such dogs are declared to be a public nuisance.

B.    Whenever any reasonable person complains to the police department that a dog that habitually barks, howls or yelps is being kept by any person in the city, the police department shall notify the owner of such dog that a complaint has been received and that the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, or yelping. If the warning given to the owner is ineffective, the police department may cite the owner of the dog for a violation of this section. (Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.5)

6.04.060 Animals at large prohibited.
Section 6.04.200 of the Napa County Code is deleted and section 6.04.190 of the Napa County Code is modified for the purposes of this chapter to read as follows:

Sec. 6.04.190 Animals at Large Prohibited.

(a)    An owner or person having custody, possession, or control of any animal shall not permit such animal to do any of the following:

1.    To be at large in or upon any public place or property or upon any unenclosed property of another without the consent of the owner or tenant in possession thereof unless the animal is leashed, chained, strapped, haltered, harnessed, or saddled by a substantial leash, chain, or lead rope. Such leash, chain, or lead rope shall be not more than fifteen feet in length and shall be either continuously held by some person competent to keep such animal under effective control or staked, fastened, or otherwise kept secured.

2.    To enter upon any private property without the consent of the owner or tenant in possession thereof, and it shall further be unlawful for an owner or person having custody, possession, or control of any animal, after receiving written notice via registered mail from any owner or tenant in possession of private property, to permit such animal to remain upon such property or to continue habitually to trespass thereon.

3.    “At large” means any animal off the premises of its owner and not under the direct control of the owner or some responsible person authorized by the owner. An animal is not “at large” within the meaning of this subsection if, while under the effective control of a competent person, it is being used to guard, herd, gather, or otherwise work animals, to assist in the lawful hunting or taking of animals, or in field trials, exhibitions, competitions, or parades, and as long as such animal does not wrongfully harm or damage any person, public property, or property of another.

(b)    In cases of violation of this section, the City Police Department is authorized to:

1.    Take up and impound any stray animals running at large, and/or

2.    Transfer unclaimed, diseased or vicious animals to the county pound, and/or

3.    Allow owners or persons entitled to possession of animals impounded to reclaim the animal.

The City Police Department shall charge fees associated with these activities, as set by City Council resolution.

(Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code 3.6)

6.04.070 Removal of animal excrement.
A.    An owner or person having custody, possession or control of any animal shall not permit such animal to defecate on any school ground, public street, alley, sidewalk, park or any other public grounds or on the private property of another unless such excrement is removed immediately.

B.    Any person walking or exercising an animal in or upon any public place or property or upon the property of another shall have in his or her possession an appropriate receptacle to retrieve any excrement should the animal defecate during such walk or exercise.

C.    Visually disabled persons who use seeing eye dogs are exempt from this section. (Ord. 01-9 § 1 (part): prior code § 3.7)

Chapter 6.05
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
Sections:

6.05.010    Purpose of provisions—Scope.

6.05.020    Definitions.

6.05.030    Interim confinement of animal—Bond.

6.05.040    Investigation, certification and decision.

6.05.050    Request for hearing—Form of notice.

6.05.060    Hearing—Procedures generally.

6.05.070    Hearing—Dangerous animal hearing panel.

6.05.080    Hearing—Findings and orders.

6.05.085    Service on owner and/or keeper.

6.05.090    Assessment and penalty.

6.05.100    Amount of fines.

6.05.110    Criminal sanctions.

6.05.010 Purpose of provisions—Scope.
A.    The maintenance of animals which are potentially dangerous or vicious and involve a threat to property and the health and safety of those on streets, sidewalks and private property where the animals are not maintained constitutes a serious hazard within the city. The increasing tendency to maintain animals, especially dogs, which by virtue of breeding or training have a propensity to attack others, compounds the hazard. Specific injuries to persons and animals resulting from attacks by such animals illustrates the need for regulation.

B.    Every owner of an animal is held strictly accountable for the exercise of such control over the animal as necessary to ensure that the animal does not destroy the property of other persons or injure human beings or other animals who are not on the premises where the animal is maintained. Such strict accountability is imposed whether or not the damage or injury results from the negligence or other fault of the owner, and regardless of the degree of precaution or control exercised by the owner.

C.    Further, within the city there are potentially dangerous and vicious animals which constitute a public nuisance which should be abated. The provisions of this chapter provide an expedited, alternative administrative procedure by which animals found to be potentially dangerous or vicious may be abated and their owners or keepers appropriately penalized and otherwise held responsible for injury or damage caused by their animals. This chapter is intended to supplement rather than supplant any other remedy available either under state law, county ordinance or city ordinance.

D.    This chapter does not apply to commercial kennels, veterinarians, or to dogs utilized by the sheriff, police department, or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.020 Definitions.
A.    “Certification” means the animal control officer’s written certification, following investigation, that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious.

B.    “City clerk” means the city clerk for the city of St. Helena or anyone designated by the city clerk to carry out the duties of the city clerk as set forth in this chapter.

C.    “Decision” means the animal control officer’s written decision, rendered together with the certification, regarding whether the animal may be safely released and, if so, setting the terms and requirements for release to the owner or keeper.

D.    “Directive” means the animal control officer’s written directive that an animal certified to be potentially dangerous or vicious be humanely destroyed.

E.    “Final decision” means any decision of the officer which becomes final pursuant to the terms of this chapter.

F.    “Final order” means an order of the dangerous animal hearing panel which becomes final pursuant to the terms of this chapter.

G.    “Keeper” means any person who keeps regular care of and resides with an animal, whether or not he or she actually owns the animal.

H.    “Officer” means the chief animal control officer for the city of St. Helena or, in the absence of the chief animal control officer, any officer designated by the St. Helena chief of police.

I.    “Owner” means any person who owns or shares ownership of an animal (whether or not documented or registered).

J.    “Potentially dangerous animal” means any animal which, when unprovoked, engages in aggressive conduct prompting or resulting in defensive action by any person to avoid bodily injury.

K.    “Unprovoked” means conduct which is not:

1.    In response to physical attack, taunting, or harassment upon the animal, its owner and/or keeper or other temporary attendant; or

2.    In response to unlawful trespass onto private property, whether or not the private property owner actually owns the animal.

L.    “Vicious animal” means:

1.    Any animal seized under Section 599a of the California Penal Code and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the California Penal Code; or

2.    Any animal which, when unprovoked, inflicts or causes injury to or kills a human being or domestic animal. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.030 Interim confinement of animal—Bond.
If the officer determines that there is reason to undertake an investigation as to whether an animal is a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, the officer may take such interim actions, including requiring a bond, as he or she deems appropriate, such that the animal shall be confined on an interim basis at an appropriate animal shelter or other location deemed suitable by the officer. As soon as reasonably practicable, the officer shall undertake to notify the owner and/or keeper of the animal of the interim confinement of the animal pending the officer’s determination set forth in Section 6.05.040. All costs of such confinement shall be borne solely by the animal’s owner and/or keeper. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.040 Investigation, certification and decision.
A.    Investigation. The officer shall determine whether an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious as defined in Section 6.05.020. In so determining, the officer shall solicit, obtain and consider written and/or verbal statements, photographs and documents from all reasonably available witnesses to the relevant conduct and to the relevant history of the animal and the owner and/or keeper. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant. The officer shall promptly inform the owner and/or keeper of the nature of the investigation and invite the owner and/or keeper to provide statements, photographs or other documents relevant to the investigation.

B.    Considerations. In determining whether the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and what disposition is appropriate to protect the public, the officer shall consider, among other things:

1.    Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting or causing injury to a human being or other animal;

2.    The nature and extent of injuries inflicted, damages sustained, and the number of victims involved;

3.    The place where the aggressive conduct, attack, or injury occurred;

4.    The presence or absence of any provocation for the aggressive conduct, attack, or injury;

5.    The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;

6.    Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of having been trained for fighting, attack or aggression or other evidence to show such training or history of fighting;

7.    Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or other domestic animals or livestock;

8.    Whether the animal can be effectively trained or retrained to change its temperament, characteristics or behavior;

9.    The manner in which the animal had been maintained, controlled and/or cared for by its owner and/or keeper;

10.    Any other relevant evidence or factors regarding the ability of the owner and/or keeper to control, train, secure or maintain the animal in compliance with this chapter or otherwise protect the public safety in the future if the animal is returned to the owner and/or keeper.

C.    Certification. If, following investigation, the officer concludes that any animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the officer shall so certify in writing to the owner and/or keeper within five working days following completion of the investigation. This certification shall include a statement of the basis for the determination that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious.

D.    Decision. Together with the certification and as part of the same document, the officer shall issue a written decision to the owner and/or keeper of the animal regarding whether the animal may be safely released and the steps the owner and/or keeper are required to take to obtain the animal’s release if the officer determines release is appropriate, payment of costs of impoundment and enforcement, and imposition of penalty.

E.    Requirements for Release. The officer shall require that the following be accomplished as a precondition of the release of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal from the shelter and shall provide the information set forth below:

1.    Registration of the animal with the officer as a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, including identifying the animal’s owner and/or keeper and identifying the animal’s place of residence, which shall be changed only with the written approval of the officer;

2.    Registration of the animal for appropriate training with a professional trainer or agency, to be approved in writing by the officer, with certification that such training has been completed delivered to the officer within an identified period following the animal’s release from the shelter;

3.    Payment by the owner and/or keeper of any documented medical expenses or property damage caused by the animal;

4.    Installation of graphic and written signs warning of the presence of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal on all doors to the animal’s place of residence, and on all gates to any fencing on the premises, the form and placement of which shall be pre-approved in writing by the officer;

5.    Microchipping the animal;

6.    Payment of a penalty as set forth in Section 6.05.100, together with costs of enforcement;

7.    Notification that noncompliance with any term of the decision shall result in an additional penalty as set forth in Section 6.05.110;

8.    The date, no earlier than thirty (30) days following service of the certification and decision, by which the owner and/or keeper must satisfy all conditions for release, including payment of all fees, penalties, costs of impoundment and enforcement;

9.    Notification that failure to meet all terms of the decision within the time allotted by the decision will result in a directive issued by the officer ordering the humane destruction of the animal at the owner and/or keeper’s expense;

10.    Notification that failure to comply with the terms of the decision after release of the animal will result in a directive issued by the officer for the confiscation and humane destruction of the animal at the owner and/or keeper’s expense;

11.    Notification that any certification, decision, or directive of the officer for which no hearing is requested by the owner and/or keeper shall be final at the conclusion of the time periods specified in Section 6.05.050(A), (B) and (C).

F.    Further Requirements for Release of a Vicious Animal. In addition to the requirements listed in subsection (E) of this section, the officer shall require that the following be accomplished as a precondition of the release of a vicious animal from the shelter and shall provide the information set forth below:

1.    Expert behavior testing and written report by a professional agency approved in advance by the officer and paid for by the owner and/or keeper;

2.    Construction of appropriate interior and/or exterior enclosures built to the officer’s specifications, including special enclosures, security doors, locks, and other measures built on to existing structures;

3.    Confinement of the animal within specified structures or enclosures, except under specified conditions (such as approved leash, collar and muzzle and physical control by specified persons);

4.    Spaying/neutering the animal;

5.    Obtaining and providing proof of liability insurance in an amount determined by the officer to reasonably protect against injury or damage caused by the animal;

6.    That the animal shall not reside at a location where minor children reside;

7.    The conditions, if any, under which the owner may transfer ownership of the animal, or change the location where the animal resides;

8.    Whether the owner and/or keeper shall be prohibited from owning or keeping other animals deemed capable of engaging in potentially dangerous or vicious conduct, as defined herein.

G.    For good cause, the officer may permit extensions of the date by which the owner and/or keeper must satisfy all conditions for release. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.050 Request for hearing—Form of notice.
A.    An owner and/or keeper may request a hearing regarding any certification issued by the officer by filing a written request for hearing with the city clerk within five working days of service of the certification.

B.    An owner and/or keeper may request a hearing regarding any decision issued by the officer by filing a written request for hearing with the city clerk within five working days following the date by which the owner and/or keeper must satisfy all conditions for release.

C.    An owner and/or keeper may request a hearing regarding any directive issued by the officer by filing a written request for hearing with the city clerk within five working days of service of the directive.

D.    The officer shall request a hearing if:

1.    The officer issues a decision that the animal cannot be safely released to the owner and/or keeper or issues a directive ordering the humane destruction of an animal; and

2.    The officer is unable to obtain the owner and/or keeper’s voluntary consent to the humane destruction of the animal within five days of the officer’s written request for such voluntary consent.

E.    The city clerk shall schedule a hearing date to commence within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for hearing. The city clerk shall give at least five days’ notice of the hearing to the officer and the owner and/or keeper.

F.    The notice to the owner and/or keeper shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF HEARING REGARDING A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND/OR VICIOUS ANIMAL

TO: (Name of Owner and/or Keeper)

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on September, the __ day of , 20__ at the hour of ____ o’clock __.m., in _____________ Napa County, California, the below-identified matter(s), as determined and issued by City of St. Helena Animal Control will be considered by the Dangerous Animal Hearing Panel of the City of St. Helena, together with such other oral and documentary evidence bearing upon the question(s) so presented.

[ ]    Certification by City of St. Helena Animal Control that your animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and a public nuisance.

[ ]    Decision by City of St. Helena Animal Control:

[ ]    that your animal cannot be safely released to the owner and/or keeper.

[ ]    as to the conditions for release.

[ ]    Directive by City of St. Helena Animal Control ordering that your animal be humanely destroyed.

You may appear and may present evidence at the hearing, and cross-examine witnesses. You may be represented by counsel. No later than noon one working day before the hearing, you must provide to the city clerk sufficient copies of any photographs, written statements or other documentary evidence you plan to present at the hearing.

IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR AT THE TIME, DATE AND PLACE APPOINTED FOR THE HEARING, THE HEARING SHALL BE CONDUCTED IN YOUR ABSENCE.

For good cause, the hearing may be continued upon your request or upon request of City of St. Helena Animal Control.

The action of City of St. Helena Animal Control which is being challenged shall either be upheld by the hearing panel, or the hearing panel shall make its own determination and issue its own order.

The determination and order of the hearing panel shall be made within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall be final unless you file an appeal of the hearing panel’s findings and order with the Napa County Superior Court in accordance with California Food and Agriculture Section 31622(a) within five days of the date the hearing panel’s determination and order in writing is served upon you.

Dated:

City Clerk

G.    The city clerk shall give at least five days’ notice of the hearing to any other person involved in the incident(s) at issue and to any person who has requested notice of same. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.060 Hearing—Procedures generally.
A.    Any person planning to present any photographs, written statements, or other documentary evidence as evidence at the hearing shall provide sufficient copies of those items to the city clerk no later than noon one working day before the time set for hearing. The city clerk shall make copies of the items available to anyone who requests copies of the items.

B.    The hearing provided for by this chapter shall be conducted by a hearing panel as specified in Section 6.05.070. The officer shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner and/or keeper may appear, present evidence, examine and cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by counsel. In the event the owner and/or keeper fails to appear at the time, date and place appointed for the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in the absence of the owner, and the hearing panel shall render a determination and order based upon evidence presented during the hearing. For good cause, the hearing may be continued upon request of either the officer or the owner. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply; any relevant evidence shall be admissible. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.070 Hearing—Dangerous animal hearing panel.
The hearing prescribed by Sections 6.05.050 and 6.05.060 shall be conducted by a dangerous animal hearing panel, comprised of a group of three individuals designated by the city manager of the city of St. Helena. The individuals shall not be subordinate to the city’s animal control officer and may be individuals retained pursuant to a contract to provide such services. The city manager may, in his or her discretion, designate the County of Napa’s Dangerous Animal Hearing Panel to conduct hearings under this chapter. At the city manager’s discretion, and upon written notice to the owner and/or keeper cited under this chapter, any appeal conducted under this chapter may be conducted in accordance with Section 1.12.170. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.080 Hearing—Findings and orders.
If, based upon the hearing, the hearing panel finds that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, it shall be so specified in writing together with the reasons therefor. A copy of the hearing panel’s determination and order shall be sent by registered mail or otherwise delivered to the owner and/or keeper. Any dog found to be potentially dangerous or vicious is deemed a public nuisance, and shall be, pursuant to the order of the hearing panel, humanely destroyed or removed from the city, or the nuisance otherwise abated by appropriate order, including but not limited to confinement, fencing, muzzling or leashing. The determination and order of the hearing panel shall be made within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall be final, unless an appeal is filed with the Napa County Superior Court in accordance with Food and Agriculture Code Section 31622(a) within five days of the date the decision in writing is served upon the owner and/or keeper. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.085 Service on owner and/or keeper.
Service of a certification and decision, or a directive, issued by the officer, or of a notice of hearing issued by the city clerk, or of a determination or order issued by the hearing panel, shall either be by personal service or by first class mail, but if by first class mail, any time(s) specified for action(s) required to be taken by owner and/or keeper shall be extended by five days. The failure of any owner and/or keeper to receive service required to be given under this chapter shall not invalidate the validity of any determination, action, or proceedings taken pursuant thereto. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.090 Assessment and penalty.
A.    If the hearing panel finds the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the city-incurred costs of impoundment, including any abatement, and penalty shall be paid by the owner and/or keeper. If the order includes the release of the animal to the owner and/or keeper, the animal shall not be released until such amounts have been paid in full.

B.    If such amounts have not been paid within thirty (30) days after the date of service of the order if personally served, or within thirty-five (35) days if served by first-class mail, the officer may dispose of the animal in any manner provided by law.

C.    If the assessment and penalty imposed by the officer or by the hearing panel are not paid, an action may be brought in the name of the city to recover the assessment and penalty in small claims or other appropriate court, in which case all the remedies provided by law may be pursued by the city, including but not limited to attachment of the personal property of the person owning or controlling the animal. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.100 Amount of fines.
The amount of fines imposed by this chapter shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council of the city of St. Helena. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

6.05.110 Criminal sanctions.
The violation of any final decision of the animal control officer issued pursuant to Section 6.05.040 or any final order issued pursuant to Section 6.05.080 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both. (Ord. 08-4 § 1 (part))

Title 7
RESERVED
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.04    Solid Waste Collection

8.08    Nuisances Generally

8.12    Abandoned Vehicles

8.16    Alarm Systems

8.20    Littering

8.24    Noise

8.28    Nuclear-Free Zone

8.32    Relocation Services and Payments for Residential Tenant Households

8.36    Single-Use Carryout Bag Reduction

8.40    Fireworks

Chapter 8.04
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
Article 1
Generally

Sections:

8.04.010    Definitions.

Article 2
Storage of Solid Waste

Sections:

8.04.020    Storage of solid waste at point of origin.

8.04.030    Solid waste container requirements.

8.04.040    Container area to be kept clean.

8.04.050    Location of containers.

8.04.060    Storage of rubbish.

8.04.070    Food facility solid waste storage.

8.04.080    Solid waste and recycling storage areas.

8.04.090    Burning or burying solid waste prohibited.

8.04.100    Throwing or depositing solid waste.

Article 3
Collection, Transportation and Disposal of Solid Waste

Sections:

8.04.110    Collection of solid waste.

8.04.120    Solid waste removal contract.

8.04.130    Collection and disposal rates.

8.04.140    Collection by contractor mandatory unless otherwise specified.

8.04.150    Exemptions to mandatory collection.

8.04.160    Vehicles used to transport refuse or curbside recycling materials.

8.04.170    Frequency and hours of collection by contractor.

8.04.180    Ownership and collection of recyclable material.

8.04.190    Violations—Penalties.

8.04.200    Nonapplicability.

Article 1
Generally

8.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Contractor” means any person authorized by the council to collect solid waste from others within the city limits.

“Garbage” means that solid waste which includes kitchen refuse, offal, swill, and other matter that attends the preparation, dealing in or handling of food-stuffs. It shall also include all other refuse, except rubbish, sewage, trash and recyclable material.

“Health officer” is defined as the health officer of the city, his or her authorized representatives, or the county health officer, or any of his or her authorized representatives, whenever a contract is in force between the city and the county for the furnishing of the services of the county health officer.

“Place” means public or private land, building, site, public or private drainage ditch, or public or private road in the city.

“Recyclable material” means that material which otherwise would become or be treated as solid waste but which, by means of a process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and/or reconstructing, may be returned to the economic mainstream in the form of finished or source material for new, reused or reconstituted products which may be used in the market place. The term includes, but is not limited to, paper, books, magazines, cardboard, boxes, plastic, metal, glass and other similar materials authorized by the city for collection by the contractor.

“Recyclable materials collector” means an agent or employee of the city or any person with whom the city has duly contracted to collect and transport curbside recyclable materials through, in and from the city.

“Rubbish” means those nonputrescible solid wastes including all dry refuse such as tree trimmings, ashes, dead plants and lawn and yard clippings, except to the extent such materials are exempt under this chapter.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, other discarded and solid and semi-solid wastes, and recyclable material. Solid waste does not include any wastes defined under federal or state laws and regulations as hazardous waste, low-level radioactive waste regulated by California Health and Safety Code Sections 25800 et seq., or medical waste.

“Solid waste removal contract” means a garbage collection and disposal contract entered into by the city and a contractor pursuant to this chapter, or a franchise agreement between the contractor and the Upper Valley Waste Management Agency, a joint powers authority, as long as St. Helena is a member. (Ord. 02-4 § 2: prior code § 7.1.010)

Article 2
Storage of Solid Waste

8.04.020 Storage of solid waste at point of origin.
No person may keep or dispose of solid waste in a manner or upon any place which affords food or harborage for rodents or insects, or which causes a public nuisance or public health hazard, or in a manner which violates this article. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.010)

8.04.030 Solid waste container requirements.
It shall be the duty of every person occupying, using or controlling any dwelling, flat, apartment, boardinghouse, lodging house, restaurant, hotel, eating house or place of business, where solid waste accumulates, to place the solid waste in a container as approved or supplied by the contractor, or in a container which is watertight and made out of plastic or galvanized metal; is not of more than thirty-two (32) gallon capacity; has suitable handles and a tight-fitting cover; is covered continuously except when being filled or emptied; and is kept clean by the user. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.020)

8.04.040 Container area to be kept clean.
Each person who has a solid waste container shall keep the area where the solid waste container is located clean and free of solid waste. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.030)

8.04.050 Location of containers.
Each person from whom solid waste is collected shall maintain the container in locations as designated by the collector, but where it will not be a public nuisance or otherwise offensive. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.040)

8.04.060 Storage of rubbish.
Each person who has charge or control of a place where rubbish accumulates shall provide a suitable method of storage so that the rubbish does not scatter about the premises in an unsightly or unsanitary manner. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.050)

8.04.070 Food facility solid waste storage.
Food facilities shall provide adequate solid waste storage locations, as determined by the health officer, with a hose bib within twenty-five (25) feet. Additional requirements such as coverage and sewer drainage may be required to assure the storage location is operated in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.060)

8.04.080 Solid waste and recycling storage areas.
A.    Projects that require approval of a use permit shall provide one or more solid waste/recycling areas for storage of these materials.

B.    Materials other than solid waste or recyclable materials (e.g., building materials, business supplies, etc.) shall not be stored in solid waste or recycling storage areas.

C.    Recycling and solid waste areas shall be adequate in capacity, number and distribution to accommodate the amount and different types of solid waste and recyclable materials generated by all users of the areas.

D.    Solid waste and recycling areas shall be adequately signed to provide instructions for depositing solid waste and recyclable materials in the appropriate receptacles and to identify the name and phone number of the management authority responsible for the maintenance of the areas. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.070)

8.04.090 Burning or burying solid waste prohibited.
No person shall burn or bury solid waste in any yard or open space within the city. (Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.080)

8.04.100 Throwing or depositing solid waste.
No person shall deposit, throw, scatter or sweep any solid waste on any private property without the permission of the owner thereof or on any publicly owned place in the city except in containers provided for such purposes by the city. No person shall deposit in any public container any solid waste not produced by an activity lawfully conducted in the street, sidewalk, park, or public place. (Ord. 2005-3 § 2, 2005: Ord. 02-4 § 3 (part): prior code § 7.2.090)

Article 3
Collection, Transportation and Disposal of Solid Waste

8.04.110 Collection of solid waste.
The collection, removal and disposal of solid waste may be performed only by the city under the direction of the city council, or by any person with whom the city has entered into a solid waste removal contract, or may enter, into contracts for the collection, removal and disposal thereof. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.010)

8.04.120 Solid waste removal contract.
The city council may contract for the collection or disposal, or both, of solid waste by granting to a qualified person the privilege of doing so. The privilege granted by the city may be exclusive or nonexclusive, and may relate to all or a portion within the city and may relate to all solid waste or to any one or more of the substances constituting solid waste. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.020)

8.04.130 Collection and disposal rates.
A.    Solid waste removal rates shall be as set forth in the solid waste removal contract or any extension thereof between the city and contractor and as the same may be modified from time to time pursuant to the terms thereof. No contractor shall make any charge for such collection or disposal in excess of the established rates.

B.    The owner of each premises shall be liable for payment of all charges for solid waste removal service to his or her premises whether the owner occupies the premises or not. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.030)

8.04.140 Collection by contractor mandatory unless otherwise specified.
A.    No person shall collect, transport and/or dispose of any solid waste or recyclable material from any other person in the city and no person except the contractor shall collect, transport and/or dispose of any solid waste on the streets of the city, except as otherwise expressly provided in this article.

B.    No person who produces, generates or otherwise accumulates solid waste shall pay, reimburse, contract with or in any other way arrange for any person other than the contractor to collect, transport and/or dispose of solid waste, except as otherwise expressly authorized in this article. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.040)

8.04.150 Exemptions to mandatory collection.
A.    No provision of this article shall prevent the disposition of recyclable materials for which there are established commercial values, and for which the generator, accumulator or producer actually receives compensation, such as used kitchen fats, provided such materials are accumulated in a sanitary manner and disposed of through regular commercial channels.

B.    No provision of this article shall prohibit the donation of recyclable material for which there are established commercial values by the generator, accumulator or producer of such recyclable material to any approved drop-off center. Further, recyclable materials may be provided free of charge to any charitable, youth, civic, religious or similar person, group or organization, and the collection, transport and/or disposal of such recyclable material may be provided free of charge by such person, group or organization.

C.    Nothing in this article shall prohibit any person from collecting, disposing or transporting any recyclable materials for which the contractor does not provide recycling services pursuant to the city’s approved recycling program to or at any recycling drop-off center or facility which is appropriately permitted or authorized under applicable health and safety laws and regulations.

D.    Nothing in this article shall apply to or prohibit the disposition, collection, transport or disposal by any person of construction and demolition debris and wastes as long as the quantity is less than ten (10) cubic yards.

E.    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the collection, transportation or disposal of lawn, tree and garden trimmings by any person as an incidental part of a landscaping or gardening service by that person, as long as the quantity is less than ten (10) cubic yards.

F.    All owners and occupants of structures who demonstrate and certify to the satisfaction of the director of public works or his or her designee that solid waste collection service is not needed may collect and transport solid waste produced on the premises where he or she resides or which he or she owns if the owner or occupant satisfies any of the following criteria:

1.    The owner or occupant does not generate sufficient solid waste to require service and timely and appropriately transports his or her solid waste to a permitted disposal facility at least every seven days; or

2.    The owner or occupant otherwise has arranged for shared solid waste disposal with the owner or occupant of another structure receiving solid waste collection service from the contractor, and such shared service does not involve an undue accumulation or improper storage of solid waste.

G.    No provisions of this article shall bar any person from removing solid waste in an emergency situation where the contractor for any reason is unable to handle such solid waste and where such removal is necessary for the protection of public health. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.050)

8.04.160 Vehicles used to transport refuse or curbside recycling materials.
No person shall remove, convey or transport any refuse along, upon or over any public street, highway or public place in the city, except in such manner so as to prevent the contents thereof from dropping upon the public streets. The solid waste shall only be conveyed on city streets in a tightly sealed and metal enclosed watertight motor truck. The truck body shall be constructed of metal, of sufficient strength to withstand fire from within, without endangering persons or property. The truck body in which solid waste is hauled shall be washed thoroughly and cleaned at least once each week. The contractor shall park and store all vehicles used in the pickup and transport of solid waste in a designated area to be agreed upon between the city and contractor. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.060)

8.04.170 Frequency and hours of collection by contractor.
A.    Garbage and refuse shall be collected at least once each week.

B.    The contractor shall dispose of solid waste at its disposal site on the same day as the contractor collects the solid waste. The contractor shall not permit a vehicle to be parked overnight with solid waste stored in it.

C.    The contractor and the city may agree upon the hours for the collection of solid waste. However, the hours of collection may not begin before four-thirty a.m. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.070)

8.04.180 Ownership and collection of recyclable material.
A.    Recyclable materials which are placed at the curbside or other collection location designated by the city or the contractor for collection by the contractor in containers provided by the contractor shall be collected solely by the contractor.

B.    No person other than the contractor shall remove recyclable material which has been placed at the curbside or other designated collection location for removal by the contractor in containers provided by the contractor.

C.    No person shall burn, break, destroy, scatter, scavenge, collect or take any recyclable material placed at the curbside or other designated collection location for collection by the contractor, without the consent of either: (1) the resident, owner or occupant of the premises or establishment which generated the recyclable materials; or (2) the authorized contractor.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person, organization or entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable materials, provided that any such conduct is otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.080)

8.04.190 Violations—Penalties.
A.    No person shall interfere with the collection, removal or disposal of refuse or curbside recyclable materials by the refuse collector or the curbside recyclable materials collector.

B.    No person other than an authorized city employee or the city’s authorized curbside recyclable materials collector to take, remove, move or otherwise appropriate any container in which recyclable materials are placed for collection or the curbside recyclable materials contained therein. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.090)

8.04.200 Nonapplicability.
This article does not apply to the services provided pursuant to the Upper Valley Waste Management Agency Formation Agreement to the extent such agreement conflicts with the provisions hereof, as long as that agreement is effective. (Ord. 02-4 § 4 (part): prior code § 7.3.100)

Chapter 8.08
NUISANCES GENERALLY
Sections:

8.08.010    Nuisances.

8.08.010 Nuisances.
The creating, causing or maintaining on any property within the corporate limits of the city of any condition defined as a nuisance by any ordinance of the city, section of this code, resolution of the city council or statute of the state, is unlawful and any person maintaining any such nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Conditions which constitute a nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Accumulation of junk, rubbish, waste, refuse or other material of unsightly or unhealthy nature and which may endanger or injure neighboring property or the health and welfare of the residents of the vicinity;

B.    A fire hazard as defined in the Uniform Fire Code;

C.    Any substandard building pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3;

D.    Polluted or stagnant water which because of its nature or location constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition;

E.    Maintenance of property in such a condition as to become defective or in a condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties including, but not limited to:

1.    Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed for a period of at least six months, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An “unreasonable state of partial construction” is defined as any unfinished building or structure that has been in the course of construction two years or more and where the appearance or other conditions of such unfinished building or structure constitutes visible blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses,

2.    Buildings having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. Any building on which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation as to render the building unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair,

3.    Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally contains glass. Plywood or other materials used to cover such window space and/or doors, if permitted under this code, shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the remainder of the building,

4.    Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, or alleys which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses,

5.    Discarded, abandoned, or unused appliances, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible from a public street, alley, or from adjoining properties,

6.    Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on property when it is readily visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property or where the property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment and/or machinery or where agricultural equipment is parked or stored on property zoned for agricultural use,

7.    Improper storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled vehicles, pursuant to Chapter 8.12 of this code, including recreation vehicles as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18010,

8.    Property, including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance,

9.    Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which are a hazardous condition to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic and/or constitute visual blight, or reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or are offensive to the senses, or are detrimental to nearby properties, or which may cause a danger to public safety,

10.    Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, or that constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood,

11.    Any violation of this chapter expressly declared to be a public nuisance,

12.    The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating on the premises for an unreasonable period of time dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials that constitute visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is detrimental to nearby properties. (Ord. 02-3 § 10; prior code § 11.4)

Chapter 8.12
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Sections:

8.12.010    Findings and declaration of purpose.

8.12.020    Definitions.

8.12.030    Exceptions.

8.12.040    Regulations are not exclusive but supplemental.

8.12.050    Enforcement.

8.12.060    Council to fix administrative costs of enforcement.

8.12.070    Notice of intention to abate and remove.

8.12.080    Contents and mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove.

8.12.090    Public hearings.

8.12.100    Removal of vehicle.

8.12.110    Liability disclaimer.

8.12.120    Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.

8.12.130    Failure to pay costs.

8.12.140    Leaving abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle in certain places prohibited.

8.12.150    Failure or refusal to remove abandoned vehicle.

8.12.010 Findings and declaration of purpose.
In accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle as a public nuisance, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

A.    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles on private or public property not including highways creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, creates a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare; and

B.    The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle on private or public property not including highways is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with this chapter. (Prior code § 10.40)

8.12.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

“Highway” means a place publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes streets.

“Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

“Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

“Vehicle” means a device by which a person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway and includes any part of a vehicle whether or not the part is capable of being propelled or can move itself. The term does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Prior code § 10.41)

8.12.030 Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to:

A.    A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B.    A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.

This exception shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private “nuisance” as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. (Prior code § 10.42)

8.12.040 Regulations are not exclusive but supplemental.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or other legal agency having jurisdiction.

The provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22661 and all future amendments thereto are referred to and incorporated by reference into this section. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with Vehicle Code Section 22661 and all future amendments thereto, the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22661 shall govern over the provisions of this code. (Prior code § 10.43)

8.12.050 Enforcement.
The city may enforce this chapter by its own officers and employees or may contract with or grant a franchise to a person for its enforcement. A person authorized to enforce this chapter may enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance under this chapter. (Prior code § 10.44)

8.12.060 Council to fix administrative costs of enforcement.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of a vehicle under this chapter. (Prior code § 10.45)

8.12.070 Notice of intention to abate and remove.
A.    A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if: (1) the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; or (2) all the following conditions are satisfied:

1.    The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed;

2.    The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) by the police chief of the city or his or her designee;

3.    The department of building and safety has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety;

4.    The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof;

5.    The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units.

B.    If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section, prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler’s yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. (Prior code § 10.46)

8.12.080 Contents and mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove.
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Chapter 8.12 of the Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to __________, license number _____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of Chapter 8.12 of the Municipal Code.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request if not received by the City Council of the City of St. Helena within such 10-day period, the City Administrator shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, and present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

NOTICE MAILED:__________

_______________

City Administrator

City of St. Helena

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record vehicle - notice should be given to both if different)

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of (Chapter 8.12 of the Municipal Code).

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such request is not received by the City Council of the City of St. Helena within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

NOTICE MAILED: __________

_______________

City Administrator

City of St. Helena

(Prior code § 10.47)

8.12.090 Public hearings.
A.    A public hearing shall be held before the city upon request for such a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located. This request shall be made to the city within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or at the time of signing a release pursuant to Section 8.12.070. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the appropriate public body agency, or officer, shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.

B.    The council shall hear all facts and testimony it considers pertinent, including testimony on the condition of the vehicle and the circumstances concerning its location on private or public property. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

C.    The council may impose such conditions and take other action as it considers appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, if in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may find that a vehicle has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order it removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of the removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available, at the site.

D.    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect these costs from the land owner.

E.    If an interested party makes a written presentation to the council but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Prior code § 10.48)

8.12.100 Removal of vehicle.
After expiration of the ten (10) day notice period in Section 8.12.070, if required by that section, or after an order requiring removal is adopted by the council pursuant to Section 8.12.090, if required, the vehicle or parts thereof shall be disposed of in conformance with Vehicle Code Section 22662. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Prior code § 10.49)

8.12.110 Liability disclaimer.
No local agency or contractor thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to Section 22661 of the California Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Prior code § 10.50)

8.12.120 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles evidence of registration available, including registration certificate, certificate of title and license plates. (Prior code § 10.51)

8.12.130 Failure to pay costs.
If the administrative cost and the cost of removal is charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this chapter and not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Prior code § 10.52)

8.12.140 Leaving abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle in certain places prohibited.
No person shall abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of a vehicle which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon a private property or public property, not including highways, within the city for a period in excess of five days unless:

A.    The vehicle is completely enclosed within the building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street;

B.    The vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or

C.    The vehicle is located behind a solid fence six feet in height or is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.53)

8.12.150 Failure or refusal to remove abandoned vehicle.
No person shall fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or refuse to abate the nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where state law is applicable. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.54)

Chapter 8.16
ALARM SYSTEMS
Article 1
Burglary and Robbery Alarm Systems

Sections:

8.16.010    Purpose.

8.16.020    Definitions.

8.16.030    Owner responsibility.

8.16.040    Alarm system standards and regulations.

8.16.050    Audible alarm requirements.

8.16.060    Audible alarms similar to sirens prohibited.

8.16.070    Reporting telephone prohibited.

8.16.080    Alarm systems which constitute a hazard to responding officer.

8.16.090    Alarm business.

8.16.100    Notification to subscribers.

8.16.110    Notification of alarm system.

8.16.120    Alarm system.

8.16.130    Exemptions.

8.16.140    Notice of change.

8.16.150    Applications—Forms.

8.16.160    Application, investigation and denial.

8.16.170    Alarm system permits.

8.16.180    Grounds.

8.16.190    Suspension.

8.16.200    Procedure.

8.16.210    Revocation.

8.16.220    Surrender of permit.

8.16.230    Reapplication for permit.

8.16.240    Violations—Penalties.

8.16.250    Reimbursement.

8.16.260    Enforcement.

8.16.270    Appeals.

Article 2
Fire Alarm Systems

Sections:

8.16.280    Definitions.

8.16.290    Alarm user permits.

8.16.300    Alarm system instruction.

8.16.310    Notice of repair.

8.16.320    Responsibility for fire alarm activation, owner response, fire alarm malfunction and corrective action.

8.16.330    Fee charges—multiple fire alarm malfunctions or false fire alarms.

8.16.340    Newly installed alarm systems.

8.16.350    Alarm system operations.

Article 1
Burglary and Robbery Alarm Systems

8.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing burglary and robbery alarm systems, businesses and agents within the city of St. Helena, require permits therefor, provide the authority to establish fees, and provide for punishment of violations of provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 20.1)

8.16.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply:

“Alarm agent” means any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing, or installing on or in any building, structure, or facility, any alarm system.

“Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of: selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed, any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility.

Exemption: The provisions of this section do not include a business which engages in the manufacture or sale of any alarm system unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises.

“Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated and which is likely to result in a response by the police department. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms, devices not designed for use to register alarms audible or visible on the outside of the protected building, structure or facility, are not included within this definition; nor are auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by use of an alarm system. No alarm device shall transmit to the St. Helena police department live or recorded voices not capable of two-way communications on any telephone line not designated specifically for this purpose.

“Audible alarm” means a device designed for detection of unauthorized entry on premises which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the premises.

“False alarm” means an alarm signal produced by an alarm system and necessitating response by the St. Helena police department where an unauthorized entry or an attempted entry on or into any building, place or premises or robbery/burglary or attempted robbery/burglary at a protected premises has not occurred. False alarm does not include alarms caused by acts of God, electrical interruptions, flooding or other violent conditions.

“Owner” means the person who owns and/or occupies the premises served by an alarm device.

“Police department” means the police department of the city of St. Helena and the “chief of police” means the chief of such department or his or her authorized representative.

Public nuisance. An alarm shall constitute a public nuisance if it falsely activates more than the below-listed number of false alarms, except that alarms activated during the first thirty (30) days after the initial installation of the system will not be counted as false alarms:

1.    Three false alarms in any thirty (30) day period:

2.    Five false alarms in any ninety (90) day period; or

3.    Six false alarms in any one hundred eighty (180) day period. (Prior code § 20.2)

8.16.030 Owner responsibility.
The owner of premises having an alarm system shall instruct all persons having access to the premises in the proper use and operation of the alarm, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning on and off the alarm and in avoiding false alarms. The owner shall notify the St. Helena police department whenever an alarm system is under service or repair, where in the process of service of repair, the system may be activated, causing a police response. (Prior code § 20.3)

8.16.040 Alarm system standards and regulations.
The city council by resolution shall prescribe minimum standards and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the city. All devices shall meet or exceed such standards and regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this article. The police chief shall be authorized to inspect and approve all alarm systems installed within the city. (Prior code § 20.4)

8.16.050 Audible alarm requirements.
Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or night that the burglar alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building where the alarm system is located. The alarm system must be equipped with an automatic shut-off device which shall silence the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes; and on U. L.certified systems thirty (30) minutes. (Prior code § 20.5)

8.16.060 Audible alarms similar to sirens prohibited.
No person shall install on the exterior or interior of a building, an alarm system which upon activation, emits a sound exceeding eighty (80) decibels (when measured from outside the premises), which is similar to sirens used on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. (Ord. 02-5 § 20 (part): prior code § 20.6)

8.16.070 Reporting telephone prohibited.
No person, except a public utility engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities, shall use or operate, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install, any device or combination of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate the interstate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior written consent of such subscriber.

The term “telephone number” includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to such primary number when the primary telephone number is in use. In no case will the prerecorded message from such reporting telephone terminate at any city-owned facility, or other city-approved communication center. (Prior code § 20.7)

8.16.080 Alarm systems which constitute a hazard to responding officer.
No permit shall be issued for an alarm system which, due to the nature of its construction and/or installation, constitutes an unreasonable hazard to life and limb of responding officers, in the opinion of the chief of police. (Prior code § 20.8)

8.16.090 Alarm business.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the city without first applying for an receiving a state alarm company operator license, therefor, in accordance with the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 11.6, of the Business and Professions Code (Sections 7500 et seq.), and filing a copy of such license with the city. In the event its license is suspended, revoked, or otherwise rendered invalid by the State Issuing Authority, the alarm business shall notify the city in writing of such state action within three days thereof, with a copy to the police department. (Ord. 02-5 § 20 (part); prior code § 20.9)

8.16.100 Notification to subscribers.
Each alarm business owner and/or operator is required to provide each subscriber with a copy of the ordinance codified in this article, in its entirety. (Prior code § 20.10)

8.16.110 Notification of alarm system.
Each alarm business owner and/or operator is required to provide the police chief with the name, address, and phone number of each new subscriber within the incorporated city limits of St. Helena, prior to the activation of the new alarm system. (Prior code § 20.11)

8.16.120 Alarm system.
No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Prior code § 20.12)

8.16.130 Exemptions.
The provisions of this article are not applicable to audible alarms fixed to automobiles. (Prior code § 20.13)

8.16.140 Notice of change.
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 8.16.150, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice ten (10) days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this article if such hearing is conducted before the notice has been given. (Prior code § 20.14)

8.16.150 Applications—Forms.
Applications for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the police department and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. The fee is established to cover the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permit; and is not refundable. The police department shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The application for alarm systems shall require the name, address and telephone number of the person who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. (Prior code § 20.15)

8.16.160 Application, investigation and denial.
An application for an alarm permit shall be processed in a timely manner. The permit may be denied by the police chief if:

A.    The applicant, his or her employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency; or

B.    That the applicant has had a similar permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation. Permits shall be issued to the person occupying or owning the property served by the alarm system. (Prior code § 20.16)

8.16.170 Alarm system permits.
The fee for an alarm system permit shall be set by resolution of the St. Helena city council and shall not be prorated. Such permit issued shall expire three years after issuance. Applications for renewals of permits shall be processed in the same manner as applications for the initial permit. (Prior code § 20.17)

8.16.180 Grounds.
The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and revocation:

A.    The violation of any of the provisions of this article;

B.    When an alarm system actuates excessive false alarms, and thereby constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein;

C.    When the applicant or permittee, or his or her employee or agent, has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency. (Prior code § 20.18)

8.16.190 Suspension.
Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended by the police chief for the grounds listed in Section 8.16.180. (Prior code § 20.19)

8.16.200 Procedure.
The police chief, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty-eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service. Notwithstanding the effectiveness of an order of suspension, the permittee may continue the use of any alarm system requiring a permit under this article until the appeal process has been exhausted, unless the police chief determines that the continued operation of such alarm system interferes with the safe and efficient operation of the St. Helena police department. (Prior code § 20.20)

8.16.210 Revocation.
The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files an appeal of the order of suspension in the manner set forth in Section 8.16.270. If the permittee’s appeal is denied, the revocation will be effective at the conclusion of the appeal process. (Prior code § 20.21)

8.16.220 Surrender of permit.
If any permit is revoked pursuant to this article, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the police department and discontinue the use of any and all alarm systems covered by the permit. (Prior code § 20.22)

8.16.230 Reapplication for permit.
A person or company whose permit has previously been revoked by the city may reapply for a permit after a period of one year from the effective date of revocation or upon proof that there has been a material change in the premises alarm system. (Prior code § 20.23)

8.16.240 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 02-5 § 20 (part): prior code § 20.24)

8.16.250 Reimbursement.
A permittee shall be required to reimburse the city for the cost of the St. Helena police department manpower and equipment responding to each and every false alarm in excess of the number set forth in Section 8.16.020. The amount of such reimbursement shall be fixed by resolution of the St. Helena city council and notification thereof to the permittee shall be made within fifteen (15) days from the actuation of the excessive false alarm. (Prior code § 20.25)

8.16.260 Enforcement.
The conviction or punishment of any person from violation of the provisions of this article shall not release such person from paying the permit fee or reimbursement for all excessive false alarms due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this article. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not ban the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. The amount of any permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms. All permit fees or reimbursement for excessive false alarms shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days after they are due and payable. (Prior code § 20.26)

8.16.270 Appeals.
The notice of suspension, notice of revocation and bill for service charges shall contain a notice to the owner advising him or her of his or her right to appeal the imposition of a suspension or revocation of the subscriber’s alarm permit or any false alarm service charge. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis of the appeal, and shall be filed with the chief of police not later than thirty (30) days after notification regarding the false alarm service charge, order of suspension, or revocation of the alarm permit. Upon receipt of such appeal, the chief of police may conduct such investigation thereof as he or she deems necessary and shall afford to the appellant reasonable opportunity to present evidence in support of such appeal. The decision of the chief of police shall be final. (Prior code § 20.27)

Article 2
Fire Alarm Systems

8.16.280 Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:

“Alarm system” means a fire alarm system as defined below.

“Automatic telephone digital alarm communicator system” means an alarm system which automatically sends a coded signal over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.

“Enforcement official” means the fire chief or his or her designated representative.

“False fire alarm” means the activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire department caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of the system by the owner or his or her employees, servants or agents; or any other activation not caused by heat, smoke or fire, exclusive of a fire alarm malfunction as defined below. An alarm is not considered a false fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious causes beyond the control of the owner.

“Fee” means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city, authorized pursuant to this article, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm or alarm malfunction.

“Fire alarm malfunction” means the activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire department caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance or any other responses for which the fire department personnel are unable to gain access to the premises for any reason, or are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation.

“Fire alarm system” means any mechanical, electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed to emit a sound and/or transmit a signal or message when activated because of smoke, heat or fire. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, alarm systems shall be deemed to include audible alarms at the site of the installation of the detection device, proprietor alarms and automatic telephone digital alarm communicator systems. A single station (residential) smoke detector shall not be deemed to be an alarm system under this article.

“Fire alarm technician” means any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on fire alarm system.

“Owner” means any person or entity who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises.

“Premises” means any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures wherein an alarm system is installed.

“Required operative alarm system” means an alarm system that the owner of a premises is required to maintain in an operative condition pursuant to statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any governmental entity.

“Serve” means hand-delivery by a representative of the fire department to the owner or authorized representative who responded to the premises. In the event the owner or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within thirty (30) minutes, “serve” shall mean placing the form or other matter in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or authorized representative.

“Single-station (residential) smoke detector” means an assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment and alarm-sounding device in one unit operated from a power supply either in the unit, or obtained at the point of installation.

“Smoke detector” means a device which detects the visible or invisible particles of combustion. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.30)

8.16.290 Alarm user permits.
A.    Required. Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article, every fire alarm system user shall obtain from the fire chief an alarm user permit for each alarm system he or she operates within the city.

B.    Application. The alarm user applying for the permit required in subsection A of this section shall state on a permit application form:

1.    The name(s), address, business and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed;

2.    The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified by the enforcement official in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within thirty (30) minutes and who are authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof;

3.    The name, address and telephone number of the company contracted to service the alarm system;

4.    The name, address and telephone number of the business and/or property insurance carrier;

5.    Alarm silence code or information.

C.    Notification of Change. When any of the information has changed, the owner shall report it to the enforcement official within fifteen (15) days of such change.

D.    Fees. Permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.31)

8.16.300 Alarm system instruction.
Each alarm user shall obtain and provide to his or her employees accurate and complete instruction from the alarm company in the proper use and operation of such system. Specific emphasis shall be placed on the avoidance of false alarms. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.32)

8.16.310 Notice of repair.
The alarm business, alarm agent, user, or permittee shall notify the police dispatcher of the city prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance adjustment or installation which might activate a false alarm on a particular alarm system. The police dispatcher shall notify the fire chief or duty officer. No subsequent recording of a false alarm for the purpose of charge for a police response shall occur if the police dispatcher has been appropriately notified of the repair period. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.33)

8.16.320 Responsibility for fire alarm activation, owner response, fire alarm malfunction and corrective action.
A.    Owner Response. The responsibility for a fire alarm activation shall be that of the owner of the premises in which the fire alarm system is installed. A response to an alarm activation shall result when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises where the alarm has been activated or learns of the activation of the alarm system(s), by any means whatsoever, and responds thereto by traveling to that premises. After responding to an alarm activation, the enforcement official shall notify any person identified in the notice required pursuant to Section 8.16.290(B) of the activation of the alarm system and such person shall thereupon travel to the premises to ascertain the status thereof. Should the person notified fail to appear at the premises within thirty (30) minutes after being notified to do so, the city shall charge the owner of the premises a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).

B.    Affidavit of Service/Repair. In the event of a fire alarm activation deemed by the enforcement official to be the result of a fire alarm malfunction, the owner will be served a fire alarm activation report by the fire marshal, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a fire alarm malfunction. The owner shall return a completed affidavit of service/repair within fifteen (15) days of such alarm activation which evidences that the fire alarm system in question has actually been examined by a fire alarm technician and that a bonafide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was identifiable as the cause of the fire alarm malfunction. Failure to return such an affidavit of service/repair within the fifteen (15) day period will result in assessment against the owner of a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the fire alarm malfunction. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.34)

8.16.330 Fee charges—multiple fire alarm malfunctions or false fire alarms.
No fee shall be assessed for the first three false fire alarms at the same premises responded to by the fire department during each calendar year. Thereafter, the owner shall pay such charges as assessed by the city for false alarms. Such charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.35)

8.16.340 Newly installed alarm systems.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any newly installed alarm system for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the installation of that alarm system, but shall apply from and after the expiration of the initial thirty (30) day period following installation. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.36)

8.16.350 Alarm system operations.
The city, its officers, employees, and agents, shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately owned alarm system, those duties or responsibilities being solely those of the owner of the premises. Additionally, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to silence an activated alarm and thereafter reset same. (Ord. 00-10 § 2 (part): prior code § 20.37)

Chapter 8.20
LITTERING*
Sections:

8.20.010    Throwing waste on streets and private property.

*    Editor’s Note: As to throwing garbage, etc., on streets, etc., generally, see Chapter 8.04 of this code.

8.20.010 Throwing waste on streets and private property.
No person shall sweep, scatter or deposit any dirt, trash, paper, garbage, refuse, or waste over or upon any public street, sidewalk, park, or public place within the city except in containers provided for such purposes by the city. No person shall throw or distribute circulars, handbills or other advertising matter into or upon any private property within the city save that he or she may hand the same to persons who will accept and take them, or deposit them in or upon private property in such a manner that they will not be blown therefrom into the public streets. No person shall expose papers, handbills or other advertising matter for distribution at any place within the city in such a manner that the same is apt to be scattered or distributed over the streets or sidewalks thereof. (Ord. 2005-3 § 1, 2005: prior code § 13.8)

Chapter 8.24
NOISE*
Sections:

8.24.005    Definitions.

8.24.010    Unnecessary noises generally.

8.24.020    Exemption—Garbage and trash collection.

8.24.030    Abatement of nuisance.

8.24.040    Exemptions.

*    Editor’s Note: As to barking and howling dogs, see Section 6.04.050 of this code.

8.24.005 Definitions.
“Leaf blower” means a portable machine, powered by a gasoline or electric motor, used to blow, displace or vacuum leaves, dirt and debris. (Ord. 12-9 § 2)

8.24.010 Unnecessary noises generally.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to cause or produce any unnecessary noise which can be heard outside of any building by attaching any noise-producing attachment to any vehicle; or blowing or ringing any horn, whistle or bell; by operating a loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplification system; or by making any other loud or unusual noise which disturbs the peace of any other persons, unless a permit to cause or produce the noise shall be first obtained from the chief of police.

B.    Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. next ensuing, no commercial or other activity shall be conducted upon any privately owned real property within the city which activity creates noise which can be heard at the property line of any parcel of real property within the city, unless a permit shall first have been secured from the chief of police.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, activities associated with commercial and residential construction projects by contracted services shall be regulated as follows:

1.    Monday through Saturday. Construction activities which generate noise that can be heard at the property line of any parcel of real property within the city limits shall be limited to eight a.m. to five p.m. Delivery of materials/equipment and cleaning and servicing of machines/equipment shall be limited to seven a.m. to six p.m. Exceptions to these time restrictions may be granted by the public works director for one of the following reasons: (a) inclement weather affecting work; (b) emergency work; or (c) other work, if work and equipment will not create noise that may be unreasonably offensive to neighbors as to constitute a nuisance. The city engineer must be notified and give approval in advance of such work.

2.    Sundays and Holidays (Federal and Local). No construction activities allowed which generate noise that can be heard at the property line of any parcel of real property within the city limits.

Exception: This subsection shall not apply to self-help affordable housing construction activities that take place between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. on any local or federal holiday (with the exception of Thanksgiving Day; the day after Thanksgiving; Christmas Eve; Christmas Day; New Year’s Day and the fourth of July, which remain subject to the standard noise limitations) for residential projects containing units that the planning director determines will be affordable to very low, lower or moderate income households pursuant to an agreement with the city of St. Helena. All such self-help construction activities shall otherwise comply with the hourly and decibel limitations contained in subdivision C.1 and Tables 8-3 through 8-5 in the Noise section of the Public Health & Safety Element of the 1993 General Plan, respectively.

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, activities associated with landscape maintenance by contracted services which generate noise that can be heard at the property line of any parcel of real property within the city limits shall only be allowed Monday through Saturday from eight a.m. to five p.m. and are prohibited on Sundays and holidays (federal and local).

E.    Leaf Blowers.

1.    Effective July 1, 2013, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any gas-powered leaf blower other than a gas-powered leaf blower that bears a manufacturer’s label indicating a noise level designation not exceeding sixty-five (65) dB(A) at a distance of fifty (50) feet utilizing American National Standard Institute (“ANSI”) B175.2 methodology. All such leaf blowers shall be operated with all mufflers, full extension tubes, shrouds and sound-attenuating devices supplied by the manufacturer for that leaf blower and shall be maintained in sound operating condition. This paragraph shall not apply to electric leaf blowers.

2.    The operation of lawful gas-powered and electric leaf blowers on all streets and parcels within the city, except for those areas designated in subsection (E)(3) of this section, shall be allowed between nine a.m. and four p.m. Monday through Friday, between ten a.m. and three p.m. on Saturdays, and between ten a.m. and twelve p.m. on Sundays.

3.    The operation of lawful gas-powered and electric leaf blowers on all parcels on Main Street between Pine Street and Grayson Avenue shall be allowed between five a.m. and three p.m. Monday through Friday, between ten a.m. and three p.m. on Saturdays, and between ten a.m. and twelve p.m. on Sundays.

4.    It shall be unlawful to operate gas-powered and electric leaf blowers on federal and local holidays.

5.    The operation of gas-powered and electric leaf blowers shall be exempt from the permit requirement of subsection A of this section.

F.    Any person desiring to obtain a permit under this section shall file a written application stating the permit desired, the name and address of the applicant, the reason why he or she desires the same and the place where and the particular time when he or she desires to exercise the same.

G.    The chief of police shall grant such permit if it reasonably appears that: (1) the activity is otherwise permitted under this code; and (2) the benefit to be derived by the applicant from conducting such activity at the time and place specified in the application outweighs the detriment to be suffered by the neighborhood, by neighboring residents, and by the city’s residents generally.

H.    Violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance and an infraction. (Ord. 16-14 § 1; Ord. 12-9 § 3: Ord. 02-7 § 1; prior code § 11.11)

8.24.020 Exemption—Garbage and trash collection.
The collection of garbage and trash pursuant to Chapter 8.04 of this code is expressly exempted from the provisions of Section 8.24.010. (Prior code § 11.12)

8.24.030 Abatement of nuisance.
Whenever the existence of any nuisance, as provided by Section 8.24.010, comes to the attention of the chief of police or any sworn police officer of the city, it shall be their duty to promptly notify in writing the person(s) producing or causing the nuisance and the occupant of the premises upon which such nuisance exists, specifying the measures necessary to abate such nuisance, and unless the nuisance is thereafter immediately abated, the persons so notified shall be guilty of an infraction and the chief of police or the sworn police officer shall summarily abate such nuisance. (Prior code § 11.13)

8.24.040 Exemptions.
Nothing in Sections 8.24.010 to 8.24.030 shall apply to the playing of music by a band or the blowing of a bugle or the announcing of any show, entertainment or event upon the public streets for which band music, bugle blowing or privilege of announcing the chief of police has granted a special permit specifying the time and place when and where such music may be played or such bugle be blown; nor shall apply to the blowing of any whistle or horn or the ringing of any bell or other noise necessary as a vehicular traffic warning or signal; nor to any public celebration or public function on a public holiday or other public occasions generally celebrated. (Prior code § 11.14)

Chapter 8.28
NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE
Sections:

8.28.010    Nuclear-free zone declared—Exception.

8.28.020    Signs.

8.28.030    Violation—Penalty.

8.28.010 Nuclear-free zone declared—Exception.
The people of St. Helena declare it to be a nuclear-free zone. No nuclear weapon shall be produced, transported, stored, processed, disposed of, nor used within St. Helena. No facility, equipment, supply or substance for the production, storage, processing, disposal or use of nuclear weapons, except radioactive materials for medical purposes, shall be allowed in St. Helena. (Prior code § 10B.1)

8.28.020 Signs.
The city council shall place and maintain a sign reading “Nuclear-Free Zone” at all city limit signpost locations. The sign shall be clearly visible and its letters at least equal in size to those on the nearest city limit sign. (Prior code § 10B.2)

8.28.030 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of the nuclear-free zone provisions is a misdemeanor punishable by up to six months in jail or a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine or both. (Prior code § 10B.3)

Chapter 8.32
RELOCATION SERVICES AND PAYMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL TENANT HOUSEHOLDS
Sections:

8.32.010    Findings.

8.32.020    Purpose.

8.32.030    Definitions.

8.32.040    Eligibility for relocation services and assistance.

8.32.050    Owner responsibilities.

8.32.060    Relocation payment procedures and appeal process.

8.32.070    City’s involvement in relocation payments.

8.32.080    Relocation and other payments.

8.32.090    Emergency relocations—Payments.

8.32.100    Move-back option.

8.32.110    Penalties.

8.32.120    Private right of action.

8.32.130    Notices.

8.32.010 Findings.
The city council finds and determines that:

A.    Some rental units and rooms in St. Helena have been found, or will be found, to have severe code violations, which threaten the life and safety of occupants and require the units or rooms to be vacated to allow for extensive repairs.

B.    Such code violations are often caused by deferred maintenance, may breach the landlord’s implied warranty of habitability, and sometimes constitute constructive eviction of the tenant household from its residence.

C.    Difficulty of preventing displacement, enforcing health and safety codes, and finding replacement housing and incurring moving-related expenses creates a financial hardship for tenant households, particularly those who are low-income.

D.    The level of services and payments provided in this chapter is similar to that provided to tenant households displaced as a result of government-sponsored rehabilitation programs and is reflective of actual relocation costs likely to be incurred by displaced households.

E.    The difference in payments between tenant households displaced from units and those displaced from rooms is based on differences in actual costs likely to be incurred.

F.    The relocation payment obligations imposed on landlords by this chapter partially mitigate the financial hardships faced by tenant households displaced in order to bring the property up to housing code and have the additional purpose of encouraging landlords to maintain their residential properties in a habitable condition. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.020 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to: (A) prevent displacement where possible; (B) provide relocation services; (C) require property owners to make payments to residential tenant households displaced as a result of code enforcement activities in order to alleviate hardships associated with such relocations; (D) facilitate the correction of code violations; and (E) protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of St. Helena. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.030 Definitions.
“Code enforcement” or “code enforcement activity” shall mean an activity or activities initiated by the city to ascertain the condition of a building and requiring an owner to make necessary repairs to bring the property into compliance with applicable building and housing codes.

“Emergency relocations” shall mean when, in the opinion of the building official, any condition of the building or surrounding property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of tenant households.

“Household” or “tenant household” shall mean one or more individuals entitled to the occupancy of a rental unit or room who share living expenses.

“Owner” shall mean a person, persons, landlord, corporation, or any entity holding title to a property or agent or assignee.

“Relocation” shall mean the required vacating of a residential unit or room by a tenant household and the moving into another unit or room as a result of repairs required to bring the property into code compliance where such repairs are undertaken because of code enforcement.

“Rental unit” or “unit” shall mean a dwelling containing a separate bathroom, kitchen, and living area which is the place of permanent or customary and usual abode of a household, including a single-family dwelling or a unit in a multifamily or multipurpose dwelling, a unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project.

“Room” shall mean a room in a hotel or boarding house or a rented room in a private dwelling occupied by a tenant who has paid for at least thirty (30) consecutive days of occupancy. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.040 Eligibility for relocation services and assistance.
A tenant household may be considered eligible for relocation assistance and payments pursuant to Sections 8.32.060, 8.32.070, 8.32.080, 8.32.090, and 8.32.100 if the city determines that the condition of a building is such that a household cannot safely occupy the unit or room while the unit is being rehabilitated and such condition was not created by the tenant household occupying the unit or room. The owner shall have the burden of establishing that a tenant household is exempt from relocation assistance under this chapter. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.050 Owner responsibilities.
A.    The owner shall make repairs within the time frame required by the city to remedy code violations that the city has determined are necessary to protect the health and safety of the tenants.

B.    Neither the owner nor the city shall require the tenants to relocate as a result of code enforcement or code enforcement activity if the city determines that repairs can be made within a reasonable period of time without unreasonably endangering the health or safety of the tenants.

C.    The owner shall be responsible for providing relocation payments to each tenant household displaced because repairs undertaken to bring the property into code compliance, as determined by the city, cannot be undertaken with the tenant household(s) in place.

D.    The owner shall be responsible for providing such payments directly to the tenant household(s) to be displaced or already displaced.

E.    The owner shall make payments required by this chapter at least ten (10) days in advance of the move to facilitate relocation. When it is uncertain as to when the unit to be rehabilitated will be ready for reoccupancy, advance payment can be a partial payment sufficient to allow relocation of the affected tenant household to take place. The remaining amount owed pursuant to this chapter shall be made in a timely manner in order to prevent hardship to the tenant household.

F.    Relocation payments shall not be required for repairs which are required as a result of any natural disaster or emergency not caused by the owner, including, but not limited to, a fire, earthquake or flood. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.060 Relocation payment procedures and appeal process.
A.    The city, in conjunction with available housing assistance and tenant advocacy services, shall assist households displaced by code enforcement activities by providing information, referral, monitoring, and other relocation advisory assistance aimed at facilitating the household’s move.

B.    Whenever a building containing a residential rental unit or room or portion thereof is declared to be a substandard or deficient building pursuant to this code, the building official shall also determine whether the repairs necessary to abate the substandard or deficient conditions can be reasonably accomplished without vacation of such building, or portion thereof, by its occupants. In deciding whether to order repairs or require vacation, the city shall give preference to repair of the building without requiring vacation; provided, that the city determines the violations are not so extensive or of such a nature that the health and safety of the affected tenant households or the public is substantially and immediately endangered, consistent with the requirements of Health and Safety Code Section 17980 et seq. or any successor statute(s).

C.    Upon a written showing by any affected tenant that displacement would create extreme hardship, the city shall allow a deferral of the effective date of any order(s) of abatement consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 17959.4 or any successor statute, except in cases in which the city determines that the violations are so extensive or of such a nature that the health and safety of the affected tenant households or the public is substantially and immediately endangered, consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 17980 et seq. or any successor statute(s), as applicable. The city manager may create and make available a form to be used by affected tenants to make the written showing required by this section.

D.    If the city determines that relocation is necessary in order to bring the property into compliance with applicable code requirements or abatement orders, the owner shall provide written notice to each affected tenant household at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of required relocation, unless the city orders an abatement that requires relocation in less than thirty (30) days, and in such case, the owner shall provide notice as soon as practicable prior to the effective date of the abatement order. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following:

1.    A summary of the repairs to be undertaken and the estimated duration of the relocation;

2.    A statement that the tenant household is entitled to relocation benefits under this chapter;

3.    A statement that the tenant household may appeal the determination to the city and request from the city a hardship deferral of the order to vacate;

4.    A statement that such appeal and/or request may be made to the city manager; and the address and telephone number of the city manager;

5.    A copy of this chapter.

The owner shall provide the city a copy of each notice provided under this section.

E.    In addition to the notice provided by the owner, when the city issues a notice of abatement to the owner which requires vacation of the unit or building, the city shall provide written notice to affected tenant households either: (1) by posting a copy of the notice or order in a conspicuous place on the affected property and mailing the same by first class mail to each affected residential unit, or (2) by posting a copy of the order or notice in a conspicuous place on each affected residential unit. The notice required by this subsection shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following:

1.    The city’s address and telephone number;

2.    A statement that the tenant household may appeal the determination to the city and request from the city a hardship deferral of the order to vacate;

3.    A statement that such appeal and/or request may be made to the city manager; and the address and telephone number of the city manager; and

4.    A statement that a lessor (or owner) may not retaliate against a lessee (or tenant household) pursuant to Civil Code Section 1942.5.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, failure of an affected tenant household to receive the notice required by this section shall not invalidate the city’s notice of abatement to the owner requiring vacation of the unit or building.

F.    The issuance by the building official of a notice of necessity to vacate the building shall not relieve the building owner of his or her obligation to provide any other notice of termination of tenancy imposed or required by any provision of state law or ordinance. Each tenant household which has been served with a notice of necessity to vacate building pursuant to this chapter shall: (1) submit a written request for relocation payment; (2) serve a copy of said written request for relocation payment on the owner, together with an estimate of the amount of payments to which the tenant household is entitled pursuant to Section 8.32.080 within twenty (20) days after receipt of such notice; and (3) retain a copy of the written request for its records. If payment is to be made in more than one installment, the tenant household shall notify the owner of the remaining amount owed. The city manager may create and make available a form to be used by tenant households under this section.

G.    Within ten (10) days after receipt of the tenant’s notice referred to in subsection F of this section, the owner shall either make the initial payment of relocation benefits directly to the tenant household or file a written request for an appeal hearing before the city manager or designee describing the reasons for such request with the city manager if the owner wishes to contest the estimated relocation payment amounts or the tenant household’s eligibility for relocation payment. The initial payment shall include:

1.    The dislocation allowance pursuant to Section 8.32.080(A)(1).

2.    Fixed moving and storage costs pursuant to Section 8.32.080(A)(2) or (B)(1).

3.    The replacement housing payment pursuant to Section 8.32.080(A)(3) or (B)(2).

Except in cases where the city determines that the violations are so extensive or of such a nature that the health and safety of the tenant household or the public are substantially and immediately endangered (consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 17980 et seq. or any successor statute), the tenant household shall have the right to remain at the rental unit or room until such time as it has received the initial payment of relocation benefits to which it is entitled under this chapter.

Subsequent relocation payments shall be made on a monthly basis thereafter and shall be made at least seven days in advance of when the tenant household’s monthly rental payment is due. In lieu of monthly payments, the owner may make lump payments covering specified periods of time.

H.    An appeal hearing shall be scheduled before the city manager or designee to consider the issues described in the appeal document within thirty (30) days of the filing of such appeal. The owner and all affected tenants shall be notified by mail of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing. The city manager or designee shall render a decision on any such appeal within ten (10) days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

I.    Nothing in this section shall in any way preclude or limit any aggrieved party from seeking judicial review after such person has exhausted the administrative remedies provided by this section. However, it shall be conclusively presumed that a litigant has not exhausted his or her administrative remedies as to any issue which is not raised in the administrative proceedings authorized herein. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.070 City’s involvement in relocation payments.
The city may, in its discretion, make any of the payments required by Section 8.32.080 in situations where the owner is unwilling or unable to pay for relocation costs and the tenant household is required to relocate due to code enforcement activity to bring the building into code compliance. The city shall recover from the owner all costs incurred as a result of making such payments. In order for the city to consider making such payments, a request must be made by the tenant household to the city manager within twenty (20) days from the owner’s refusal to make the required payments.

A.    In the above cases, the city shall first mail, by certified mail, a written notice to the owner of the owner’s obligation under this chapter (1) to provide relocation assistance and payment and (2) the time limit within which payment is to be made. The notice shall also specify that failure to make required payments may result in the city making such payments on behalf of the owner and the consequences to the owner of the city’s action.

B.    If within ten (10) days of receipt of said notice the owner continues to refuse to make the necessary payments, the city may make the required relocation payment to the tenant household. The city shall then bill the owner for the amount of payment, plus any administrative and other costs it would not have otherwise incurred. If the owner does not make payment to the city within sixty (60) days, the city shall record a lien on the property from which the tenant household was displaced with the county recorder and provide notice of such lien to the owner and to the county assessor. The lien amounts shall accrue interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum until the lien is discharged. The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the property and shall be paramount to all other liens except for state, county and municipal taxes and special assessments. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.080 Relocation and other payments.
A.    Payments for Relocation from Rental Units. Tenant households displaced from rental units in order to bring the property into code compliance shall be eligible for the following payments:

1.    A one-time dislocation allowance of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to help defray incidental relocation expenses.

2.    The household’s choice of a fixed or actual moving and storage expense payment subject to the following requirements:

a.    If a fixed payment is chosen, a payment of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) shall be made if both moving and storage of household goods are necessary. If no storage is required, the fixed payment shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). No documentation is necessary to receive a fixed payment. In cases of disputes as to whether storage is required, the city shall be asked to make that determination. The city’s determination is final.

b.    Payment for actual documented moving and storage expenses shall include both movement to the replacement unit(s) and movement back to the original unit. Payment shall not exceed the rates established by the California Public Utilities Commission.

3.    A replacement housing payment equal to the documented difference between the rent and utilities paid on the unit being rehabilitated and the lesser of:

a.    Rent and utilities in the replacement unit; or

b.    An amount equal to ten percent (10%) above the fair market rent guidelines maximum used for the Section 8 Existing Housing Program or its equivalent by bedroom size of the unit being rehabilitated. The rent differential payment shall be made until such time that the unit from which the household was displaced is available for occupancy.

4.    Payment of the required security deposit at the relocation unit, excluding any charges for damages to the relocation unit caused by tenant other than normal wear and tear.

5.    Payment of a daily food allotment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per person to the extent the relocated tenant household does not have access to cooking facilities during the time it temporarily occupies replacement housing.

B.    Payments for Relocation from Rental Rooms. Payments for relocation from rooms shall be as follows:

1.    Actual, documented moving and storage costs, not to exceed the rates established by the California Public Utilities Commission.

2.    A replacement housing payment equal to the lesser of:

a.    The documented difference between rent and utilities on the room to be vacated and a replacement dwelling; or

b.    The fair market rent guidelines maximum for a one-bedroom unit used for the Section 8 Existing Housing Program. The rent differential shall be paid until such time as the room from which the tenant household was displaced is available for occupancy.

3.    Payment of the required security deposit at the relocation unit, excluding any charges for damages to the relocation unit caused by tenant other than normal wear and tear.

C.    Payment to Multiple Households Occupying a Unit or Room. Payments for displacement from a unit occupied by more than one household shall be divided among the households according to amount of space occupied in the unit. Payments for displacement from a room shall be shared equally among the households. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.090 Emergency relocations—Payments.
A.    In the event of an emergency relocation, the city may order the immediate relocation of the tenant households without notice or hearing as provided in this chapter. The city shall provide relocation payments and services as provided in this chapter with the owner being responsible for payment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 8.32.070 and 8.32.080. Prior to any emergency relocation, the city shall make reasonable attempts to contact the owner or his, her, or its management agent by telephone or in person to provide notice of the nature, timing, and extent of the emergency relocation, as well as the city’s intent to collect the relocation costs and attorney’s fees and that such costs and fees may be collected as a special assessment and the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments and that any special assessment for abatement costs and fees may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5 or any successor statute.

B.    When emergency relocation is necessary, it shall be ordered only by the city manager or his or her designee.

C.    Notice of the emergency relocation shall be provided to the owner or other responsible parties as soon as practicable. Service of the notice shall be made either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the U.S. Mail to such person to be notified at the address shown upon the last tax roll or as shown upon some other public record pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed effective at the time of deposit in the post office. The notice shall describe the condition that caused the emergency vacation and imminent and/or immediate danger to the health and safety of the tenant household(s) and/or public that resulted in the emergency vacation as well as the city’s intent to collect the relocation costs and attorney’s fees as a special assessment against the property subject to collection at the same time and in the same manner as is provided for the collection of ordinary property taxes pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5 or any successor statute. The notice shall also advise that a hearing to contest the need for the emergency vacation and the amount of the relocation payments may be requested within fifteen (15) days of the notice. If a timely request for a hearing is submitted, it shall be heard within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the request pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.12.170. The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the terms of Section 1.12.180.

D.    The costs and expenses of an emergency vacation shall be made a lien on the property and shall be collected pursuant to the procedure found in Sections 1.12.210 to 1.12.230. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.100 Move-back option.
A.    The relocation of a tenant household pursuant to this chapter shall not terminate the tenancy of the relocated household.

B.    A tenant household displaced due to repairs or rehabilitation undertaken to bring a property into code compliance shall have the right to reoccupy the unit or room from which it was displaced as soon as the unit is ready for reoccupancy.

C.    If a tenant household wishes to avail itself of this option, it must inform the owner in writing of its current address at all times during the period of displacement.

D.    As a general rule, owners shall notify a relocated tenant household at least thirty (30) days in advance by registered mail of the availability of the unit or room. If a shorter notice is given and the tenant household indicates that it wishes to move back, the unit or room must be held vacant at no cost to the tenant household for a period of thirty-five (35) days after the mailing of the notice of availability.

E.    Within five days of receipt of notice of availability of the unit or room, a tenant household wishing to move back must personally notify the owner of its intent to reoccupy the rental unit or room.

F.    A unit or room shall be deemed to be permanently surrendered and the tenancy terminated when the tenant household provides notice in writing to the owner that it does not intend to reoccupy the unit or room from which it was displaced or does not notify the owner of its intent to reoccupy the unit or room. If the owner has not made relocation payments as required by this chapter and the tenant has not timely notified the landlord of its intent to reoccupy the premises, then it shall be presumed that the surrender of the right of possession of the premises was involuntary, unless the owner has received a written notice from the tenant household permanently surrendering its right to occupy the premises. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.110 Penalties.
In addition to any other penalty or remedy available or imposed by law or in equity, any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as set forth in Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.120 Private right of action.
Any person or organization aggrieved by a violation of any provision of this chapter shall have the right to file an action for injunctive relief and/or damages. Treble damages shall be awarded for willful failure to comply with the payment obligation established by this chapter. The prevailing party in any court action under this chapter shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-6 § 1 (part))

8.32.130 Notices.
All notices required by this chapter shall be provided in English and Spanish. (Ord. 14-13 § 1 (Exh. A (part))

Chapter 8.36
SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAG REDUCTION
Section:

8.36.010    Purpose and intent.

8.36.020    Definitions.

8.36.030    Single-use carryout bags.

8.36.040    Exemptions.

8.36.050    Operative date.

8.36.060    Enforcement.

8.36.010 Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this chapter are to:

A.    Enact a bag reuse program that reduces waste and pollution, and that decreases the use of single-use carryout bags in the city of St. Helena.

B.    Protect the environment from the negative impacts of single-use carryout bags by reducing the use of single-use carryout bags, with a provision that would require retail stores within the city of St. Helena to charge customers who request recycled paper bags.

C.    Provide an incentive for customers to use reusable bags or bring their own bags by exempting application of the bag charge from those customers who use reusable bags or bring their own bags. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

8.36.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A.    “Customer” means any person obtaining merchandise from a retail establishment.

B.    “Director” means the planning director of the city of St. Helena, or a designee of the planning director or city manager.

C.    “Merchandise” means any consumer goods as that term is defined by California Civil Code Section 1791(a), except that “merchandise” shall also include clothing and consumables, as those terms are defined by California Civil Code Sections 1791(c) and (d), respectively. “Merchandise” does not include prepared food. “Merchandise” includes, but is not limited to, liquor and beer, clothing, electronics and groceries that are not prepared food.

D.    “Person” means any human person, as well as any other form of legal entity (including a corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship).

E.    “Post-consumer recycled material” means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. “Post-consumer recycled material” does not include materials and byproducts generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process.

F.    “Public eating establishment” means a restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other business that receives ninety percent (90%) or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises.

G.    “Prepared food” means food or beverages which are prepared on the premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further preparation to be consumed. “Prepared food” does not include any raw or uncooked meat product, or fruits and vegetables that are intended to be prepared for consumption off site.

H.    “Recycled paper bag” means a paper bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer in accordance with this chapter, at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment that contains no old growth fiber and a minimum of forty percent (40%) post-consumer recycled material; is one hundred percent (100%) recyclable; and has printed on the outside of the bag the word “Recyclable,” the name and location of the manufacturer, and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content.

I.    “Retail establishment” means a commercial establishment that sells merchandise at retail directly to the customer, and is located within or doing business within the geographical limits of the city of St. Helena. “Retail establishment” does not include a public eating establishment.

J.    “Reusable bag” means either a bag made of cloth or other machine washable fabric that has handles, or a durable plastic bag with handles that is at least 2.25 mils thick and is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse.

K.    “Single-use carryout bag” means a bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment; provided, that “single-use carryout bag” specifically excludes any reusable bag, or recycled paper bag or gift bag and excludes any bag provided to the customer to (1) transport produce, bulk food or meat from a produce, bulk food or meat department within a store to the point of sale; (2) hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; (3) segregate merchandise that could damage or contaminate other merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag or recycled paper bag; or (4) contain or wrap meat, fish, or frozen foods, whether prepackaged or not.

L.    “Specialty bag or gift bag” means a paper shopping bag made of a minimum one hundred seventy-five (175) grams per square meter paper weight, with a flat bottom, side gussets, reinforced turn top, and ribbon, rope or cord handles. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

8.36.030 Single-use carryout bags.
A.    No retail establishment shall provide a single-use carryout bag to a customer.

B.    No retail establishment shall provide a recycled paper bag to a customer for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment unless: (1) the retail establishment charges the customer an amount of ten cents ($0.10) or more per bag, and (2) the amount of the charge for each recycled paper bag is separately itemized on the sales receipt provided by the retail establishment to the customer.

C.    Retailers shall retain the proceeds from the collection of the charge required by subsection B of this section for the point of sale purchase of a recycled paper bag. This chapter does not restrict how retailers use these monies.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit customers from using bags of any type that they bring to a retail establishment themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

8.36.040 Exemptions.
A retail establishment may provide a reusable bag or a recycled paper bag at no cost at the point of sale to a customer who is participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Health and Safety Code Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106, or a customer who is participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Chapter 10 of Part 3 of Division 9. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

8.36.050 Operative date.
A.    This chapter shall become operative on January 1, 2015, for any full-line, self-service retail establishment with gross annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or more that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items.

B.    This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 2015, for all retail establishments. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

8.36.060 Enforcement.
The director shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The director is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations with respect to the enforcement of this chapter. All such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

It is a violation of this code, subject to punishment and prosecution pursuant to Chapter 1.20, for any retail establishment to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 14-8 § 2 (part))

Chapter 8.40
FIREWORKS
Sections:

8.40.010    Purpose and findings.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.030    Prohibition.

8.40.040    Exceptions.

8.40.010 Purpose and findings.
A.    Fireworks present a significant hazard to the city of St. Helena, the environment and the safety of its citizens.

B.    It is in the city’s best interest to prohibit the sale, use, possession and discharge of fireworks, including “safe and sane fireworks.”

C.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a prohibition on the sale, use, possession and discharge of fireworks in the city of St. Helena.

D.    California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. provides for regulation of the manufacture, classification and, in part, sales of safe and sane fireworks by the California State Fire Marshal and California Health and Safety Code Section 12541.1 allows local jurisdictions to prohibit or otherwise regulate sale based upon local conditions.

E.    In 2017 and previously, the Napa Valley has experienced devastating wildfires. The city of St. Helena is surrounded by woodlands and brush-covered lands so that fireworks present a significant fire hazard to the environment and the safety of its citizens.

F.    All jurisdictions in the Napa Valley and many jurisdictions elsewhere have already banned fireworks. (Ord. 18-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

8.40.020 Definitions.
As used herein, the words and phrases “fireworks” and “safe and sane fireworks” shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Section 12500 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 18-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

8.40.030 Prohibition.
The sale, use, possession and discharge of fireworks, including, but not limited to, safe and sane fireworks, are prohibited within the city of St. Helena. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, purchase, discharge or otherwise use fireworks within the city of St. Helena except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 18-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

8.40.040 Exceptions.
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the sale, use, or discharge of any of the following: torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroad or other transportation or law enforcement agencies for signal purposes or illumination; blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic, or sports events or military ceremonies or demonstrations; fireworks by permittees having a permit as hereinafter provided; agricultural and wildlife fireworks as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12503; or to those subjects identified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 12540(a) through (d).

B.    Public displays of fireworks may be conducted by permit granted pursuant to Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 18-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.04    Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency

9.06    Smoking Regulations

9.08    Social Host Accountability Ordinance

9.12    Curfew

9.16    Weapons

9.22    Substituted Cathinones, Synthetic Cannabinoids, and Other Synthetic Drugs

Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
Sections:

9.04.010    Intoxicating beverages on public streets and parking lots.

9.04.010 Intoxicating beverages on public streets and parking lots.
Except as authorized by permit approved by the city council, no person shall possess an opened alcoholic beverage on any public street, sidewalk, alley or highway, or on any public or private off-street parking lot. (Ord. 02-3 § 15: prior code § 11.6)

Chapter 9.06
SMOKING REGULATIONS
Sections:

9.06.010    Findings and purpose.

9.06.020    Definitions.

9.06.040    Smoking prohibited in and around city buildings.

9.06.060    Smoking prohibited at public sports facilities, public sports spectator areas, playground structures, and municipal parks.

9.06.080    Violations an infraction.

9.06.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    State law prohibits smoking in all public buildings and within twenty (20) feet of a public building, which includes city-owned or leased buildings that are occupied by the city of St. Helena.

B.    State law prohibits smoking within twenty-five (25) feet of playgrounds and tot lots.

C.    No state law mechanism exists under which local police can enforce these smoking prohibitions.

D.    State law allows the city to adopt a more restrictive ordinance regarding smoking on or around government facilities and playgrounds.

E.    Nonconsensual exposure to secondhand smoke at sports facilities, sports spectator areas, and municipal parks is a nuisance and a threat to the health of the general public and sports players and spectators.

F.    As aerosol emissions from electronic smoking devices have been found to contain at least ten (10) chemicals that are on California’s list of chemicals known to cause cancer, birth defects, or other reproductive harm, including acetaldehyde benzene, cadmium, formaldehyde, isoprene, lead, nickel, nicotine, N nitrosonornicotine, and toluene, secondhand exposure to e-cigarette aerosol is a health concern.

G.    People exposed to aerosol emissions from electronic smoking devices and electronic cigarettes absorb nicotine, a substance that can cause cancer, birth defects, or reproductive harm, at levels comparable to secondhand smoke, and are also exposed to volatile organic compounds and other particulate matter that can lead to tissue inflammation.

H.    Nonsmokers who suffer from allergies, respiratory disease, or the negative effects of breathing secondhand tobacco smoke or aersol emissions from electronic smoking devices or electronic cigarettes may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions.

I.    Accordingly, the city council finds it is within its basic police power to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and declares that the purposes of this chapter are:

1.    To effectuate state law preventing smoking inside all public buildings and within twenty (20) feet of public buildings, all to the general health, safety, and welfare of the public;

2.    To assist in the enforcement of laws prohibiting smoking in all public buildings and within twenty (20) feet of a public building; and

3.    To protect the health of the general public, including sports players, spectators who utilize the sports facilities and sports spectator areas, and those who use playground structures and municipal parks. (Ord. 18-4 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-4 § 1: Ord. 08-3 (part))

9.06.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

A.    “Electronic smoking device or electronic cigarette” means an electronic and/or battery operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver vapors for an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substance. This term shall include, without limitation, every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, a vaporizer, a device that heats a flavored liquid, usually containing nicotine, until it produces a vapor, or any other similar product name or descriptor.

B.    “Inside a public building” means all indoor areas of the building, except for covered parking lots and residential space. “Inside a public building” includes any indoor space leased to the state, county, or city, except for covered parking lots and residential space (a private living area, not including common areas such as lobbies, lounges, waiting areas, elevators, stairwells, and restrooms that are a structural part of a multi-complex building such as a dormitory).

C.    “Public building” means a building, or any area within a building, owned and occupied, in whole or in part, or leased and occupied, in whole or in part, by the state, county, or the city of St. Helena.

D.    “Public sports facilities” means property owned by the city that has as its main purpose the facilitation of the playing of a sport, including but not limited to baseball fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, skateparks, volleyball courts, swimming pools, and bocce courts.

E.    “Public sports spectator areas” means the areas designated for the use of spectators of sports at public sports facilities, including but not limited to bleachers and seating areas, and any other area within such proximity to public sports facilities that its use by spectators is common.

F.    “Playground structures” means areas constructed and/or intended as an outdoor area set aside for primarily children’s recreation and play, containing equipment such as swings, slides, or other play structures.

G.    “Smoking” means and includes (1) inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or leaving any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed or plant or other combustible substance whose smoke is intended to be inhaled; (2) inhaling or exhaling upon burning or carrying any lighted smoking equipment for tobacco, nicotine or any other plant or product used for personal habit commonly known as smoking and/or (3) inhaling or exhaling upon, vaporizing or otherwise using any electronic smoking device or electronic cigarette. (Ord. 18-4 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-3 (part))

9.06.040 Smoking prohibited in and around city buildings.
Smoking shall be prohibited, and no person shall smoke, inside a public building or within twenty (20) feet of any entrance(s), exit(s), operable window(s), ventilation intake systems and covered entryways of any public building in the city of St. Helena. All public buildings owned or leased by the city of St. Helena shall have posted “No Smoking Within 20 Feet” signs outside of all entrance(s), exit(s), operable window(s), and ventilation intake systems. This prohibition shall be enforced consistent with the provisions of the St. Helena Municipal Code. (Ord. 18-4 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-4 § 2: Ord. 08-3 (part))

9.06.060 Smoking prohibited at public sports facilities, public sports spectator areas, playground structures, and municipal parks.
Smoking shall be prohibited, and no person shall smoke, on the grounds of public sports facilities or public sports spectator areas, or on or around playground structures, or in municipal parks as that term is defined in Section 12.32.010. All public sports facilities, public sports spectator areas, playground structures, and municipal parks shall have posted “No Smoking” signs citing this code section outside, on, or near all entrance(s), exit(s), any existing operable window(s), and/or ventilation intake systems, or such sign shall be placed openly and in public view in such areas where no entrance/exit is obvious. (Ord. 18-4 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 12-4 § 2: Ord. 08-3 (part))

9.06.080 Violations an infraction.
Violations of any section herein shall be considered an infraction and the provision herein shall be enforced consistent with the St. Helena Municipal Code. (Ord. 18-4 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-3 (part))

Chapter 9.08
SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY ORDINANCE
Sections:

9.08.010    Title.

9.08.020    Legislative purpose.

9.08.030    Legislative findings.

9.08.040    Definitions.

9.08.050    Unlawful party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person.

9.08.060    Protected activities.

9.08.070    Violation(s)—Civil fine(s).

9.08.080    Imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses.

9.08.090    Hearings on the imposition of civil fine and/or imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety response—Appeals.

9.08.100    Billing and civil fine and civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses—Debt to city—Enforcement.

9.08.110    Remedies cumulative—Actions—Relationship to other laws.

9.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “social host accountability ordinance.” (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.020 Legislative purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to:

A.    Protect the public health, safety and general welfare;

B.    Promote the reduction of underage consumption of alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana by imposing a civil fine on persons responsible for a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana is consumed by, served to or in the possession of underage persons;

C.    Facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service to, consumption of or possession of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana by underage persons; and

D.    To offset the city’s costs associated with providing fire, police, and other emergency services to a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person, by imposing a civil fee upon social hosts and/or landowners who allow such party, gathering or event to occur on their premises, at their residences, or at rented facilities. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.030 Legislative findings.
The city of St. Helena city council finds as follows:

A.    The city of St. Helena, pursuant to the police powers delegated to it by the California Constitution, has the authority to enact laws which promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its residents.

B.    The occurrence of a party, gathering or event on private property where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person is a threat to the public health, safety, or quiet enjoyment of residential property and the general welfare.

C.    State law makes it unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase or attempt to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana, and makes it unlawful for any person to sell or provide any alcoholic beverage, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.

D.    Law enforcement response to a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person causes a drain of law enforcement resources and, in some situations, leaves other areas of the city with inadequate law enforcement protection. Responses to such gatherings or events result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its taxpayers and residents.

E.    According to the California Healthy Kids Survey (2009), thirty percent (30%) of city of St. Helena eleventh graders report obtaining alcohol at parties or other events outside school, and seventy-eight percent (78%) of city of St. Helena eleventh graders report that alcohol is fairly easy or very easy to obtain. Alcohol policy research regarding underage drinking shows that when communities reduce youth access to alcohol, communities experience reductions in youth alcohol use and related problems. Ordinances that reduce youth access to alcohol from social sources have been recognized as a best practice by the United States Department of Justice. The city council believes this finding and the studies upon which it is based applies similarly, if not equally, to controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana.

F.    Communities that have adopted such ordinances have seen reductions in the size of gatherings and reductions in youth perception of ease of access to alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana.

G.    Law enforcement ability to abate gatherings where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are consumed by minors on private property will result in decrease in abuse of alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana by minors, physical altercations and injuries, sexual assaults, truancy, driving under the influence of alcohol, adolescent crime, motor vehicle crashes, neighborhood vandalism and excessive noise disturbance, thereby improving public safety and overall quality of life of St. Helena residents.

H.    Persons held responsible for abetting or allowing a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person will be more likely to properly supervise or to stop such conduct at gatherings held on property in their possession or under their control.

I.    Problems associated with a party, gathering or event at which alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of underage persons are difficult to prevent or deter unless law enforcement has the additional legal authority to issue a civil citation for a civil fine and/or a civil citation for the cost of public safety response.

J.    The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property, and general welfare, rather than to punish. Persons who actively or passively aid, abet, or allow a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person shall be held liable for the nuisances created by such gatherings, the civil fine(s) for such violations and/or the costs associated with responding to such gatherings. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.040 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Controlled substance” means a drug or substance described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11007, as may be amended or superseded; provided, that the term does not include any drug or substance for which an individual found to have possessed or consumed such drug or substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription.

“Hearing officer” for the purpose of this chapter will be the city manager or his/her designee.

“Intoxicating substance” means a controlled substance listed in the schedules of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, any “synthetic drug” as that term is defined and/or used in Chapter 9.22, and/or any other substance, that can cause stimulation or excitement, or inhibit a person’s normal capacity to act or reason.

“Juvenile” means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.

“Marijuana” shall have the same meaning used in Section 17.126.020(D), and as such shall mean all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It includes marijuana infused in foodstuff, and concentrated cannabis and the separated resin, whether crude or petrified, obtained from marijuana. It does not include:

1.    Industrial hemp;

2.    The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product.

3.    “Medical marijuana” as defined in Section 17.126.020(E) to mean marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (“AIDS”), anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. This exclusion for medical marijuana only applies to marijuana being used by a qualified patient as defined in subsection (f) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 or a person with an identification card as defined in subsection (g) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

“Minor” means any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age.

“Other private property” refers to a hotel or motel room; an assembly hall or meeting room; a common room of a dwelling unit used for a party (e.g., recreation room of an apartment building); a site in a privately owned campground; privately owned vacant lot; privately owned agricultural land; or privately owned rural land whether occupied as a dwelling, part or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used without compensation.

“Party, gathering or event” means a group of two (2) or more persons at a residence or on other private property or rented public property who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.

“Person responsible for the event” means and includes, but is not limited to:

1.    The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the gathering occurs; and/or

2.    The person in charge of the premises; and/or

3.    The person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the civil fine and/or for the costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter.

“Public safety services” and/or “response costs” means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person, including but not limited to:

1.    The portion of the cost of salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with party, gathering or event, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);

2.    The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a party, gathering or event; and

3.    The cost of the use of any equipment or property, and the cost of repairing any equipment or property damaged, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a party, gathering or event.

“Residence” includes a dwelling unit such as a home, condominium or apartment; structures on the residence other than the dwelling unit such as a garage, studio, tent, boat dock, swimming pool, barn or boat house; land on the residence whether improved or unimproved such as a yard, patio, open fields, piers or lake shores; water bodies on the residence such as a pond, lake, river or stream; a motor vehicle, camper or trailer located on the residence or a boat, watercraft, or other marine vessel located on the residence whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or gathering, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

“Underage person” means any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age and shall have the same meaning as “minor,” defined above. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.050 Unlawful party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person.
No person shall suffer, permit or host a party, gathering or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises or host a gathering of two or more persons at a public place under his or her control where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.060 Protected activities.
This chapter shall not apply to activities protected by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution; the California Alcohol Beverage Control Act; or the First or Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.070 Violation(s)—Civil fine(s).
It shall be a civil violation for a person to conduct or allow a party, gathering or event where alcohol, controlled substances, intoxicating substances and/or marijuana are served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underaged person on premises owned by the person responsible for the event, on premises rented by or to the person responsible for the event, on premises where the person responsible for the event resides or on premises where the person responsible for the event is in control of such premises during the party, gathering or event. Law enforcement personnel, at his or her discretion, may immediately issue a citation for this civil violation upon evidence of the violation. There is no requirement of a first warning in order for law enforcement to issue this civil citation.

A.    Civil Fine. A first violation of this section shall result in a citation with a five hundred fifty dollar ($550.00) fine. A second violation shall result in a citation with a seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) fine. A third or subsequent violation shall result in a citation with a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine.

B.    Law enforcement shall give notice of a violation of this section by issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons identified by law enforcement within thirty (30) days of the violation. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the validity of the citation and the time for requesting that hearing.

C.    The civil fine prescribed in this section is in addition to any civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses that may be assessed pursuant to Section 9.08.080.

D.    In the event that the responsible person who is in violation of this section is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the civil violation. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.080 Imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses.
In addition to any civil fine imposed for violation of this section, expenses and fines which may be assessed or imposed as a result of a violation of this chapter, liability for the cost of providing public safety services (i.e., fire, ambulance, police, and other emergency providers) shall be the responsibility of any person who violates any provision of this chapter. The cost recovery for public safety responses shall be separate and distinct from a citation and fine for a civil violation described in Section 9.08.070.

A.    The amount of cost recovery under this section shall be the response costs as well as any associated costs performed by public safety.

B.    In the event that the responsible person who is in violation of this section is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the imposition of civil penalties for the cost of providing public safety services.

C.    If there is more than one responsible person for the event then each responsible person shall be jointly and severally liable for the civil fine and/or for the costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Civil cost recovery fee(s) shall not be imposed for the medical response costs in those situations where those present at the gathering call for emergency services for an actual emergency at the premises. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.090 Hearings on the imposition of civil fine and/or imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety response—Appeals.
A.    Administrative Hearing. Any person subject to a civil fine pursuant to Section 9.08.070 or subject to a civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses pursuant to Section 9.08.080 shall have the right to request an administrative hearing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of a citation for a civil violation or the issuance of a citation for the imposition of civil cost recovery fees for a public safety response. To request such a hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall notify the city clerk in writing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the citation.

B.    The city hearing officer is delegated the power and duty to hear any appeal hearing under Section 9.08.070 and/or 9.08.080. The city hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the matter within ninety (90) days of the request for the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause. The city hearing officer shall render a decision within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. Any aggrieved person may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for mandate with the superior court of California, City of Napa, a unified court, in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.100 Billing and civil fine and civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses—Debt to city—Enforcement.
A.    The amount of a civil fine and/or civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses shall be deemed a debt owed to the city of St. Helena by the person responsible for the event, and, if that person is a juvenile, then also his/her parents or guardians. Any person owing such fine and/or fees shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such fine and/or fees. These recovery costs may include reasonable attorney fees incurred in the action if the city prevails, as the city reserves the right to seek to recover reasonable attorney fees, on a case-by-case basis, pursuant to Government Code Section 25845(c). In those cases in which the city seeks to recover reasonable attorney fees, the other party may likewise do so.

The chief shall mail notice via certified mail within thirty (30) days of the response for which the person is liable giving rise to such costs. The chief shall calculate and compile an itemized list of applicable response costs. The notice shall contain the following information:

1.    The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such costs;

2.    The address of the residence or other private property where the party, gathering or event occurred;

3.    The date and time of the response;

4.    The law enforcement, fire and/or emergency service responder who responded;

5.    An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is liable;

6.    Information regarding the date payment is due;

7.    The right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the imposition of response costs and/or civil fines;

8.    The imposition of a lien on the subject property in the event of nonpayment;

9.    The election by the city under Government Code Section 25845(c), to allow for recovery of the prevailing party’s attorneys’ fees in the event of an administrative hearing or subsequent appeal.

The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed costs and/or civil fines to the city of St. Helena within forty-five (45) days of the notice thereof. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon a timely request for an administrative hearing made pursuant to Section 9.08.090.

B.    If following an administrative hearing, appeal, or other final determination, the owner of the property is determined to be the responsible person for costs of this section, such costs, if unpaid within forty-five (45) days of the notice of the final determination, shall become a lien to be recorded against the property on which the violation occurred pursuant to Section 1.20.010. Such costs shall be collected in the same manner as county taxes, and thereafter the property upon which they are a lien shall be sold in the same manner as property now is sold for delinquent taxes.

C.    The city attorney shall have the authority to file any action or proceeding to recover such police service costs, expenses and/or penalties, and take any other actions at law which he/she may deem necessary to recover same. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

9.08.110 Remedies cumulative—Actions—Relationship to other laws.
The remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative, and shall not restrict the city to any other remedy to which it is entitled under law or equity. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the imposition of any criminal penalty under state law, nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to conflict with any penalty or provision under state law, or prohibit any conduct authorized by the state or federal Constitution. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-2 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-5 § 2 (part))

Chapter 9.12
CURFEW
Sections:

9.12.010    Curfew hours.

9.12.020    Parental responsibility.

9.12.030    Violators to be detained—Parent or guardian must call for minor.

9.12.040    Violation—Penalty.

9.12.050    Suspension by resolution of the effectiveness or enforcement of this chapter.

9.12.010 Curfew hours.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be in, on or about a public street or other public place or any place open to the public in the city between ten (10) p.m. and sunrise of the following day, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such person. This section shall not apply when the person is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; when the person is going directly to or returning from work; when the person is upon an errand or emergency directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such person; or when the person is exercising rights protected by the state or federal constitutions. (Ord. 02-3 § 1 (part): prior code § 11.1.010)

9.12.020 Parental responsibility.
Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who permits such person to violate the provisions of Section 9.12.010 is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 02-3 § 1 (part): prior code § 11.1.020)

9.12.030 Violators to be detained—Parent or guardian must call for minor.
A.    A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age who violates Section 9.12.010 may be detained until the arrival of a parent, guardian or other proper person having custody or control.

B.    Every parent, guardian or other person having a minor in his or her charge who fails or neglects to go in person or send some suitable person to where the minor is detained, after receiving notice that the minor is detained, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 02-3 § 1 (part): prior code § 11.1.030)

9.12.040 Violation—Penalty.
Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years violating the provisions of Section 9.12.010 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord. 02-3 § 1 (part): prior code § 11.1.040)

9.12.050 Suspension by resolution of the effectiveness or enforcement of this chapter.
The city council shall have the authority, by resolution, to suspend the enforcement of this chapter upon a finding that there is no current need for the enforcement of this chapter and doing so would serve the public health, safety or general welfare. The council shall have the authority, by resolution, to lift the suspension of this chapter upon a finding that there is new or renewed need for the enforcement of this chapter and doing so would serve the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 19-4 § 1 (Exh. A))

 

Chapter 9.16
WEAPONS
Sections:

9.16.010    Discharging weapons prohibited.

9.16.010 Discharging weapons prohibited.
No person shall fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged, within the city limits any firearm, rifle, pistol, pellet gun, gas-operated gun, sling shot, spring gun, bow, crossbow, or any other weapon designed to discharge or propel any projectile capable of causing injury or defacement of property within the city, within five hundred (500) feet of a home, residence or other structure that is or might be occupied by people, or to point or aim such a device at any person or domestic animal or motor vehicle; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to:

A.    Peace officers when acting in the line of duty;

B.    Persons otherwise lawfully acting to protect life or property;

C.    Persons so discharging in or upon an educational institution as a curricular activity or a business establishment licensed by the city for such purposes;

D.    Any person who, with the consent of the owner of a private building, discharges one or more of the above-referenced instruments known as air rifle, air gun, B.B. gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun, gas-operated gun, sling shot, spring gun, bow, or crossbow for personal practice purposes within such private building, where the projectiles thereof cannot penetrate to the exterior of such building. (Ord. 02-3 § 5: prior code § 11.2)

Chapter 9.22
SUBSTITUTED CATHINONES, SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS, AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Sections:

9.22.010    Purpose.

9.22.020    Definitions.

9.22.030    Possession, storage, provision, sale, advertisement, use, purchase, and/or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited.

9.22.040    Declaration of public nuisance.

9.22.050    Summary abatement.

9.22.060    Penalties.

9.22.070    Seizure of evidence.

9.22.080    Exclusions.

9.22.090    Severability.

9.22.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety of the citizens of St. Helena from the dangers and ill effects of substituted cathinones (commonly called “bath salts,” “jewelry cleaner,” and “glass cleaner”), synthetic cannabinoids (commonly known as “spice” or “K2”), and other synthetic drugs by declaring certain activities involving these drugs to be a public nuisance and subject to all available civil and criminal remedies. Without the prohibitions enacted by this chapter, these synthetic drugs can be possessed by individuals without the city’s ability to control the negative effects to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of St. Helena. These negative effects include, but are not limited to, psychoactive behavior and reactions, serious injury, and death caused by its consumption. This chapter is not intended to apply to any activity already regulated by the state synthetic drug laws (California Health and Safety Code Sections 11375.5 and 11401), the federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. Section 81 et seq.), or any other applicable state or federal law or regulation that would preempt local regulation. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word is not defined in this section, the common and ordinary meaning of the word shall apply.

“Business” shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by Section 5.04.010.

“City” shall mean the city of St. Helena, California.

“Distribute,” “distributing,” and “distribution” shall mean to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, or supply, whether for monetary gain or not, other than by lawfully administering or dispensing a controlled substance.

“Person” shall mean any individual, group of two or more individuals, collective as defined in the Compassionate Use Act, business, company, corporation, firm, public corporation, partnership, association, club, or any other similar organization or entity.

“Possess,” “possessing,” and “possession” shall mean to have for consumption, distribution, or sale in one’s actual or constructive custody or control, or under one’s authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority and/or power be exercised solely or jointly with others.

“Provide,” “providing,” and “provision” shall mean offering to distribute or sell a product or substance to any person.

“Psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition, and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.

“Psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition, and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines.

“Sell,” “selling,” and “sale” shall mean to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver, or supply for monetary gain.

“Substituted cathinones (bath salts, jewelry cleaner, glass cleaner)” shall mean any compound, except bupropion or compounds listed under a different schedule, structurally derived from 2-aminopropan-1-one by substitution at the 1-position with either phenyl, naphthyl, or thiophene rings systems, whether or not the compound is further modified in any of the following ways:

1.    By substitution in the ring system to any extent with alkyl, alkylenedioxy, alkoxy, haloalkyl, hydroxyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the ring system by one or more other univalent substituents; or

2.    By substitution at the 3-position with an acyclic alkyl substituent; by substitution at the 2-amino nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups; or

3.    By inclusion of the 2-amino nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.

“Synthetic cannabinoids (spice or K2)” shall mean any of the following cannabinoids, their salts, isomers and salts of isomers, unless specifically excepted, whenever the existence of these salts:

1.    Naphthoylindoles. Any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkymethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

2.    Naphthylmethylindoles. Any compound containing a 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl) methane structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkymethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

3.    Naphthoylpyrroles. Any compound containing a 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl) methane structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkymethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

4.    Naphthylmethylindenes. Any compound containing a naphthylideneindene structure with substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkymethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

5.    Phenylacetylindoles. Any compound containing a 3-phenylacetylindole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

6.    Cyclohexylphenols. Any compound containing a 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol structure with substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring extent.

7.    Benzoylindoles. Any compound containing a 3-(benzoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

8.    2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo [1,2,3-de]-1, 4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone. Some trade or other names: WIN 55,212-2.

9.    9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methylocatan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol. Some trade or other names: HU-210, HU-211.

10.    Adamantoylindoles. Any compound containing a 3-(1-adamantoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl) methyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring system to any extent.

“Synthetic drug” shall include substituted cathinones and synthetic cannabinoids, as those terms are defined by this section. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.030 Possession, storage, provision, sale, advertisement, use, purchase, and/or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited.
A.    It is unlawful and a threat to public safety for any person to possess, store, provide, sell, advertise, use, purchase, or distribute any synthetic drug within the city.

B.    The fact a synthetic drug is marketed, sold, distributed, delivered, traded, bartered, or labeled as “not for human consumption” (or words of similar effect) or identified as having a lawful use does not exempt a person from the application of this chapter.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to store, provide, sell, or distribute or to permit the storage, provision, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs from any real property owned, possessed, managed, or controlled by that person in the city.

D.    The law enforcement personnel enforcing this section may consider any of the following evidentiary factors to determine if the product is a synthetic drug:

1.    The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as crystalline or powder being marketed as “glass cleaner”);

2.    The business providing, distributing, or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute, or sell products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling “bath salts” or “plant food”);

3.    The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors,” or “does not contain chemicals banned by Health and Safety Code Section 11357.5”);

4.    The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as one-half of a gram of a substance marketed as “glass cleaner” costing fifty dollars ($50.00));

5.    The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine or marijuana); or

6.    The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit drug (such as “spice,” “K-2,” “Eight Ballz,” or “Green Buddha”). (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.040 Declaration of public nuisance.
A.    The storage, provision, sale, advertisement, purchase, or distribution of any synthetic drug from any property, structure, or building in the city is declared to be a public nuisance.

B.    Civil Remedies Available—Remedies Cumulative. In addition to the penalties provided in Section 9.22.060, any property used in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city by civil process by means of a restraining order, a preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. All remedies herein are cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.050 Summary abatement.
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death, any violation of this chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If the law enforcement personnel, based on the facts then known, determines that a violation of this chapter presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety, that violation shall be punishable by the summary abatement procedures set forth in Section 1.12.130, including the immediate seizure of any synthetic drugs. If law enforcement personnel confiscate any synthetic drugs pursuant to this section, such synthetic drugs shall be stored pending the conclusion of a post-seizure hearing pursuant to Section 1.12.130 and the conclusion of any related criminal case. Law enforcement personnel shall give notice of a violation of this chapter by issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons identified by law enforcement. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the validity of the citation and the time for requesting that hearing. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.060 Penalties.
A.    Misdemeanor Violation. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction. Law enforcement personnel shall give notice of a violation of this chapter by issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons identified by law enforcement.

B.    Infraction Violation. Where the city attorney determines that, in the interest of justice, a violation of this chapter is an infraction, such infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him/her, unless he/she is arrested and not released on his/her written promise to appear, his/her own recognizance, or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve (12) month period for any violation of this chapter for a crime made punishable as an infraction shall be charged with a misdemeanor upon the third violation.

C.    Separate Offense. Each person committing, causing or maintaining a violation of this chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

D.    Civil Remedies Available—Remedies Cumulative. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance as provided in Section 9.22.040 and may be abated by the city by civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. All remedies herein are cumulative and nonexclusive.

E.    Additional Penalties—Costs of Abatement. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from pursuing the remedies made applicable hereto elsewhere in this code or under state law, including but not limited to, as applicable, denial or revocation of certificates of occupancy and injunctive relief. In any administrative or criminal proceeding involving the abatement of a public nuisance, the city shall also be entitled to recover its full reasonable costs of abatement, including, but not limited to, investigation, analysis and prosecuting the enforcement against the guilty party, upon submission of proof of such cost by the city.

F.    Public Nuisance Remedies. The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance, as provided herein, shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding, where the city has elected, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.070 Seizure of evidence.
Any products or substances stored, possessed, provided, distributed, or sold in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized and stored in accordance with law. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.080 Exclusions.
A.    This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or are specifically permitted by California law.

B.    This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation the state synthetic drug laws (California Health and Safety Code Sections 11375.5 and 11401), and the federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. Section 81 et seq.).

C.    This chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any act that is permitted, prohibited, or preempted by any state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

9.22.090 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section or part of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the part or section declared to be unconstitutional, void or invalid. (Ord. 13-1 § 2 (part))

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.04    Introductory Provisions and Definitions

10.08    Speed Limits

10.12    Turning Movements

10.16    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.20    Miscellaneous Traffic Rules

10.24    Transportation System Management

10.28    Bicycles and Electric Carts

10.32    Skateboards or Similar Devices

10.36    Designated Truck Traffic Routes

Chapter 10.04
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

10.04.010    Definitions.

10.04.020    Rules and regulations regulating operation of vehicles adopted by resolution.

10.04.030    Regulations applying to state highways.

10.04.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this title or any resolution of the city council adopted pursuant hereto, any words or phrases are used which are not defined herein or in such resolutions, but which are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, the definition and meaning shall be applied as set forth and contained in the provisions of the Vehicle Code and amendments thereto. (Prior code § 10.1)

10.04.020 Rules and regulations regulating operation of vehicles adopted by resolution.
A.    The city council, within the reasonable exercise of the police power, may by resolution adopt rules and regulations relating to the operation of vehicles upon the streets and highways of the city as authorized by Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state upon the following matters:

1.    Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on the streets and highways of the city;

2.    Regulating traffic by means of traffic officers;

3.    Regulating traffic by means of semaphores or other traffic-control signaling devices;

4.    Designating particular streets or highways as one-way streets or highways and requiring that all vehicles thereon be moved in one specified direction;

5.    Designating any street or highway as a through street or highway requiring that all vehicles stop before entering or crossing the same or designating any intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;

6.    Closing any street or highway or portion thereof to vehicular traffic when in the opinion of the city council such street or highway or any portion thereof is no longer needed for vehicular traffic;

7.    Prohibiting the use of particular streets or highways by certain vehicles except as otherwise provided by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 1031) of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code.

B.    No resolution adopted under subsection (A)(4), (5), (6) and (7) of this section shall be effective until signs giving notice of such traffic laws are posted at all entrances to streets or highways or parts thereof affected. All signs giving notices of any such traffic laws and regulations shall conform to the specifications applicable thereto as set forth in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.2)

10.04.030 Regulations applying to state highways.
Any provision of this title which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the Department of Transportation is required by law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Transportation. Immediately upon the effective date of such revocation, the city clerk shall enter upon the original copy of the ordinance from which this section was derived a notification of such withdrawal.

Whenever this chapter delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by law requires the prior approval of the Department of Transportation, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway, without the prior approval in writing of the Department of Transportation when and to the extent required by Division 9 and Division 11 of the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.7)

Chapter 10.08
SPEED LIMITS
Sections:

10.08.010    Prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour on city streets.

10.08.020    Increase of prima facie speed limits on certain streets.

10.08.010 Prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour on city streets.
A.    Except as may otherwise be determined and declared in this chapter, the prima facie speed limit on all public streets of the city is declared to be twenty-five (25) miles per hour.

B.    The prima facie speed limit on Main Street (State Highway 29) shall be as established by the state.

C.    Except as may otherwise be determined and declared in this code, the prima facie speed limit on private roads open for public use as established in Section 10.20.020 of this code shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 06-10 § 2; prior code § 10.8)

10.08.020 Increase of prima facie speed limits on certain streets.*
On the basis of engineering and traffic surveys, and in accordance with provisions of the California Vehicle Code, the following prima facie speed limits are determined and declared:

A.    On the following streets or portions of streets, the prima facie speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour:

1.    Madrona Avenue between Hudson Avenue and Reisling Way.

B.    On the following streets or portions of streets, the prima facie speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour:

1.    Pratt Avenue between Main Street and the easterly city limit;

2.    South Crane Avenue between Grayson Avenue and Sulphur Springs Avenue;

3.    Howell Mountain Road between Conn Valley Road and Silverado Trail.

C.    On the following street or portion of street, the prima facie speed limit is fifteen (15) miles per hour when children are present:

1.    Oak Avenue between Adams Street and Spring Street. (Ord. 06-10 § 1; Ord. 93-18 § 1; prior code § 10.9)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 93-18 is included in the code as of April 2013, having previously been left out due to an oversight during the original 1993 codification.

Chapter 10.12
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sections:

10.12.010    U-turns prohibited at certain intersections.

10.12.020    Evading compliance with traffic-control devices.

10.12.030    Left turns prohibited onto Main Street.

10.12.040    Sign indicating prohibition against turns.

10.12.010 U-turns prohibited at certain intersections.
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any of the following street intersections in the city:

A.    Intersection of Spring and Main Streets;

B.    Intersection of Hunt Avenue and Main Street;

C.    Intersection of Pine and Main Streets.

(Prior code § 10.4)

10.12.020 Evading compliance with traffic-control devices.
No person shall operate any vehicle on any public or private property in order to avoid or evade compliance with traffic-control devices on the adjacent public street or streets, or for the purpose of executing any turning movement which is prohibited on the adjacent public street. (Prior code § 10.5)

10.12.030 Left turns prohibited onto Main Street.
A.    There shall be no left turns onto Main Street from the following locations:

1.    Mitchell Drive.

B.    The city engineer shall cause to be erected such signs as may be necessary to indicate the above regulations. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.5.1)

10.12.040 Sign indicating prohibition against turns.
Appropriate signs giving notice of the prohibition of the vehicle turns enumerated in this chapter shall be erected at such street intersections. (Prior code § 10.6)

Chapter 10.16
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sections:

10.16.010    Regulation of parking by resolution.

10.16.020    Removal of tire marking prohibited.

10.16.030    Regulation of parking in certain emergencies.

10.16.040    Painting of curbs to indicate parking—Meaning of different colors.

10.16.050    Parking on Money Way.

10.16.060    Parking more than seventy-two consecutive hours.

10.16.070    Parking for sale or repair.

10.16.080    Parking of trailers, wide vehicles.

10.16.090    Lines or markings indicating parking spaces—Parking within spaces.

10.16.100    Privately owned off-street parking facilities designated.

10.16.110    Private parking lots.

10.16.120    Statutory provisions applicable.

10.16.010 Regulation of parking by resolution.
The city council may, by resolution, regulate parking upon any street or highway of the city, including the determination and designation of parking time limit within any designated area within the city, and prohibiting parking upon any street or highway or portion thereof, and it is authorized and directed, in the event of the adoption of any such resolution pursuant hereto, to place, paint and maintain or cause to be placed, painted or maintained the necessary signs, markers or painted curbs that may be required by the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state and any amendments thereto. (Prior code § 10.10)

10.16.020 Removal of tire marking prohibited.
No person shall remove or cause to be removed, altered, covered or distorted, in any manner, marks placed on a vehicle tire by a parking enforcement officer of the city while the vehicle is parked in a time limit zone. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.10.010)

10.16.030 Regulation of parking in certain emergencies.
Wherever the police chief determines that an emergency traffic congestion likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, he or she shall have authority to place or have placed temporary signs indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys or sides thereof as the police chief may designate during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the police chief shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the direction and provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 10.11)

10.16.040 Painting of curbs to indicate parking—Meaning of different colors.
Whenever the city council enacts parking regulations by ordinance or resolution and indicates them by the use of paint upon curbs pursuant to Section 21458 of the Vehicle Code of the state the regulations shall be effective on the days and at the times prescribed as follows:

A.    Red indicates no stopping, standing or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone.

B.    Yellow indicates no stopping, standing or parking between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. When a yellow zone is adjacent to school premises, the prohibition shall apply only on school days between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and nine a.m. and two p.m. to four p.m.

When designating yellow zones the city council shall designate one of two types of yellow zones as follows:

1.    Twenty (20) minute zone in which loading or unloading of passengers or freight shall not consume more than twenty (20) minutes;

2.    Sixty (60) minute zone in which loading or unloading of passengers or freight shall not consume more than sixty (60) minutes.

C.    White indicates no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or depositing of mail in an adjacent mailbox between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays. Such permitted stopping, standing or parking during restricted hours shall not consume more than five minutes; provided, however, that when a white zone is adjacent to school premises the restriction shall apply on school days between eight-thirty a.m. and three-thirty p.m., and that when a white zone is in front of a mail box the restriction shall apply at all times.

D.    Green indicates no standing, stopping or parking for longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays.

E.    Blue indicates no stopping, standing, parking or use for any purpose whatsoever, at any time, except by vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections 22511.5 or 9105. (Prior code § 10.11.1)

10.16.050 Parking on Money Way.
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon Money Way in the city, except within a yellow zone approved by resolution of the city council and in conformance with regulations established for parking in a yellow zone in which loading or unloading of passengers or freight shall not consume more than twenty (20) minutes. For any yellow zone approved on Money Way, restrictions and regulations relating to yellow zones shall apply at all times, without limitation with regard to time of day, day of week or holidays. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.12)

10.16.060 Parking more than seventy-two consecutive hours.
A.    No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle upon any public street for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.

B.    Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of subsection A of this section may be removed by any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department. Such removal shall be done in accordance with the applicable provision of the Vehicle Code of the state. Prior to such removal and if the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records of the Department of Motor Vehicles the name and address of registered and legal owner thereof, the officer shall give or cause to be given twenty-four (24) hours’ notice in writing to such registered and legal owner of the intent to remove such vehicle and the grounds therefore. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.12.010)

10.16.070 Parking for sale or repair.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:

A.    Displaying such vehicle for sale;

B.    Greasing, changing oil of or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.13)

10.16.080 Parking of trailers, wide vehicles.
A.    Parking of Commercial Trailers. No person shall park, maintain stationary or leave unattended on any public street or right-of-way for road purposes within the city for a period of time longer than two hours any commercial trailer or semi-trailer, unless such vehicle is attached to a truck, tractor or other vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semi-trailer.

B.    Parking of Wide Vehicles. No person shall stop, maintain stationary, leave unattended or park any vehicle on any public street or right of way for road purposes within the city for a period of time longer than two hours under any one of the following circumstances:

1.    The vehicle has a width or load width in excess of eighty-four (84) inches.

2.    Any part of the vehicle or load is within ten (10) feet of the center of the street.

3.    Any part of the vehicle or load is located further than ninety-six inches (96) from the face of curb.

4.    The vehicle has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more.

C.    Exception. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to trailers or semi-trailers in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semi-trailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semi-trailer on the portion of the street or right of way ordinarily used for vehicular parking.

D.    Findings and Determination. The city council finds and determines that:

1.    A dangerous hazard exists within the city in connection with the on-street parking on public rights-of-way of large recreational vehicles and commercial trailers and semi-trailer rigs;

2.    There have been many instances where the owners or operators of commercial trailers, commercial semi-trailers and trailer rigs have detached the commercial trailers or semi-trailers from the truck tractor thereof, and have left the same stored upon public streets many times overnight, and sometimes for several days and nights;

3.    Storage of large recreational vehicles and attached and detached trailers and semitrailers on public streets is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare inasmuch as the same are a hazard to traffic and other persons lawfully using the streets, and that such storage is not the parking or standing of a vehicle as contemplated by the Vehicle Code; and

4.    The storage of detached trailers or semi-trailers on public streets is not an authorized public use of the streets, and should be restricted. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.17)

10.16.090 Lines or markings indicating parking spaces—Parking within spaces.
The superintendent of streets shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or street designating each public parking space. No person shall park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.18)

10.16.100 Privately owned off-street parking facilities designated.
The city council finds and declares that the following described privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities within the city are generally held open for the use of the public or purposes of vehicular parking:

A.

Safeway/Smiths Pharmacy Parking lot

Assessors Parcels

9-20-14 and 9-20-15

B.

Sunshine parking lot

Assessors Parcels

9-26-6, 9-26-14, 9-26-16, 9-26-17

(Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.55)

10.16.110 Private parking lots.
A.    No person shall park, leave standing, or cause or permit to be left standing any vehicle upon any privately owned off-street parking facility or lot when the adjoining business commercial establishments are not open for business without the written consent of the owner of such privately owned parking facility or lot.

B.    No person shall enter and remain upon any privately owned off-street parking facility or lot when the adjoining business or commercial establishments are not open for business without the written consent of the owner of such privately owned parking facility or lot. (Ord. 02-3 § 16: prior code § 11.7)

10.16.120 Statutory provisions applicable.
The provisions of California Vehicle Code Sections 22507.8, 22350, 23103, 23109 and of California Vehicle Code Division 16.5 (Sections 38000 et seq.) and of any other applicable California Vehicle Code sections now in effect or hereafter amended shall apply to all of the privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities described in Section 10.16.100 of this chapter. (Prior code § 10.56)

Chapter 10.20
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
Sections:

10.20.010    Excessive acceleration.

10.20.020    Private roads open for public use.

10.20.030    Special load/size limits on Pope Street Bridge.

10.20.010 Excessive acceleration.
No person shall operate a vehicle on a street or alley of the city in such a manner as to facilitate its speed by means of leaving rear wheel frictional tire rubber marks, caused by rapid acceleration. (Prior code § 10.3)

10.20.020 Private roads open for public use.
A.    The city council finds and declares that the privately owned and maintained roads within the city which are described in subsection C of this section are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic and so connect with public streets and highways that the public cannot determine that such roads are not public streets or highways, or that the roads are generally held open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel to serve commercial establishments.

B.    All provisions of the California Vehicle Code and this code relating to motor vehicles and traffic shall apply to the roads described in subsection C of this section.

C.    The privately owned and maintained roads which are the subject of subsections A and B of this section are as follows:

1.    Streets in St. Helena Park:

a.    Hasty Court,

b.    St. James Drive,

c.    Wallis Court,

d.    Nemo Court,

e.    Voorhees Circle,

f.    Reed Court,

g.    St. James Court;

2.    Vallejo Street (portion);

3.    Bella Vista Court;

4.    Charter Oak (portion);

5.    Alexander Court;

6.    Peppertree Circle;

7.    Hollis Lane.

(Prior code § 10.54.1)

10.20.030 Special load/size limits on Pope Street Bridge.
A.    No person shall operate or be permitted to operate on the Pope Street Bridge:

1.    Any vehicle over 7.5 feet wide; or

2.    Any vehicle over twenty-four (24) feet long.

B.    The city council finds and determines that:

1.    The Pope Street Bridge is a two-lane bridge that connects the Silverado Trail to Pope Street in the city of St. Helena. It was built in 1894 and was not designed to accommodate oversized vehicular traffic.

2.    The Pope Street Bridge is 18.4 feet wide and one hundred seventy-seven (177) feet long and has no sidewalks or shoulders.

3.    The Pope Street Bridge has an S turn heading westbound and an abrupt left-hand turn from the eastbound direction. The design of the roadway makes it impossible for vehicles over 7.5 feet wide or twenty-four (24) feet long to drive on the bridge without driving over the center line in the roadway, creating a traffic hazard for oncoming traffic.

C.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent oversized vehicles from crossing the Pope Street Bridge. The bridge was constructed in 1894 and was not designed to accommodate oversized vehicular traffic. There are several alternative routes into the city of St. Helena and restricting oversized vehicular traffic will not impact access or egress into the city limits.

D.    Penalties. In addition to any other penalty or remedy available or imposed by any other law or equity, any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as set forth in Chapter 1.20 and be fined the maximum penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

E.    Private Right of Action. Any person or organization aggrieved by a violation of any provision of this section shall have the right to file an action for injunctive relief and/or damages. Treble damages shall be awarded for willful failure to comply with the payment obligation established by this section. (Ord. 12-8)

Chapter 10.24
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
Sections:

10.24.010    Purpose.

10.24.020    Authority.

10.24.030    Findings.

10.24.040    Definitions.

10.24.050    Requirements.

10.24.060    Violations—Penalties.

10.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish transportation system management (TSM) requirements for employers located in the city. These requirements will promote alternative commute modes and reduce the total number of vehicle trips as part of a program to achieve the following objectives:

A.    Reduce peak period traffic and congestion by decreasing the number of single-occupant vehicle trips and associated with commuting;

B.    Reduce or delay the need for major transportation facility improvements by making more efficient use of existing facilities;

C.    Reduce present and future motor vehicle emissions as a contribution towards complying with federal and state ambient air quality standards;

D.    Establish TSM goals for employers so that a significant number of their employees are encouraged to arrive at the work site by means other than single-occupant vehicles. (Prior code § 10.57)

10.24.020 Authority.
Government Code Section 65089 requires cities and counties to adopt and implement a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. The California Clean Air Act requires the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) to use all feasible means to meet the state air quality standards. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.58)

10.24.030 Findings.
The city council finds and declares that:

A.    The city is projected by both the state and the Bay Area Association of Governments to experience growth in population which will result in increases in traffic volume;

B.    The geographical and meteorological conditions in the city are conducive to the formation of air pollution attributed largely to motor vehicle emissions according to both state and regional air pollution control agencies;

C.    Transportation systems management techniques, including but not limited to ridesharing, transit, compressed work weeks and bicycle use among employees are effective means of reducing work-related trips. A reduction in the number of trips will reduce congestion and vehicle emissions. (Prior code § 10.59)

10.24.040 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Average vehicle ridership (AVR)” is the number of employees who start work at a work site during the peak period divided by the number of vehicles those employees use to arrive at the work site, averaged over the survey week as calculated pursuant to Section 10.24.050(K).

“Buspool” means a privately operated or chartered bus which provides commute transportation on a subscription basis. This term is also known as a “club bus”.

“Carpool” means a vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together between their residence and their work site or destination for the majority of the total trip distance. Employees who work for different employers, as well as nonemployed people, are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of the total trip distance.

“Commute trip” means the trip made by an employee from home to the work site. The commute trip may include stops between home and the work site.

“Compressed work week” means a regular full-time work schedule which eliminates at least one round-trip commute trip (both home-to-work and work-to-home) at least once every two weeks. Examples include, but are not limited to, working three twelve (12) hour days (3/36) or four ten (10) hour days (4/40) within a one-week period; or eight nine hour days and one eight-hour day (9/80) within a two-week period.

“Disabled employee,” for purposes of the performance objective calculation pursuant to BAAQMD Section 13-1-601, means an employee with a physical impairment which prevents the employee from traveling to the work site by means other than a vehicle and the employee has been issued a disabled person placard or plate from the Department of Motor Vehicles.

“Employee” means any person conducting work activity for an employer twenty (20) or more hours per week on a regular full-time or part-time basis. The term includes independent contractors. The term excludes field construction workers, field personnel, seasonal/temporary employees and volunteers.

“Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)” means an employee, other individual, or entity appointed by an employer to develop, market, administer and monitor the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan on a full or part-time basis.

“Employee transportation survey” means a city-approved questionnaire distributed by employers to employees designed to provide sufficient information to calculate AVR (see definition as defined in this section) or VER (see definition as defined in this section) for the work site pursuant to Sections 10.24.050(G) and (K).

“Employer” means any person(s), trust, firm, business, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, non profit agency or corporation, educational institution, school district, hospital or other health care facility, or federal, state, city or county government department, agency or district, or any other special purpose public agency or district. A city, county or city and county is a single employer for purposes of this chapter, not individual departments or agencies of the city, county or city and county. Individual departments or agencies of the state and the federal government are separate employers for the purposes of this chapter. The term includes for-profit, not-for-profit and nonprofit enterprises. Several subsidiaries or units that occupy the same work site and report to one common governing board or governing entity or that function as one corporate unit are considered to be one employer. The term shall not include employers with no permanent work site within the city.

“Employer program manager” means an employee with policy and budget authority who is responsible for the implementation of the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan and for fulfilling the requirements of this chapter.

“Employer trip reduction plan” means a document describing in detail the employer trip reduction program, including an implementation schedule, budget and all the elements listed in Section 10.24.050 (H)(1) which is submitted to the city for review and approval pursuant to Section 10.24.050 (H).

“Employer trip reduction program” means a group of measures developed and implemented by an employer that are designed to provide transportation information, assistance and incentives to employees. The purpose of such measures is to reduce the number of motor vehicles driven to the work site by increasing AVR or decreasing VER, and to achieve and maintain the performance objectives listed in Section 10.24.050 (D).

“Field construction worker” means an employee who reports for work to a temporary field construction site.

“Field personnel” means employees who spend twenty percent (20%) or less of their work-time at the work site and who do not report to the work site during the peak period for pick-up and dispatch of an employer-provided vehicle.

“Independent contractor” means an individual who enters into a direct written contract or agreement with an employer to perform certain services. The period of the contract or agreement is at least ninety (90) continuous days or is open-ended.

“Peak period” means the time from six a.m., through ten a.m., Monday through Friday inclusive.

“Seasonal/temporary employee” means an employee who works for the employer for less than ninety (90) continuous days (three months) within a calendar year.

“Single-occupant vehicle” means a vehicle occupied by one employee.

“Survey week” means a regular five day Monday through Friday (inclusive) work-week. The survey week for work sites with Saturday and Sunday work schedules will include only those work days Monday through Friday. The survey week cannot contain a federal, state or local holiday regardless of whether the holiday is observed by the employer. A survey week that meets the above criteria is to be selected by the employer during January through May, or September through November for the employee transportation surveys required by Section 10.24.050 (G). The survey week cannot be Ride-share Week or contain any other rideshare or transit promotional event, e.g., “Beat the Back-Up”.

“Telecommuting” means a system of working at home or at an off-site, nonhome telecommute facility for the full work day on a regular basis of at least one day per week.

“Vanpool” means a vehicle occupied by seven to fifteen (15) employees, including the driver who commute together to work for the majority of their individual commute trip distance. Employees who work for different employers are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of their individual trip distance.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except the following: (1) a device moved exclusively by human power; (2) a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; (3) buses used for public or private transit. Examples of vehicles include, but are not limited to, passenger cars, motorcycles, vans and pickup trucks.

“Vehicle employee ratio (VER)” is the number of vehicles used by employees who start work at a work site during the peak period divided by the number of those employees averaged over the survey week as calculated pursuant to Section 10.24.050 (K). VER is the reciprocal of AVR.

“Volunteer” means an individual who does not receive any wages, salary or other form of financial reimbursement from the employer for services provided.

“Work activity” means any activity for which an employee receives remuneration from an employer. Telecommuting is a work activity.

“Work site” means any property, real or personal, which is being operated, utilized, maintained or owned by an employer as part of an identifiable enterprise. All property on contiguous, adjacent or proximate sites separated only by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, served by a common circulation or access system, and not separated by an impassable barrier to bicycle or pedestrian travel such as a freeway or flood control channel is included as part of the work site. If two or more employers each have one hundred (100) or more employees at a single work site, then that work site is considered a separate work site for each employer. (Prior code § 10.60)

10.24.050 Requirements.
A.    Applicability. This chapter applies to all public and private employers with one hundred (100) or more employees at a work site. This chapter applies only to work sites with one hundred (100) or more employees. If an employer has one hundred (100) or more employees but no single work site with one hundred (100) or more employees, this chapter does not apply to that employer. For purposes of determining the applicability of this chapter, the number of employees at a work site is determined as the maximum number of employees reporting to that work site on any single weekday Monday through Friday during the current calendar or fiscal year.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Employee Minimum Level. A work site of one hundred (100) or more employees where less than fifty (50) of these employees normally start work during the peak period is exempt from all requirements of this chapter.

2.    Exemption—Performance Objectives Achieved. Employer may qualify for an exemption from the requirements of this chapter as specified in this section.

a.    Work sites that achieve the 1999 performance objectives specified in subsection D of this section as demonstrated pursuant to subsection G of this section are exempt from all other requirements of this chapter except for this section.

b.    Work sites that meet the requirements of subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section must submit to the city, in a format approved by the city, a listing of the measures or reasons for achieving the 1999 performance objectives.

c.    Work sites that meet the requirements of subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section must demonstrate continued achievement of the 1999 performance objectives by conducting an employee transportation survey pursuant to subsection G of this section once every three years.

d.    Work sites that do not continue to demonstrate achievement of the 1999 performance objectives pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section no longer qualify for the exemption provided by this section and become subject to the requirements of this chapter at that time.

3.    Exemption—Construction Site. Construction sites are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. For purposes of this section:

a.    “Construction” means the on-site fabrication, erection or installation of a physical structure such as a building, roadway, bridge, etc.; and

b.    “Site” has the same meaning as “work site.”

C.    Effective Dates. Employers become subject to this chapter upon adoption and publication according to law.

D.    Performance Objectives. Performance objectives are expressed in terms of AVR and VER. Employers have the option of reporting performance in terms of either AVR or VER or both. The performance objectives for the city, by year, by type follows:

 

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

AVR

1.05

1.10

1.15

1.20

1.25

1.30

1.30

VER

0.93

0.90

0.87

0.83

0.80

0.77

0.77

E.    Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). Employers must have an ETC(s) as specified within this section.

1.    Employers shall appoint an ETC for each affected work site. Employers with multiple affected work sites within the city may appoint one ETC for more than one work site.

2.    ETC’s must complete a training curriculum certified by the Bay Area Air Pollution Control District air pollution control officer within nine months of the effective dates hereof as specified in subsection (C) of this section, or within six months of appointment when appointed after the initial nine month time frame.

3.    The employer may apply to the city for a waiver from the training requirement of subsection (E)(2) of this section when an ETC has one or more years of experience in trip reduction or equivalent skills.

4.    An ETC may also serve as the employer program manager; provided, that the individual meets the criteria specified in Section 10.24.040.

F.    Employer Program Manager. Employers must have an employer program manager as specified in this section.

1.    Employers shall appoint an employer program manager. Employers with multiple affected work sites within the city may appoint one employer program manager for more than one work site, even when these work sites are located in different zones.

G.    Employee Transportation Surveys. Employers must conduct employee transportation surveys as specified in this section to establish whether the performance objectives listed in subsection D of this section have been achieved.

1.    An employer shall conduct an employee transportation survey consistent with the procedure contained in subsection K of this section and submit the survey responses to the city in accordance with the schedule contained in subsection (G)(7) of this section.

2.    An employer has the option of processing the employee transportation surveys on-site or having the surveys processed by an outside entity. Survey processing must be consistent with the procedures contained in subsection K of this section, verifiable records must be maintained, and the survey results are to be submitted to the city in accordance with the schedule contained in subsection (G)(7) of this section.

3.    An employer may use a random sample employee survey method consistent with subsection L of this section for work sites where four hundred (400) or more employees start work during the peak period.

4.    The city will notify employers of the due date for subsequent year surveys.

5.    Employee transportation surveys are to be conducted annually unless a work site demonstrates that a future year performance objective is achieved. These work sites are required to survey every other year as long as future year performance objectives continue to be achieved.

6.    An employer shall not offer any special incentives or disincentives in addition to its regular employer trip reduction program during the survey week. This limitation does not apply to activities undertaken by an employer in response to a Bay Area Air Quality Management District forecast exceedance day, e.g., the “Spare the Air” campaign.

7.    Employee transportation surveys are to be conducted as follows:

a.    Employers subject to this chapter November 1, 1993, must conduct an employee transportation survey at those work sites by May 31, 1994.

b.    Employers subject to this chapter July 1, 1994, with work sites of one hundred (100) to four hundred ninety-nine (499) employees must conduct an employee transportation survey of those work sites by May 31, 1995.

c.    Employee transportation survey results are to be submitted to the city within ninety (90) days of the survey week.

d.    Subject to the city approval, an employee transportation survey conducted prior to the effective dates hereof may be submitted to fulfill the requirements of this subsection (G)(7)(d); provided, that: (1) the survey was conducted within six months of its submittal date; and (2) it provides sufficient data to calculate the performance objective pursuant to subsection K of this section.

8.    Employers who become subject to this chapter subsequent to the schedule above due to an increase in employees or the establishment of a new or expanded work site shall conduct an employee transportation survey within six months after meeting the requirements of subsection A of this section. The dates in subsection (G)(7) of this section apply regarding submittal to the city.

H.    Requirement to Submit Employer Trip Reduction Plan. Employers that do not achieve the performance objectives established in subsection D of this section for the applicable year at any work site subject to this chapter shall prepare and submit an employer trip reduction plan for that work site to the city within one hundred twenty (120) days of a determination that the performance objective was not achieved. An employer may submit a consolidated plan that covers multiple work sites. The city will issue a determination that the performance objective has not been achieved based upon information received pursuant to subsection (G) of this section.

1.    The employer trip reduction plan shall contain the following:

a.    A detailed description and inventory of trip reduction measures including a list of specific trip reduction measures already implemented;

b.    A description, schedule, and commitment to implement additional or enhanced measures which include all reasonable, feasible and cost effective trip reduction measures that can be expected to bring about a significant progress toward achievement of the performance objectives. The plan should include appropriate measures designed to address unique characteristics of the work site;

c.    Summary and discussion of the results of an attitudinal survey of employees or an employer/employee work group designed to ascertain employee attitudes toward various incentive and disincentive measures;

d.    A discussion of the progress achieved to date and an analysis of why the work site(s) did not achieve the performance objectives including special issues, circumstances or conditions at the work site;

e.    A budget indicating all current and projected expenditures for the trip reduction measures.

2.    The plan shall be submitted by the highest ranking responsible official of the employer at the work site or each work site when a consolidated plan is submitted that covers multiple work sites.

3.    At the option of an employer, the employer trip reduction plan may include an alternative emission reduction program that demonstrates that the measures included in such program will achieve emission reductions equal to or greater than those that would have been realized if the performance objectives were achieved, and that these alternative measures are not required by any other federal, state or local control measure or regulatory requirement. Such an alternative emission reduction program shall include an update or progress monitoring report to be submitted at least every two years to fulfill the requirement of subsection (H)(7) of this section.

4.    The city shall approve and the employer shall implement an employer trip reduction plan that includes all reasonable, feasible and cost effective trip reduction measures that can be expected to bring about significant progress toward achievement of the performance objectives given the constraints of the work site, the nature of the work activity and the geographical distribution of employees relative to the work site; or the city shall approve an alternative demonstration pursuant to subsection (H)(3) of this section. The city shall disapprove any plan that does not meet the above specified approval criteria.

5.    An employer shall revise and resubmit to the city any disapproved plan within ninety (90) days of the disapproval. If the revised plan is disapproved, the employer has one additional ninety (90) day opportunity to revise and resubmit a plan before final disapproval. Final disapproval is a violation of the chapter subject to penalty.

6.    An employer may appeal any city disapproval of its employer trip reduction plan pursuant to subsection I of this section.

7.    An employer subject to this section shall update its employer trip reduction plan once every two years after plan approval until such time as the performance objective is achieved. Such plan updates are to be submitted every two years to the city on or before the anniversary date of plan approval.

8.    An employer subject to this section shall continue to meet the requirements of subsection G of this section.

9.    An employer shall revise and resubmit its employer trip reduction plan within ninety (90) days of a final determination that an element of an approved employer trip reduction plan violates any provision of law is issued by an agency or court with jurisdiction to make such determination.

I.    Appeal of Plan Disapproval. An employer may appeal a plan disapproval made pursuant to subsection H of this section to the city through the procedure listed below:

1.    The employer submits a written notice of appeal to the city within thirty (30) days of plan disapproval.

2.    The city council will convene to hear the appeal.

3.    The city council shall issue its decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing.

4.    The due date for revised employer trip reduction plans pursuant to subsection (H)(5) of this section will be suspended during the appeal process authorized by this section.

J.    Confidentiality. The city will treat the information and data specified in this section as confidential.

1.    The city shall treat individual employee transportation survey responses, records and results submitted pursuant to subsection (G) of this section in a confidential manner and shall not release any information about individual employees to the public. Both aggregate and work site performance objective results for an employer shall be within the public domain.

2.    The city shall treat employer budget information submitted pursuant to subsection (H)(1)(E) of this section in a confidential manner and shall not release any budget information about individual employers to the public. Aggregate and generic budget information for trip reduction programs and measures shall be within the public domain.

K.    Performance Objective Calculations. AVR or VER for each affected work site is to be computed in a manner consistent with the following method:

1.    The employer conducts an employee transportation survey during a survey week.

2.    AVR is calculated only for those employees who start work or are assigned to the work site during the peak period.

3.    If less than sixty percent (60%) of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, all survey forms not returned from those employees who start work during the peak period shall be counted as single-occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR or VER.

4.    If sixty percent (60%) or more of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, one-half of those survey forms not returned from those employees who start work during the peak period shall be assumed to have the same AVR or VER as that calculated from the responses to the surveys returned, and one-half shall be counted as single-occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR or VER.

5.    AVR for the work site shall be calculated by dividing the total “employee-days” for the survey week by the total “vehicle trip-days” for the survey week.

6.    VER for the work site shall be calculated by dividing the total “vehicle trip-days” for the survey week by the total “employee-days” for the survey week.

a.    Employee-days shall be determined as follows: The total number of employees who start work or are assigned to a work site during the peak period each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. Each day of the survey week that an employee starts work during the peak period counts as one employee-day. For example, an employee who starts work each day Monday through Friday of the survey week between six a.m. and ten a.m., counts as five employee-days. The following procedures are used in totaling employee-days:

i.    Employees telecommuting or are off due to a compressed work week schedule are counted as reporting to the work site in calculating the total employee-days.

ii.    The following employees are not included in the employee-days total:

(A)    Employees not working because of vacation, sickness or other time-off;

(B)    Employees who report to a different work site or an off-site work related activity;

(C)    Disabled employees.

b.    Vehicle trip-days shall be determined as follows: The total number of vehicles used by employees who start work or are assigned to the work site each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. A vehicle trip-day is based on the means of transportation used for the greatest distance of an employee’s home to work commute trip. An employee who starts work during the peak period and arrives at the work site each day of the survey week Monday through Friday in a single-occupant vehicle count as five vehicle trip-days. The following numerical values are used in calculating the total vehicle trip-days:

i.    Single-occupant vehicle (drive alone) equals one.

ii.    Carpool equals one divided by the number of people in the carpool.

iii.    Vanpool equals one divided by the number of employees in the vanpool.

iv.    Motorcycle, moped, motorized scooter or motor bike equal one.

v.    Clean-fueled vehicles are counted as follows:

(A)    Electric vehicle equals zero;

(B)    Compressed natural gas vehicle equals one-fourth;

(C)    Propane vehicle equals one-half;

(D)    Dual or flexible fueled vehicle equals three-fourths.

vi.    The following all equal zero vehicle trip-days:

(A)    Public transit (bus, light rail, ferry, Caltrain, BART);

(B)    Private buspool or club bus;

(C)    Bicycle;

(D)    Waling and other nonmotorized transportation modes;

(E)    Employees telecommuting (only on the days those employees are telecommuting for the entire day);

(F)    Employees who work a compressed work week schedule (only on their compressed day(s) off);

(G)    Disabled employee vehicles at all times.

7.    Employers with multiple work sites within the city have the option to average individual work site AVR or VER to demonstrate that the performance objectives are achieved on an aggregate basis for those work sites when the city is implementing the chapter. If the employer demonstrates that the performance objectives (subsection D of this section) are achieved using the averaging methodology, then those work sites included in the averaging are not subject to the requirements of subsection H of this section.

a.    The weighted AVR average of the multiple work sites is calculated by: (1) adding together the employee-days for each work site; (2) adding together the vehicle trip-days for each work site; then (3) dividing the aggregate “employee-days” by the aggregate “vehicle trip-days” to obtain the weighted AVR average.

b.    The weighted VER average for the multiple work sites is calculated by dividing the aggregate “vehicle trip-days” by the aggregate “employee-days”.

c.    The weighted VER average for multiple work sites can also be calculated as the number of peak period employees multiplied by VER (Site 1) plus the number of peak period employees multiplied by VER (Site 2) divided by the total peak period employees (Sites 1 and 2).

L.    Random Sample Method. The method described in this subsection must be followed when an employer chooses to use a random sample to meet the requirements of subsection K of this section.

1.    Summary.

a.    Subsection (G)(3) of this section provides an option for larger work sites to calculate AVR or VER based upon a random sample of the employee population. The random sample option is available only for work sites where four hundred (400) or more employees start work during the peak period six a.m. through ten a.m.).

b.    The size of the random sample depends upon the number of employees who start work during the peak period at the work site. The means to determine the minimum size of the random sample is described in subsection (L)(2)(b) of this section.

c.    The sample must be selected as described in subsection (L)(2)(d) of this section. Once the sample group has been selected, the employer is not permitted to send additional survey forms to employees beyond the original sample group. This will invalidate the results of the survey and void the employer’s option to utilize the random sample method.

d.    A high response rate is critical to ensure that the random sample produces an accurate AVR or VER for the work site. The employer should make a concerted effort to obtain a completed survey from each employee in the sample. All non-respondents in the sample will be treated as drive alone commuters (i.e., commuting in a single-occupant vehicle) for purposes of calculating the work site AVR or VER.

2.    Basic Random Sample Selection Methodology.

a.    The employer shall compile a complete list of employees at the work site, in alphabetical order, and assign a consecutive number to each employee. The employer shall exclude from the list employees who are known to regularly start work outside the six a.m. through ten a.m. peak period.

b.    The employer shall determine the number of employees to be included in the random sample using the following formula, where “n” is the sample size and “N” is the number of employees who start work between six a.m. and ten a.m.

n =

N

1 + .0026(N-1)

A sample of size “n” based on this formula should produce an AVR or VER with a sampling error of, at most, plus or minus 0.05, with ninety-five percent (95%) probability. The sample size based on this formula is displayed in the table below:

Number of Peak Period Employees @ Work Site

Sample Size

400 to 420

200

421 to 440

205

441 to 460

210

461 to 480

214

481 to 500

218

501 to 550

225

551 to 600

235

601 to 650

240

651 to 700

248

701 to 750

255

751 to 800

260

801 to 850

265

851 to 900

270

901 to 950

274

951 to 1,000

278

1,001 to 1,500

300

1,501 to 2,000

320

2,001 to 3,000

340

3,001 to 4,000

350

4,001 to 6,000

360

6,001 to 10,000

370

>10,000

 

c.    In no case can the random sample size be less than indicated in the above table. The employer may choose to include a larger number of employees in the survey. A larger sample group should more accurately represent the entire employee population; provided, that the employer obtains a high response rate.

d.    After the sample size has been determined, the employer has two options for selecting the sample:

i.    Use a computer program to select distinct random numbers from the employee list (e.g., two hundred seventy-eight (278) distinct random numbers between one and one thousand (1,000), where one thousand (1,000) employees start work during the peak period);

ii.    Select employees from the list based upon a sampling interval and random starting number.

To determine the sampling interval, the employer shall divide the total population of employees who start work during the six a.m., through ten a.m., peak period by the sample size and round the result down to the nearest integer.

Example: If a work site has one thousand (1,000) employees who start work during the peak period and the sample size is two hundred seventy-eight (278), then the sampling interval equals 1,000 divided by 278 = 3.6. The 3.6 is rounded down to 3 to produce the sampling interval. Therefore, every third name on the list shall be selected beginning at a random starting number X where X is between 1 and 3. If X equals 3, then the sample would include numbers 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, etc., until the required two hundred seventy-eight (278) numbers have been selected.

e.    The methodology described in subsection (L)(2)(d) of this section will eliminate potential bias that could result from choosing survey participants on the basis of department, rank, income level, home zip code or other demographic factors, or from excluding certain segments of the employee population.

3.    Selection Process for Subsequent Surveys.

a.    In subsequent surveys, the employer may select the random sample using the method described in subsection (L)(2) of this section or the employer may choose to survey the same employees that were included in the previous random sample. Employees in the previous random sample group who have left the organization shall be replaced in the new sample by employees selected per subsection (L)(2) of this section. The latter approach may enable the employer to more accurately track changes in commute mode from one survey to the next.

b.    If the number of employees who start work between six a.m. and ten a.m. has increased or decreased by more than twenty percent (20%) since the last survey, the employer shall select a completely new random sample group using the methodology described in subsection (L)(2) of this section.

4.    Performance Objective Calculation, Reporting and Recordkeeping.

a.    AVR or VER must be calculated according to the methodology described in subsection K of this section. Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (K)(4) of this section, any employee in the random sample group who fails to submit a completed survey form shall be included in the performance objective calculation as a drive alone commuter (single-occupant vehicle).

b.    The employer shall submit to the city:

i.    The completed survey forms for processing or the results of the survey, according to the schedule in subsections (G)(7) or (G)(8) of this section;

ii.    A description of the methodology used to select the random sample; and

iii.    A tally showing the number of surveys distributed, the number completed and the number of nonrespondents.

c.    The employer shall retain records needed to document adherence to this protocol for a period of at least three years, including: the master list used to generate the random sample and the names and numbers selected from that list. Such records, files and documentation shall be made available to the city during any on-site audit conducted by the city. (Prior code § 10.61)

10.24.060 Violations—Penalties.
Any person failing to comply with provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of a continuing violation. (Prior code § 10.62)

Chapter 10.28
BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC CARTS
Sections:

10.28.010    Bicycle defined.

10.28.020    License and registration forms.

10.28.030    Violations.

10.28.040    Application for license indicia and registration.

10.28.050    License indicia fee.

10.28.060    Issuance of license.

10.28.070    Renewal.

10.28.080    Lost license indicia.

10.28.090    Lost registration card.

10.28.100    Records.

10.28.110    Information required upon retail sale.

10.28.120    Recordation of transfer.

10.28.130    Riding on sidewalks in commercial areas.

10.28.140    Operation of electric carts on public sidewalks.

10.28.010 Bicycle defined.
“Bicycle” means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears having either two or three wheels (one of which is at least twenty (20) inches in diameter, in tandem or tricycle arrangement) or having a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. Bicycle includes motorized bicycles. (Prior code § 10.25)

10.28.020 License and registration forms.
The chief of police shall obtain the bicycle registration forms and the standard statewide bicycle licensing plate authorized by California Vehicle Code Section 39001. All fees collected shall be deposited in the Motor Vehicle Account in the State Transportation Fund as required by said Section 39001. (Ord. 02-5 § 12(part): prior code § 10.26)

10.28.030 Violations.
A.    No person shall operate or use a bicycle in the city which has not been registered and equipped with one or more license indicia as provided in this chapter or has not been registered and equipped with a license indicia by any other county or city in the state.

B.    No person shall tamper with, destroy, mutilate, or alter any license indicia or registration form, or to remove, alter, or mutilate the serial number, or the identifying marks of a licensing agency’s identifying symbol, or any bicycle frame licensed under the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Vehicle Code Section 39011.

D.    The city police department shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.27)

10.28.040 Application for license indicia and registration.
Every person desiring a bicycle license indicia or registration in the city shall make application to the chief of police upon the approved registration form and shall pay the required license fees. After completing the registration form and issuing the license indicia, the city police department shall furnish to the applicant a duplicate of the approved registration form. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.28)

10.28.050 License indicia fee.
The licensing fee charged shall be one dollar ($1.00) for each calendar year or portion of a calendar year for which the license indicia or renewal thereof is effective. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.29)

10.28.060 Issuance of license.
Upon approval of the application, and payment of the license fee, the chief of police shall issue a bicycle license indicia and registration card, which shall be effective until December 31st of the third year following the year of registration. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.30)

10.28.070 Renewal.
Application for renewal of an expired bicycle license shall be made by the owner, between January 1st and March 1st succeeding the expiration date, and shall be made by presentation of the registration card last issued for the bicycle and by the payment of the full three-year fee for such bicycle as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.32)

10.28.080 Lost license indicia.
Upon loss of a license indicia, or mutilation, the licensee shall be required to report its loss, theft, or mutilation within ten (10) days. Upon receipt of such report the chief of police shall cancel the license number and issue a new license indicia to the licensee upon receipt of a fee of fifty cents ($0.50). (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.33)

10.28.090 Lost registration card.
Upon loss of a registration card, the licensee shall make application of a duplicate card which shall be issued free of charge. (Ord. 02-5 § 12(part): prior code § 10.34)

10.28.100 Records.
The city police department shall maintain records of each bicycle registered. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make and type of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Such records shall be maintained during the period of validity of the license or until notification that the bicycle is no longer to be operated. (Prior code § 10.35)

10.28.110 Information required upon retail sale.
A.    Preregistration Form. Each bicycle retailer and each bicycle dealer shall supply to each purchaser a preregistration form provided by the police department and shall include, on the sales check or receipt given to the purchaser, a record of the following information: name of retailer, address of retailer, year and make of the bicycle, serial number of the bicycle if delivered to the purchaser in an assembled state, general description of the bicycle, name of purchaser, and address of purchaser. A copy of the preregistration form shall be filled out and forwarded by the purchaser to the city police department within ten (10) days from date of sale.

B.    Definition. “Bicycle dealer” means any person who sells, gives away, buys or takes in trade for the purpose of resale, more than five bicycles in any one calendar year, whether or not such bicycles are owned by such person. Bicycle dealer also includes agents or employees of such person. (Prior code § 10.36)

10.28.120 Recordation of transfer.
A.    Whenever any person sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he or she shall endorse upon the registration certificate previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address, telephone number of the transferee, date of transfer, and signature of the transferor, and shall deliver the registration certificate, so endorsed, to the city police department within ten (10) days.

B.    Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall, within ten (10) days of taking possession, apply for the transfer of license to his own name. The police chief may establish rules and regulations to govern and enforce the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 10.37)

10.28.130 Riding on sidewalks in commercial areas.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city fronting a commercial establishment. Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and upon a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.00) and upon a second conviction by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Where this section has been violated by persons under the age of sixteen (16) years, in lieu of such fines as provided hereunder, the person sitting as the traffic hearing officer of juvenile traffic court may prohibit the operation of a bicycle by the person upon the streets, alleys and public places in the city for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, and if such juvenile owns or controls a bicycle, may order the bicycle to be impounded at the police department for the period so specified by the court. At the expiration of the specified impoundment the bicycle will be returned to the owner. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.38)

10.28.140 Operation of electric carts on public sidewalks.
A.    Pursuant to authorization of California Vehicle Code Section 21114.5, physically disabled persons and persons fifty (50) years of age or older may operate electric carts on the public sidewalks within the city, subject to prior compliance with subsection B of this section.

B.    Any person owning an electric cart shall, prior to operating same on any public sidewalk of the city, apply to the chief of police for a permit and an identification sticker to so operate the cart. The chief of police shall issue such a permit and an identification sticker at no cost to any person qualified under subsection A of this section. The person receiving such sticker shall affix such sticker to the electric cart prior to operating the same on public sidewalks of the city. (Prior code § 10.39)

Chapter 10.32
SKATEBOARDS OR SIMILAR DEVICES
Sections:

10.32.010    Skateboards or similar devices defined.

10.32.020    Prohibitions on operations.

10.32.030    Restrictions on operation.

10.32.040    Violation—Penalty.

10.32.010 Skateboards or similar devices defined.
“Skateboard or similar device” means any multiwheeled device which is utilized to transport one or more persons thereon and is propelled or pushed by the operator’s human power or by gravitational force or by ancillary motors or engine. Skateboard or similar device shall not include bicycles or wheeled devices required to be used by one who is disabled, but shall include, without limitation, rollerskates, coasters, scooters, and toy vehicles. (Prior code § 10.19)

10.32.020 Prohibitions on operations.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard or similar device upon:

A.    The sidewalks of Main Street, bounded on the south by Pope Street and north by Pine Street;

B.    Any public street or public sidewalk fronting a commercial establishment or located within a commercially zoned district as defined in Section 17.04.160.

C.    Any public street or public sidewalk adjacent to property on which a school is located, from one hour before through one hour after school is open for educational instruction;

D.    Any private sidewalk or private driving surface fronting or adjacent to a commercial establishment. (Ord. 02-5 § 12 (part): prior code § 10.20)

10.32.030 Restrictions on operation.
A.    No person shall operate or ride a skateboard or similar device upon any sidewalk, street, or parking area in a manner which endangers the safety of any other person or property or restricts the movements of pedestrians. Operating or riding a skateboard or similar device within five feet of a pedestrian shall constitute endangerment.

B.    Any person riding a skateboard or similar device at a recreational skateboard facility owned by the city shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads while engaged in such activity. (Prior code § 10.21)

10.32.040 Violation—Penalty.
Any person failing to comply with provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Upon a first conviction, the violator shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.00) and upon a second conviction by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Where this chapter has been violated by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, in lieu of such fines as provided hereunder, the court may prohibit the operation of a skateboard or similar device by the person upon the streets, alleys and public places in the city for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, and if the juvenile owns or controls a skateboard or similar device, may order such item to be impounded at the police department for the period so specified by the court. The court may order permanent confiscation of the skateboard or similar device. (Prior code § 10.22)

Chapter 10.36
DESIGNATED TRUCK TRAFFIC ROUTES
Sections:

10.36.010    Truck traffic routes.

10.36.020    Restriction of heavy trucks to truck traffic routes.

10.36.030    Inapplicability of truck traffic routes to certain vehicles.

10.36.040    Truck parking permits.

10.36.050    Enforcement.

10.36.060    Weigh-in.

10.36.070    Civil penalty—Additional liability and indemnification for damage caused.

10.36.080    Challenge to administrative citation.

10.36.090    Remedies cumulative—Actions—Relationship to other laws.

10.36.010 Truck traffic routes.
The following streets, or portions thereof, located within the city are hereby designated as “truck traffic routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum weight limit of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, and the city manager is hereby authorized to designate such streets as “truck traffic routes” by appropriate signs:

Street Name

From

To

Main Street (SR29/SR128)

Chaix Lane

Deer Park Road

(Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.020 Restriction of heavy trucks to truck traffic routes.
When appropriate signs are in place, designating the “truck traffic routes” set forth in Section 10.36.010, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross limit of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall drive on such routes, and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds coming from a “truck traffic route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor, or for parking such vehicle in a location for which a parking permit has been issued pursuant to Section 10.36.040.

For purposes of this section, “direct route” means:

A.    For deliveries more than one-half mile off of the nearest point on the truck traffic route, travel is permitted only by the most direct route to the destination.

B.    For deliveries one-half mile or less from a driver’s chosen point of departure from the truck traffic route, travel is permitted by the most direct route from the chosen point of departure to the destination.

C.    After delivery or pickup, travel is permitted by (1) the most direct route back to the truck traffic route, or (2) if the next stop is one-half mile or less, proceeding to the next stop by the most direct route. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.030 Inapplicability of truck traffic routes to certain vehicles.
The provisions of Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.020 shall not apply to:

A.    Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.

B.    Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor which necessarily is in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility.

C.    School buses while carrying students to and from school.

D.    Pickup trucks. For the purposes of this section, a “pickup truck” means a four-wheeled commercial motor vehicle commonly known as a “pickup truck,” equipped with a permanently affixed open-box body and with a manufacturer’s rated load capacity not exceeding one ton in weight.

E.    Any vehicle owned, leased, operated, or controlled by any licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, maintenance, or repair of a public works project, or by any highway carrier regulated by the Public Utilities Commission while transporting any materials to or from a public works project, when the bids for such project were opened prior to the adoption of the ordinance establishing this section, unless an alternate direct route is provided substantially within and by the city.

F.    Tow trucks or moving vans providing a service on a street.

G.    Transfer, operator, and contractor trucks, including trucks hauling disposables and recyclables, leaving and returning from a solid waste disposal site.

H.    Street sweepers.

I.    Emergency vehicles.

J.    Recreational vehicles (as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18009.3). (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.040 Truck parking permits.
The public works director may issue permits to vehicles subject to provisions of Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.020 to park such vehicles in locations off “truck traffic routes” as specified in the permit, if the public works director determines that the issuance of such a permit will not result in damage to any city street and will not permit the violation of any city ordinance or state law. The permit shall be issued for a specified vehicle and for a specified parking area, and shall be visibly displayed on the vehicle at all times. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.050 Enforcement.
The city may enforce this chapter in any manner permitted by law. A violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), a public nuisance, and contrary to the public interest, and shall, at the discretion of the city and without limitation on any other relief, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.060 Weigh-in.
Any peace officer is authorized to require any person driving or in control of any vehicle which may be subject to this chapter and that is being operated on a street within the city other than on a truck traffic route, as designated under Section 10.36.010, to proceed to any public or private scale available to weigh the vehicle for the purpose of determining whether a violation of this chapter has occurred. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.070 Civil penalty—Additional liability and indemnification for damage caused.
A.    In addition to any fine imposed under Section 10.36.050, any person who violates this chapter shall be liable and responsible for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day such violation occurs. The city may recover such civil penalty by either civil action or administrative citation. Such penalty shall be in addition to all other costs incurred by the city, including, without limitation, the city’s staff time, investigation expenses, and attorney’s fees.

B.    In addition to any fine imposed under Section 10.36.050, and any civil penalty imposed under subsection A of this section, any person operating a vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be liable, and shall indemnify and hold the city harmless, for any damage or liability to public facilities arising out of or related to any such violation. Such liability shall be in addition to all other costs incurred by the city, including, without limitation, the city’s staff time, investigation expenses, and attorney’s fees. The city may recover such liability, costs, and fees by either civil action or administrative citation.

C.    Where the city proceeds by administrative citation in collecting either the civil penalty imposed by subsection A of this section or the liability for damage caused under subsection B of this section, the responsible person must remit payment of the noticed costs, expenses, and/or fees to the city of St. Helena within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the citation. The city shall provide the responsible person notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the cost recovery, and the time for requesting that hearing. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon a timely request for an administrative hearing made pursuant to Section 10.36.080, and if such a request is made, shall remain stayed during the pendency of the administrative hearing process. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.080 Challenge to administrative citation.
In accord with the following provisions, any person dissatisfied with the city’s issuance of an administrative citation under Section 10.36.070 may request an administrative hearing to challenge the citation:

A.    The responsible person shall have the right to request the administrative hearing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the administrative citation and imposition of the civil penalty. To request such a hearing, the responsible person shall notify the city clerk in writing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the citation. The appeal notification shall include all specific facts, circumstances, and arguments upon which the appeal is based.

B.    The city manager is hereby authorized to designate a hearing officer to hear such appeal. The city hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within ninety (90) days of the request for the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause. The hearing officer shall only consider those facts, circumstances, or arguments that the responsible person has presented in the appeal notification.

C.    The hearing officer shall render a decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer shall have discretion to reduce the amount of the administrative citation based upon evidence presented by the responsible person that such a reduction is warranted by mitigating factors including, without limitation, lack of culpability and/or inability to pay. Provided, however, that in exercising its discretion the hearing officer should consider the purpose of this chapter to prevent and deter violations and whether the reduction of civil penalties will frustrate that purpose by resulting in the responsible person’s enrichment or profit as a result of the violation of this chapter.

D.    Any aggrieved party to the hearing officer’s decision on the administrative appeal may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the Napa County superior court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4.

E.    If, following an administrative hearing, appeal, or other final determination, the responsible person is determined to be liable for the administrative citation, such liability, if unpaid within forty-five (45) days of the notice of the final determination, may be recovered by civil action. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

10.36.090 Remedies cumulative—Actions—Relationship to other laws.
The remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative, and shall not restrict the city to any other remedy to which it is entitled under law or equity. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with any penalty or provision under state law, or prohibit any conduct authorized by the state or federal constitutions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-3 § 2 (Exh. A (part))

Title 11
RESERVED
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.04    Introductory Provisions and Definitions

12.08    Construction and Maintenance

12.12    Street and Sidewalk Excavations and Encroachments

12.16    Obstructions and Encroachments

12.20    Newsracks

12.24    Trees and Other Vegetation

12.28    Miscellaneous Street/Sidewalk Regulations

12.32    Parks

12.36    Skate Parks

Chapter 12.04
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

12.04.010    Definitions.

12.04.020    Duties of superintendent of streets.

12.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the following definitions apply:

“Parkway” means the area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is not sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. The parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not opened to vehicular travel.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

“Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

“Street” means the entire area between fence or building lines of any street, way, alley, roadway or thoroughfare in the city opened to the use of public or dedicated to public use or used by the public or owned or maintained by the city or in which the city may have any right, title, interest, easement or claim, and shall embrace that portion of such street, way, alley, roadway or thoroughfare set apart for sidewalk, parkway or pedestrian travel and use. “Street” also includes curbs and gutters as well as the portion devoted to vehicular travel. (Prior code § 13.1)

12.04.020 Duties of superintendent of streets.
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to enforce all of the provisions of this title and to oversee and direct all work provided for herein, he or she shall direct the manner in which repairs shall be made, in accordance with the regulations herein provided or which may hereafter be adopted. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to cause all surplus material from such work to be removed after the work is finished, or during its progress, by the party excavating and using the street, alley, sidewalk, public square or place, for the purposes contemplated and provided for herein. (Prior code § 13.2)

Chapter 12.08
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Sections:

12.08.010    Duty of property owners to repair sidewalks.

12.08.020    Duty of property owners to clean public right-of-way in front of premises.

12.08.025    Liability for injuries to the public.

12.08.030    Enforcement of property owners’ duty to repair.

12.08.040    Water drains emptying into streets.

12.08.050    Permit required.

12.08.060    Application for permit—Posting of permit.

12.08.070    Permit need not be issued.

12.08.080    Concrete to be used—Exception.

12.08.090    Plans and specifications.

12.08.100    Construction standards on Main Street.

12.08.110    Obtaining correct line and grade.

12.08.120    Inspection, supervision and approval of work.

12.08.130    Responsibility for injuries—Protection of work.

12.08.140    Permit fees.

12.08.150    Repair requirements—Generally.

12.08.160    Grading and paving along railroad tracks generally.

12.08.170    Grading and paving along railroad tracks—Enforcement by superintendent of streets.

12.08.180    Failure to comply.

12.08.010 Duty of property owners to repair sidewalks.
A.    It is made the duty of every property owner within the city whose property fronts on any public street therein to keep the sidewalks that are now or may hereafter be built or established along such frontage in a good state of repair so that they shall not endanger persons or property passing thereon or interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, maintenance and repair of sidewalks, which includes curb, gutter and storm drainage structures, on Main Street between Sulphur Creek and Pine Street, shall be the responsibility of the city in every case where damage to the sidewalk is caused by street trees for which the city has responsibility under Section 12.24.070, or by a tree designated as a heritage tree for which the city has responsibility under Section 12.24.120, except for damage as a result of over watering and any other damage not caused solely by the tree(s).

C.    In addition to the provisions of this Chapter 12.08 regarding the construction and maintenance of sidewalks, the director of public works may establish procedures which govern the maintenance of repair of sidewalks throughout the city in order to provide property owners an opportunity to comply with maintenance and repair requirements in a cost effective manner, consistent with the purpose and provisions of this chapter and Title 12 of this code and any other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-3 (part); prior code § 13.3)

12.08.020 Duty of property owners to clean public right-of-way in front of premises.
It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate within the city fronting on a public street to remove and clean away, at his or her own expense, the weeds, grass, bush and debris in the public right-of-way in front of his or her premises from the property line to the center of the street. (Prior code § 13.4)

12.08.025 Liability for injuries to the public.
A.    Any property owner to whom Sections 12.08.010 and 12.08.020 apply shall owe a duty to members of the public to comply with those sections and with all applicable provisions of California Streets and Highways Code Sections 5610 through 5661, as incorporated by reference into this code. If any property or person suffers injury or damage as a result of a property owner’s failure to comply with the requirements of Sections 12.08.010 and 12.08.020, or with other applicable law that requires a property owner to maintain and repair sidewalks, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting injury or damage.

B.    Notwithstanding the duty of care established by subsection (A) of this section, if any property or person suffers injury or damage as a result of the city’s failure to repair any sidewalk for which the city has the responsibility to maintain and repair under Section 12.08.010, liability for such resulting injury or damage shall be determined according to law. (Ord. 06-3 (part))

12.08.030 Enforcement of property owners’ duty to repair.
All provisions of California Streets and Highways Code Sections 5610 through 5661, as they now exist or are from time to time hereafter amended, are referred to and are incorporated by reference into this code. (Prior code § 13.5)

12.08.040 Water drains emptying into streets.
All water drains constructed or maintained for the purpose of discharging water into the public streets shall be so constructed that the waters will not be discharged upon or over any sidewalk or permitted to flow over or across the same, but shall be conducted beneath the sidewalk and discharged into the gutter of the street beneath the curb line thereof. Except as specifically authorized by the director of public works, such drains may be only for the purpose of conducting water from the exteriors of buildings and other improvements and may not drain water or any other materials from within the buildings and other improvements. The director of public works may authorize a special water drain connection for the purpose of disposing of uncontaminated water from an overflow, ground water sump, condenser, or other source. In authorizing a special water drain connection, the director of public works will consider the quality and quantity of water to be drained into the street and possible impacts on the public. All water drains not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be reconstructed so far as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 13.6)

12.08.050 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed in any street in the city any sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or gutter without first obtaining a permit in writing to do so from the city council or from such officer of the city as the city council may from time to time authorize or delegate the authority to issue such permit. (Prior code § 13.13)

12.08.060 Application for permit—Posting of permit.
Any permit granted under the terms of this chapter shall be issued upon blank forms furnished by the city and shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the location of the property in front of which the proposed sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or gutter is to be constructed, the dimensions thereof and shall refer to this chapter for the materials to be used and the method of construction. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the work to be done by the permittee to whom the same may be issued. (Prior code § 13.14)

12.08.070 Permit need not be issued.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to compel the city council or its duly authorized officer to issue a permit on any application that may be made therefor and as provided in this chapter if, in the judgment of the council or its duly authorized officer, the proposed work is against the best public interests, welfare or convenience. (Prior code § 13.15)

12.08.080 Concrete to be used—Exception.
No sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or gutter shall be constructed of any material other than concrete, unless the city council expressly authorizes the same. (Prior code § 13.16)

12.08.090 Plans and specifications.
All sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs or gutters must be constructed in every particular in accordance with the permit issued therefor, and all sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs or gutters constructed on streets in the city, with the exception of Main Street, which is a state highway route, shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications for concrete sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs or gutters in the city on file in the office of the city clerk, as the same now read or as they may hereafter be changed or amended by resolution of the council, reference to which plans and specifications is hereby made for further particulars. (Prior code § 13.17)

12.08.100 Construction standards on Main Street.
All sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs or gutters constructed on Main Street in the city, so long as the street is a state highway route, must be constructed in every particular and in accordance with the permit issued therefor and all sidewalk approaches on Main Street shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations for sidewalk approaches and standard driveways to serve property fronting on state highways outside the limits of incorporated cities, promulgated by the Division of Highways, Department of Public Works of the state of California, under date of July, 1975, where the same may be applicable to such state highway route within the city limits of the city. (Prior code § 13.18)

12.08.110 Obtaining correct line and grade.
Where the street is unimproved or where the existing curbs are in poor condition or not to official line and grade, owners of property proposing to construct any of the work mentioned in this article must first obtain the correct line and grade from the city engineer. For this service, the city engineer shall charge one dollar ($1.00), which shall be paid in advance. (Prior code § 13.19)

12.08.120 Inspection, supervision and approval of work.
All work provided by this chapter shall be done under the supervision and direction and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets or the city council or such other officer as it may designate, and notice shall be given by the permittee when the forms are in place, and no concrete shall be poured until such forms are inspected and approved. (Prior code § 13.20)

12.08.130 Responsibility for injuries—Protection of work.
The one to whom any permit is provided by this chapter is granted shall thereby become and be responsible for the proper execution of the work, and for all personal injuries or damages to third persons arising from the doing of any of the work specified in such permit, and the permittee shall see that necessary barriers, “Street Closed” signs, lights and watch-men, or any thereof, as may be necessary to prevent accidents to the public and to protect work are provided. (Prior code § 13.21)

12.08.140 Permit fees.
The city council shall have the right at any time, upon order duly made and given, to require payment of a fee for any permit issued under this chapter. (Prior code § 13.22)

12.08.150 Repair requirements—Generally.
When any portion of any improved street, avenue, lane, alley, court or place in the city, or any sidewalk constructed thereon shall be out of repair, or needing reconstruction, and in condition to endanger persons or property passing thereon, or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof, and the superintendent of streets has required the owners or occupants of lots or portions of lots fronting on such portion of such street, avenue, alley, lane, court or place, or such portion of such sidewalks so out of repair or needing reconstruction as aforesaid, to repair or reconstruct, or to do both, forthwith, the portion of the street, avenue, lane, alley, court, or place, to the center line of the street in front of the property of which he or she is the owner or tenant, or occupant, by serving written notice in the manner and form prescribed by Section 31 of the Statutes of the state generally known as the “Improvement Act of 1911" being Chapter 397 of the Statutes of 1911 (Sections 5000 to 6794 of the Streets and Highways Code Annotated of the state), as the same has or may hereafter be amended, and the owner or occupant fails or neglects to commence the repair or reconstruction in the manner and form required by the notice within three days after the service of the same, or to diligently or without interruption prosecute the work to completion, the owner or occupant of such lot or property so failing or neglecting to do such things or any of them, after the service of the notice in the manner and form above described, shall forfeit to the city the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which may be recovered by the city in a civil action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, and shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13.42)

12.08.160 Grading and paving along railroad tracks generally.
The city council being of the opinion and having in its judgment decided that the method of construction herein provided is necessary, does specify that when any street in the city has or hereafter shall be graded and paved with an asphalt wearing surface, on a concrete or other base, and there are railroad tracks laid in the street, the portions of the street between and under the tracks and for a distance of two feet on each side thereof, shall be graded and paved in the same manner and with the same materials as the rest of the street is graded and paved, subject to the following modifications adjudged by the city council to be necessary for the preservation of the pavement:

The tracks shall be laid flush with the official grade of the street, the rails to be secured to the ties on tie plates three-fourths of an inch in thickness and the ties to be spaced at thirty (30) inches apart center to center, except at joints where one tie will be placed under the end of each rail. Pockets under the rails between ties will be dug out and the entire width of the roadbed brought to the form shown on the plans hereinafter referred to, and the pockets and the space above the level of the base of the tie plates shall be filled with concrete thoroughly tamped and worked into such pockets and brought up solidly under the base of the rails and elsewhere brought to a true finish one and one-half inches below the official grade of the street and parallel thereto.

Paving bricks of good quality and suitable shape shall be set alongside the heads of “T” rails as shown on such plans; these to be set on sand cushions as shown therein. Where grooved rails are used, the pavement surface shall be finished with asphaltic paving mixture only.

After the paving bricks are set in place the space occupied by the toothing shall be filled with concrete. The joints between the tracks and the rails shall be filled with asphaltic cement.

Upon the base thus formed shall be laid an asphaltic wearing surface one and one-half inches in thickness and to the official line and grade of the street. It shall be laid and constructed in like manner as the wearing surface on adjacent portions of the street on each side of the railroad.

The plan and specifications for the paving, prepared by C. H. Wallace, former town engineer, and filed in the office of the city clerk are adopted for a further description of the method of doing the work and by special reference thereto are made a part of this section; provided, that when any of the work is done under contract awarded by any of the officials of the city, the superintendent therein referred to shall be the street superintendent and when any of the work is done by private contract executed by any person or corporation owning any of the railroad tracks within the city, the superintendent of streets shall not have charge of the work, although he or she shall have the right to inspect the same as therein provided and to require that it shall be done in accordance with the regulations herein adopted. Any work not so done will not be accepted by the city. (Prior code § 13.43)

12.08.170 Grading and paving along railroad tracks—Enforcement by superintendent of streets.
It is made the duty of the superintendent of streets to enforce the provisions of Sections 12.08.160 through 12.08.180. In all cases where there are railroad tracks laid in any street so graded and paved with an asphalt wearing surface on a concrete or other basis and any portion of the street between and under the tracks and for the distance of two feet on each side thereof has not been graded and paved, in accordance with the provisions of said sections or where such pavement or the foundation thereof has become defective or out of repair, the superintendent of streets shall cause a written notice to be served upon the person owning or maintaining the railroad tracks, in which notice he or she shall specify generally the nature and kind of the work required, and shall direct the person to perform the same and it shall thereafter be the duty of any such person to commence the work within ten (10) days after the service of the notice, and to prosecute the same diligently and without the intermission until the same be completed, under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets and to furnish and use thereon all appliances and workmen that may be required therefor and designated by the superintendent of streets. When any such pavement is hereafter required to be repaired under the provisions of said sections, it must be repaired in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.08.160 for the original construction of the pavement. (Prior code § 13.44)

12.08.180 Failure to comply.
Should any person fail to grade or pave any such street as required by Sections 12.08.160 through 12.08.180 or to comply with any notice that the superintendent of streets may cause to be served upon such person under the provisions of said sections or to comply with any direction that he or she may lawfully give as to the manner of doing the work during the course thereof, or to repair any defective pavement or foundation now or hereafter laid on any of the streets between or under the tracks or for a distance of two feet on each side thereof, in accordance with the requirements of said sections for the original construction of the work, or to repair any defective pavement under or between the tracks, or for a distance of two feet on each side thereof on any street, after written notice from the superintendent of streets so to do; such person so failing therein shall forfeit to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day for each and every day that such person shall fail therein, after receiving notice from superintendent of streets, so to do, which forfeiture may be recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, and it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to prosecute the action thereof in the name of the city, and at its expense. Nothing in Sections 12.08.160 through 12.08.180 contained shall be construed to relieve any such person from liability for any damage that may accrue by reason of his or her nonperformance of the work or to abate or modify any other remedy that the city may have to enforce the performance of the same or to forfeit the franchise of any such person. (Prior code § 13.45)

Chapter 12.12
STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
Sections:

12.12.010    Purpose.

12.12.020    Compliance.

12.12.030    Definitions.

12.12.040    Prohibition period.

12.12.050    Permits.

12.12.060    Excavation material.

12.12.070    Backfill.

12.12.080    Paving.

12.12.090    Defects.

12.12.100    Applicability to public utilities.

12.12.110    City work exempted.

12.12.120    Safety precautions.

12.12.130    Drainage.

12.12.140    Violations—Revocation and other penalties.

12.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to manage, regulate and preserve the public rights-of-way for the benefit of the public welfare. To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the city shall endeavor to coordinate its capital improvement programs with those of utility companies and franchisees with facilities in, on, under or above the public right-of-way. Information about any planned work in the right-of-way shall be shared at the earliest possible time. Utility owners and franchisees are encouraged to coordinate their street excavations so that all work is done simultaneously and the street is not excavated more than once within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.020 Compliance.
No person shall excavate or encroach under, upon or over any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way or construct, obstruct, reconstruct, break up, remove, or otherwise disturb or undermine any sidewalk, curb, gutter, cross gutter, drainage facility, street, parking strip, or miscellaneous structure except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.030 Definitions.
A.    “Arterial street” means any “commercial” street identified in the general plan.

B.    “Asphalt concrete” or “AC” means blend of aggregate and asphalt binder meeting the specifications set forth in city of St. Helena standard plans and specifications and the Caltrans Standard Specifications Section 39, “Asphalt Concrete.”

C.    “Caltrans” means the State of California Department of Transportation.

D.    Chip Seal. (See the definition of “slurry seal” set forth below.)

E.    “City” means the city of St. Helena, a general law city and a municipal corporation duly organized and validly existing under the laws of the state of California, and all departments, divisions, and offices thereof.

F.    “Encroach” means constructing or placing temporary or permanent structures, improvements, vehicles, equipment, facilities, or materials in, on, over, or under any public right-of-way or using any public right-of-way so as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with the normal use of that way, including but not limited to the performance of any of the following acts:

1.    Excavating or disturbing the public right-of-way;

2.    Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, pipe, conduit, cable, wire, communication service equipment, or other facility or structure on, over, or under a public right-of-way;

3.    Planting any tree, shrub, grass, or other growing thing within the public right-of-way;

4.    Placing or leaving on the public right-of-way any rubbish, brush, earth, or material;

5.    Constructing, placing, or maintaining on, over, under, or within a public right-of-way any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing; any culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface drainage facility; or any pipe, conduit, wire, communication service equipment or facility, or cable;

6.    Constructing, placing, planting, or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree, or other object adjacent to the public right-of-way, which causes or may cause an encroachment.

G.    “Engineer” means the city engineer or his or her designee.

H.    “Excavation” means any trench cuts within the street right-of-way to access or install a utility line or any related facility. All such excavations shall require an encroachment permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

I.    “Facility” means any fiber optic, coaxial, or copper cable; communication service equipment; telephone, telecommunications, electric or other wire, line or equipment; utility structure; oil, gas, or other pipeline; duct; conduit; cabinet; tunnel; vault; drain; manhole; splice box; surface location marker; pole; subsurface tiebacks; soil nails; stairs; access ramps; subsurface foundations; landscape features, including curbs around planter areas; planter boxes; clocks; bus shelters; phone booths; bike racks; fencing; retaining walls; benches; stockpiles; building materials; and other appurtenances or tangible things located in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right-of-way.

J.    “Major arterial street” means those streets identified as major arterials in the general plan.

K.    “Major defects” means any defects greater than the deficiency tolerances specified in city of St. Helena standard plans and specifications; the Caltrans Standard Specifications and Plans; or individual contract plans and specifications.

L.    Micro Paving. (See the definition of “slurry seal” set forth below.)

M.    Micro Surfacing. (See the definition of “slurry seal” set forth below.)

N.    “Permittee” means any person, contractor, utility, or special district that has been issued an encroachment permit pursuant to this chapter, including any lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of the original permittee. All obligations, responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee shall be binding on successors in interest of the original permittee.

O.    “Person” means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties, not including the city, or its officers, employees, or agents.

P.    “Prohibition street” means streets that have been reconstructed or resurfaced within the past three to five years, as more particularly described in Section 12.12.040(A).

Q.    “Public right-of-way” means the area in, upon, above, beneath, or across any land or interest which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage, or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the use of the general public for travel, and includes any public street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, court, alley, boulevard, sidewalk, median, parkway, or emergency vehicle easement.

R.    “Public street” means the full width of the surfaced or travel portion, including shoulders, of any road, street, path, lane, or alley dedicated to, reserved for, or used by or for the general public when those roads, streets, paths, lanes, and alleys have been accepted as and declared to be part of the city system of public streets, except highways forming a part of the state highway system.

S.    “Slurry seal” means a mixture (usually less than one inch in thickness) of polymer modified asphalt emulsion, mineral aggregate, mineral filler, water, and other additives, properly proportioned, mixed, and spread in accordance with the city of St. Helena standard plans and details and the Caltrans Standard Specifications.

T.    “Special district” means any agency of the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries, and includes a county service area, a maintenance district or area, an improvement district or improvement zone, or any other zone or area within which a property tax or assessment will be levied to pay for a service or improvement benefitting that area.

U.    “Street overlay” means one or more courses of asphalt concrete on an existing pavement (usually greater than one inch in thickness), and generally includes an asphalt-leveling course to correct the contour of the old pavement.

V.    “Structure” means any physical alteration or improvement, including but not limited to a building, post, cabinet, fence, vault, sign, pole, guardrail, wall, facility, pedestrian walking path, sidewalk, driveway, track, surfacing, culvert, drainage facility, pipe, embankment, or excavation.

W.    “Underground utility district” has the meaning set forth in Chapter 13.28, Underground Utility Districts.

X.    “Utility” means any person or entity providing electricity, gas, telephone, telecommunications, water, or other services to customers, and which pursuant to state law or local franchise is entitled to install its facilities in the public right-of-way.

Y.    “Wearing surface defects” means the defects in the surface of a roadway that is in direct contact with traffic and that resists the resulting abrading, crushing, or other disintegrating action. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.040 Prohibition period.
A.    Newly constructed or resurfaced streets shall be termed “prohibition streets” within this section. Permission to excavate in prohibition streets will not be granted for five years after the completion of street overlays. An overlay consists of at least a one-inch-thick layer of asphalt. For those streets with chip seal, slurry seal coating, or micro surface treatment, the prohibition period shall be for three years. Utilities shall plan well enough in advance to determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating in newly resurfaced streets. Exceptions to the above policy are as follows:

1.    Emergencies that endanger life or property.

2.    Interruption of essential utility service.

3.    Work that is mandated by city, state, or federal law.

4.    Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing service exists.

5.    Situations in which no alternative course of action exists, as determined by the engineer in writing setting forth the facts giving rise to the conclusion that no alternative exists.

B.    To excavate in a prohibition street, a waiver must be obtained.

1.    To request a waiver, the applicant must submit a written request to the engineer. The request must include:

a.    The location of the excavation.

b.    Description of the work to be performed.

c.    The reason(s) the work was not performed before the street was paved.

d.    The reason(s) the work cannot be deferred until after the prohibition period.

e.    The reason(s) the work cannot be performed at another location.

f.    The reason(s) it is justified to excavate the prohibition street.

2.    Any excavation in prohibition streets will be repaired with full lane width paving on the street as follows (and as further provided in Section 12.12.080):

a.    Overlaid or Reconstructed Streets. All lanes that are affected shall be ground down two inches and repaved with two inches of asphalt concrete, or all lanes that are affected shall be resurfaced in accordance with the requirements of Section 12.12.080.

b.    Slurry Sealed, Chip Sealed, or Micro Surfaced Streets. All lanes that are affected shall be resurfaced in accordance with the requirements of Section 12.12.080.

c.    A minimum of four feet wide plus one foot on either side of the trench shall be resurfaced if the excavation is a lateral cut. For longitudinal trenches, the full lane width along the entire length of the trench entire length plus one foot on either end shall be resurfaced.

d.    Exception: Full lane width restoration shall not be required if either of the following conditions apply:

i.    The work is not considered an excavation as defined in Section 12.12.030.

ii.    The work is being performed on behalf of a low-income household in order to bring an owner-occupied single-family residence into compliance with sanitary sewer regulations at any time other than as part of the sale of the residence. Low-income is defined as eighty percent (80%) or less of the area median family income. The purpose of this exception is to prevent hardship to property owners of limited means, and it shall be interpreted and applied solely to achieve that purpose.

iii.    Before issuing a permit for work in a prohibition street, the engineer shall verify that the applicant has analyzed all feasible alternatives to make the necessary repairs using a trenchless method in prohibition streets to avoid excavating a newly resurfaced street whenever possible. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.050 Permits.
A.    No person shall construct, obstruct, reconstruct, remove, excavate or encroach over, under, or on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, cross gutter, drainage facility, street, parking strip, or miscellaneous structure without first obtaining a permit from the city. All work shall conform to the permit conditions. Any and all construction work within the public right-of-way shall require an encroachment permit. Anyone doing excavation work within the public right-of-way shall obtain an encroachment permit for the purpose of excavation in addition to any other required permits. The contractor performing the work shall apply for the permit.

B.    The permit application may be obtained from the city public works department.

C.    The contractor performing the work shall apply for the permit. The following must be provided to apply for an encroachment permit:

1.    An encroachment permit application form with two sets of plans and a temporary traffic control plan.

2.    A bond, fee, or cash deposit satisfactory to the city engineer in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the value of the work as a performance security guaranteeing satisfactory completion of the work and warranting the work against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of one year after completion of the work. An engineer’s estimate or bid by a contractor shall be submitted to determine the value of the work. Companies working under a franchise agreement that includes a bond are not required to post the cash deposit required by this section unless/until they have been issued a notice or citation for a violation of any city standards or permit requirements.

3.    A current city business license.

4.    Current evidence of insurance.

5.    Twenty-four (24) hour phone number for emergencies.

6.    The name, telephone number, email address and mailing address (fax number, cell phone if available) of the person who will receive all office correspondence from the city.

7.    Any applicable permits or regulations, such as an OSHA permit or Department of Fish and Wildlife agreement.

D.    All applications shall include plans indicating the following:

1.    Name of the street to be excavated and the nearest cross street.

2.    Distance of proposed excavation from the face of curb.

3.    Distance of proposed excavation from the intersection.

4.    The size of the excavation (length and width).

5.    The location of any above-ground facilities to be installed, showing:

a.    Distance from curb and any street facilities/furnishings.

b.    Purpose of the facility.

c.    Size of the facility.

d.    Location of doors and door swings.

6.    The location of any existing underground facilities and the location of underground facilities to be installed showing:

a.    Conduit vaults, maintenance holes, pipes, etc.

b.    Structural detail and additional information for structures to be installed such as vaults and maintenance holes.

c.    The construction method of the structure to be installed.

d.    Construction detail, location, size, design criteria and the purpose of the facility to be installed.

7.    Cross section of a typical trench indicating:

a.    The approximate depth of the facility to be installed.

b.    Trench backfill depth, compaction and layer depths.

c.    Pavement section detail (type and depths).

d.    Plans, structural details, and trench cross section must be signed and stamped by a licensed civil engineer, when legally required.

8.    The plan may show the approximate location of the excavation; provided, that an “as built” plan showing the exact location of the excavation is submitted to the city prior to the permit being finalized.

9.    A traffic control, traffic detour, and/or pedestrian detour plan per the California Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

E.    All encroachment permit fees and deposits are due at the time the permit is issued, unless special arrangements have been made with the engineer. These fees represent the value of staff time in processing a permit application and are nonrefundable.

1.    All past due fees, fines and penalties owed by the applicant must be paid before a permit will be issued.

2.    If a permit violation occurs no other application will be processed until the fines and penalties have been paid and all permit conditions are met.

F.    If an account is past due or not in good standing, a permit cannot be issued until the account is brought into good standing. To bring the account to good standing, all fees and fines must be paid.

G.    As a condition of the permit to excavate, the applicant shall provide evidence of an inquiry identification number issued by a regional notification center (Underground Service Alert, USA) pursuant to Section 4216 of the California Government Code or any successor statute.

H.    If a permittee damages other facilities during their excavation work, the permittee shall repair such damage at permittee’s sole cost and expense. The permittee may need an additional street cut permit if additional excavation and trenches are needed to repair the damaged facility. The original permittee shall maintain the site and restore the pavement and any affected signage or striping in the same material and configuration at their sole cost.

I.    Except in an emergency, encroachment permits shall be taken out prior to the commencement of any excavation work. For the purposes of this chapter, an emergency is considered to exist only when life or property is endangered or when an essential utility service is or may be interrupted during weekends, holidays, or between five p.m. and eight a.m. of normal working days.

J.    In the event of an emergency, the permittee shall promptly notify the city of the emergency and shall apply for an encroachment permit for “emergency work” within four hours after the city’s offices open on the next business day.

K.    Pre-Construction Meeting.

1.    A pre-construction meeting shall be held for all projects that are scheduled to take longer than five working days to complete.

2.    The owner, contractor, any other agency that is involved, and the city shall attend this meeting.

3.    For projects that cannot be completed within five working days, the city may issue administrative citations if a pre-construction meeting was not held.

4.    The temporary traffic control plan shall be approved by the engineer prior to the pre-construction meeting.

L.    Permit duration shall be indicated on the permit:

1.    All permits shall include estimated start and completion dates. A permit is valid from the construction start date specified on the approved permit until the specified completion date, unless extended by the engineer as provided in subsection M of this section.

2.    Encroachment permits are not valid if other required permits are not obtained or required notifications are not given.

3.    No disruption of traffic is allowed after four p.m. and before nine a.m. in the vicinity of the schools located on Grayson Avenue, South Crane Avenue, Elmhurst Avenue, Hillview Drive, Tainter Street and Adams Street, unless the encroachment permit specifically authorizes construction during these hours. No disruption of traffic is allowed on other city streets after five p.m. and before seven a.m. unless the encroachment permit specifically authorizes construction during these hours.

4.    Some permits may be valid only on specific dates. They may be approved with special conditions specifying dates:

a.    When work shall be done.

b.    When work shall be completed.

c.    Before which work shall not start.

5.    Permits expire and become void, unless otherwise amended:

a.    Sixty (60) days after the start date, if no work has begun.

b.    If the work is not diligently proceeding and there are delays of more than four working days after the work has started, unless the delays are caused by weather or other circumstances beyond the permittee’s control.

c.    When the excavation, including the trench restoration, is completed or on the date specified on the permit as the expiration date if not extended by the engineer pursuant to subsection M of this section.

6.    The work is determined to be proceeding diligently if:

a.    After a project begins, work continues on a regular basis, except for weekends, holidays, inclement weather, labor disputes, or any emergency beyond the control of the permittee.

b.    The permittee ensures that all necessary materials and supplies are on hand and ready for use so as not to delay the excavation and the prompt restoration of the public right-of-way.

M.    A valid permit may be extended by requesting an extension prior to the expiration date by specifying the dates that need to be changed and explaining the reason for the extension. The engineer reserves the right to deny a request for extension.

N.    Permit fees are nonrefundable.

O.    By accepting an encroachment permit, the permittee and the owner of the facility(ies) for which the permit has been issued agree:

1.    To follow all laws, rules, regulations, and permit conditions.

2.    To assure that their employees, contractors, and subcontractors comply with all laws, rules, regulations, and permit conditions.

3.    To indemnify the city against all claims for personal injury or property damage that may arise in connection with the work.

P.    The encroachment permit shall be available at the excavation site during all ongoing work periods, until the project is completed and approved by the engineer. Permit(s) shall be shown to city employees upon request. Failure to maintain the encroachment permit on site and produce it upon request shall constitute a violation subject to the penalties set forth in Section 12.12.140.

Q.    The permittee shall provide public notifications when excavating in the public right-of-way.

1.    Minor projects lasting longer than forty-eight (48) hours but less than five working days shall provide eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch posters with one-inch minimum letters at the beginning and end of the project and every three hundred (300) feet between the beginning and the end of the project. The city engineer shall approve the contents and exact location of such notifications. At a minimum, such notifications shall include:

a.    The names, address, and telephone number of the owner and the permittee.

b.    The start and completion dates of the project.

c.    Such additional information as the engineer deems necessary.

2.    For major projects lasting six working days or longer, shall provide the following notice:

a.    After the permit has been issued and at least five but no more than thirty (30) calendar days before the anticipated start date of work, the permittee shall mail or deliver written notice to:

i.    Residents and occupants along the affected street.

ii.    Schools, churches, and other assembly uses within three hundred (300) feet of the affected street.

iii.    The city planning and public works departments.

b.    At least five calendar days but not more than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to starting work, post and maintain eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch notices in accordance with subsection (Q)(1) of this section. At a minimum, the notices shall contain:

i.    The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the permittee.

ii.    A description of the project.

iii.    The start and completion dates of the project.

iv.    The name, address and twenty-four (24) hour telephone number of a contact person.

v.    Such additional information as the city engineer deems necessary. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.060 Excavation material.
A.    Pavement shall be cut to a straight, neat, vertical line prior to excavation. Jack hammering is not allowed unless the pavement is saw cut or milled at a later date as part of the project.

B.    All excavated material shall be removed from the job site within twenty-four (24) hours.

C.    Every trench must be backfilled and paved or covered by trench plates the same day. The city may issue administrative citations or pursue any other legal remedy if the trenches are not properly covered or backfilled in a timely manner. Backfill must meet the requirements specified in Section 12.12.070. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.070 Backfill.
A.    Trenches shall be backfilled with Class 2 Aggregate Base as specified in the Caltrans Standard Specifications Section 26, “Aggregate Base,” or suitable material as required by the city of St. Helena standard plans and specifications. Compaction of backfill shall be in accordance with the city of St. Helena plans and specifications or using the standard of care in the industry to the reasonable satisfaction of the engineer.

B.    When undermining occurs, remove existing pavement as required to compact the backfill and restore the pavement.

C.    Compaction tests shall be performed by a geotechnical engineer and certified by an independent laboratory and submitted to the engineer, who may require the contractor to recompact and retest until the test results show that proper compaction is being achieved. All compaction testing fees shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.080 Paving.
A.    Trenches shall be paved in accordance with the city of St. Helena standard plans and specifications. After the trench has been backfilled, and immediately prior to placing asphalt concrete, the existing asphalt concrete shall be saw cut, or milled according to the city’s standards, to a vertical face. The cut shall be a “T-cut,” as required by the city’s standards, and the new asphalt concrete paving shall be butt joined to the existing asphalt concrete vertical face. No feathering of new paving to existing paving is allowed. The vertical faces shall be tack coated. In prohibition streets, placement of the final two inches of asphalt concrete wearing surface shall be done by a paving machine or spreader box. Asphalt concrete shall be delivered and compacted in accordance with the city of St. Helena standard plans and specifications.

To allow for proper placement of the new pavement section, damaged pavement outside of the original trench cut lines shall be removed by cutting in lines perpendicular to or parallel to the original trench lines. No diagonal cuts are to be made. Undamaged pavement of three feet or less between two damaged areas shall also be removed. Pavement of three feet or less between the trench and lip of gutter or vertical curb shall be removed.

B.    For trenches in recently paved prohibition streets, the entire lane shall be key cut two inches deep, and repaved with asphalt concrete unless the engineer gives written authorization to resurface with a polymer modified slurry seal or micro surfacing instead. Authorization from the engineer to use slurry seal instead of asphalt concrete shall set forth the reasons for the authorization.

C.    For trenches in recently slurry sealed prohibition streets, the entire lane shall be resurfaced with polymer modified slurry seal or micro surfacing to the satisfaction of the engineer.

D.    Trenches in concrete streets shall be repaved with concrete to the satisfaction of the engineer. The thickness of the new pavement shall be equal to the thickness of the existing pavement with the minimum thickness to be six inches in the roadway.

E.    Trenches in arterial and collector streets shall be paved to the satisfaction of the engineer with not less than six inches asphalt concrete or match the existing pavement thickness (whichever is greater).

F.    Pavement shall be restored within fourteen (14) working days from the time the entire trench is backfilled, unless delay is excused due to circumstances beyond the contractor’s control, such as inclement weather. For minor excavations such as service installations, the pavement shall be restored within thirty (30) working days from the time the entire trench is backfilled, unless delay is excused due to circumstances beyond the contractor’s control, such as inclement weather.

G.    The asphalt pavement base layer and subgrade shall be compacted to obtain a minimum of ninety-five percent (95%) relative compaction, respectively. The asphalt concrete wearing surface shall have no irregularity greater than five-sixteenths of an inch in ten (10) feet in any direction. No area shall be left so that a ponding condition occurs.

H.    On all streets, steel plates shall be used to facilitate traffic flow and to protect the excavation until finish pavement is restored. Steel plates used to bridge a street opening shall be ramped to the elevation on the adjacent pavement and secured against movement in any direction. Temporary ramps shall be constructed of asphalt and shall have a gradual 30:1 slope or flatter using asphalt cutback.

I.    All painted USA markings shall be removed by the permittee after the work has been completed. If the USA markings are on asphalt concrete, then a seal coat or slurry seal shall be used to cover the USA markings. If the USA markings are on concrete, then the USA markings shall be removed by power washing.

J.    All damaged pavement markings, striping, and facilities (such as crosswalk lighting) shall be replaced and restored in the same material and configuration to the satisfaction of the engineer by the permittee. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.090 Defects.
A.    If at any time within twelve (12) months after work is performed pursuant to an encroachment permit, the surface of the street, alley, sidewalk, public square or place remains improperly elevated or depressed, or not properly paved, then such defect shall be repaired and put in good order by the permittee who performed the work or the owner of the facilities who caused said excavation work to be performed. Such repairs shall be performed within three calendar days after notice to repair has been served by the engineer upon the permittee or facilities owner.

B.    Depressed trench pavement shall be repaired as follows:

1.    Wearing Surface Defects. Remove and restore wearing surface to the satisfaction of the engineer.

2.    Major Defects. Excavate, remove and restore surface and base to the satisfaction of the engineer. The permit inspector will determine the severity of the defect.

C.    Work not completed in compliance with the requirements set forth in this section shall be rejected, removed, and redone by the permittee, at the permittee’s sole cost and expense, to the satisfaction of the engineer. If any person fails or neglects to make repairs, after receiving the notice provided for by subsection A of this section, then the engineer shall cause such repairs to be made, keeping an account of all expenses incurred therefor, and certify the same to the city attorney, who shall immediately commence proper proceedings to collect from the person or company so failing to put the street, alley, sidewalk or public square or place in proper condition and repair, or from the sureties upon the undertaking, all costs or charges which the city shall have been put to. In any suit brought under the provisions of this section, there shall be taxed as costs a reasonable attorney’s fee, to be fixed by the court, which shall be, when collected, paid to the city attorney for his or her services rendered therein.

D.    The owner of the facility/utility company is responsible for any roadway defects in the area over and adjacent to the trench appearing after the permittee restores the trench. The owner is responsible for maintenance, repair or reconstruction of the excavation site’s affected area until the city reconstructs, repaves, or resurfaces the street.

E.    If there is a trench-related failure after the city of St. Helena reconstructs, repaves, or resurfaces the street, the owner of the facility/utility company is responsible for its repair if the failure occurs within one year of a trench repair.

F.    When the city of St. Helena determines that an excavation or a defect is hazardous or constitutes a public nuisance or other imminent threat to public health, safety, or welfare, the engineer may order the responsible party to remedy the condition immediately.

If the responsible party refuses or fails to make the needed repairs immediately, the city of St. Helena will make the repairs and:

1.    The responsible party will be charged all the actual costs including administration, construction, consultant fees, equipment, inspection, notification, and remediation made necessary by the action or inaction of the permittee.

2.    The repair or restoration by the city of St. Helena does not relieve the responsible party from liability for future pavement failures.

3.    If the responsible party fails or refuses to pay the restoration cost, the city may use any legal means available to recover the costs, including but not limited to property liens and/or court action. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.100 Applicability to public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter and the standards and requirements adopted pursuant to it apply to each and every public utility and franchisee with facilities in, on, under or above the public right-of-way. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.110 City work exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to construction, reconstruction or removal made by or under the direction of or contract with the city or any of its officers, in the discharge of the officers’ official duties. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.120 Safety precautions.
A.    It shall be the duty of every person doing any work in any public street, alley or other public right-of-way or place to maintain safe crossings for vehicle and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. No street may be blocked without notification and written approval by the city engineer. When approval is granted for street closure, the person responsible for the construction work shall notify the city fire department, police department, and the engineer at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of closure. All street closures shall be opened for traffic at the end of each workday, unless the city engineer grants special approval in writing.

B.    If the street is not wide enough to hold excavated materials without using a part of the adjacent sidewalk, a barrier upon or along such sidewalk and a pedestrian detour shall be erected and maintained along an approved ADA access path as long as the materials remain along the sidewalk.

C.    Free access must be provided to all fire hydrants and water valves at all times. The permittee shall supply any lights, barricades, signs or other safety devices the city engineer deems necessary for the protection of the public. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.130 Drainage.
All existing drainage conduits, pipes, structures, ditches or other facilities in the public street area of the city that provide drainage for stormwater are the property of the city and no person shall divert, plug, abandon, fill, close in, add onto or change them in any manner without a permit from the city engineer. Erosion control shall be provided to prohibit illicit discharges from the construction area. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

12.12.140 Violations—Revocation and other penalties.
Any violation of this chapter may be enforced either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor, and may be subject to civil penalties and other fines as prescribed by Chapters 1.12 and 1.20. Potential enforcement measures include but are not limited to the following:

A.    Fine. If a city inspector finds that a contractor has committed any of the following violations, then the contractor may be required to pay fine or penalty for his or her actions pursuant to Chapter 1.12.

The above fines, when assessed, shall be deducted from the cash deposit required by Section 12.12.050(C)(2) or will be paid by the applicant if there is not a cash deposit.

B.    Suspension. Whenever the engineer finds that a suspension of an encroachment permit is necessary to protect the public health or safety from imminent danger, the engineer may immediately suspend any such permit pending a hearing for remedial action or revocation. The engineer shall, within three working days of the emergency suspension, give a written notice of such suspension to the permittee, by personal service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the permittee. The permittee may, within fifteen (15) days after service of such a written notice of suspension, file with the city manager a request for hearing regarding the suspension. The city manager or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing on the suspension within five working days of receipt of a request for hearing. If the city manager or his or her designee, after the hearing, finds that the public health or safety requires correction or alteration of any condition caused by or existing on the site of the encroachment, he or she shall issue one or more of the following:

1.    An order to correct any particular noncompliance.

2.    A revocation of the encroachment permit.

3.    A continued suspension of the encroachment permit, until such time as the dangerous condition is corrected.

4.    A modification or reinstatement of the encroachment permit, with conditions as necessary to prevent harm to the public.

The city manager or his or her designee shall, within ten (10) days of the hearing, render a written opinion, stating the findings upon which the decision is based, and the action taken. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be final, except a decision to revoke the permit that may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 1.16.010.

C.    Revocation. The engineer may recommend that the city manager revoke a permit where he or she finds that:

1.    The permittee has violated any provision of this code or conditions of the permit; or

2.    The permittee has failed to pay any required fees, or to post or maintain any bond or insurance required by this chapter; or

3.    The encroachment for which the permit was granted adversely affects the safety, capacity, or integrity of the public right-of-way or increases the city’s liability exposure; or

4.    The encroachment is causing the city to incur substantial additional maintenance costs; or

5.    Material misrepresentations, omissions, or inaccuracies were made in the application for the permit.

The engineer shall give the permittee at least ten (10) days’ written notice of a hearing before the city manager or his or her designee on the proposed revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, setting forth the grounds for such action. If, after reviewing all evidence presented before or at the hearing, the city manager or his or her designee makes any one of the five findings set forth above, he or she may revoke the permit. The city manager or his or her designee shall, within ten (10) days after the close of the hearing, render a written opinion, stating the findings upon which the decision is based, and the action taken. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 13-3 § 3 (part))

Chapter 12.16
OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
Sections:

12.16.010    Obstructing streets and sidewalks.

12.16.020    Awnings, marquees and canopies.

12.16.030    Lights and barriers around obstructions.

12.16.040    Erection of signs over sidewalks.

12.16.010 Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any street or sidewalk, and no person owning, occupying or having the control of any premises, shall suffer to remain upon a street or sidewalk in front thereof, any boxes, bales, barrels, wood, lumber, goods, wares, newsracks and merchandise or any other thing obstructing the free use and passage of such street or sidewalk, excepting that the city manager may grant encroachment permits for newsracks pursuant to Chapter 12.20 and the city council may grant permits allowing the placing of permanent tree, shrub and flower planters, permanent flag display devices for United States flags, and portable shoeshine stands if permitted by the zoning ordinance on sidewalks upon such terms and conditions as the city council may determine and may by motion waive the provisions hereof as to temporary merchandise displays for business area sales promotion events. (Prior code § 13.7)

12.16.020 Awnings, marquees and canopies.
A.    No marquee, canopy, awning or similar fixture shall be installed, rebuilt or altered that encroaches upon the public sidewalk area within the area measured horizontally from the face of the established curb to a point two feet at right angles thereto. The lower edge of such marquee, canopy, awning or other fixture shall not be less than seven and one-half feet above the sidewalk immediately below.

B.    The city council may, in its discretion, grant a permit allowing the placement of posts, columns or other supporting structures for awnings, marquees or canopies to be erected or constructed upon the public sidewalk area incidental to the restoration, reconstruction, replacement or remodeling of historic buildings or structures; provided, that the city council finds that such encroachment does not interfere with the safe and convenient use by the public of the public sidewalks nor adversely affect the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties. No such encroaching structures shall be located closer than two feet distant from the face of the established curb. An application shall be filed for the encroachment permit setting forth the precise plans and specifications for the encroachment and all facts justifying the granting of the permit, and an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid. The application shall be heard by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the filing thereof. (Prior code § 13.9)

12.16.030 Lights and barriers around obstructions.
Any person by whom, or under whose immediate direction, or by whose immediate authority, as principal, contractor or employer, any portion of a public street, alley, sidewalk, public park or place may be made dangerous shall:

A.    Erect, and so long as the danger may continue, maintain around the portions thereof so made dangerous, a good and sufficient barrier;

B.    Cause to be maintained during every night, from sunset to daylight, lighted lanterns at each end of the place so made dangerous and also at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet along its length, and at every side of a street crossing so made dangerous. (Prior code § 13.10)

12.16.040 Erection of signs over sidewalks.
A.    Generally. No sign or advertisement shall be hung, erected or extended over any sidewalk in the city without first obtaining the approval of the city council. Any person erecting or extending any sign or advertisement contrary to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to take down such sign.

B.    Signs to be Securely Fastened—Removal by Superintendent of Streets. Signs or advertising hung, erected or extending over any sidewalk in the city shall be securely fastened in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent of streets. If the superintendent of streets shall at any time become dissatisfied with the way any sign or advertising is hung, erected or extended, he or she may require the same to be made satisfactory to him or her, or the sign or advertising be taken down. (Prior code §§ 13.23, 13.24)

Chapter 12.20
NEWSRACKS
Sections:

12.20.010    Purpose and intent.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Newsracks regulated on roadways and sidewalks.

12.20.040    Permit required.

12.20.050    Standards for the installation, maintenance and operation of newsracks.

12.20.060    Newsrack violations.

12.20.070    Hearing procedure.

12.20.080    Notices.

12.20.090    Applicability.

12.20.100    Abandoned newsracks.

12.20.110    Enforcement authority.

12.20.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    Findings. The council of the city finds and declares that:

1.    The uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks in the public right-of-way can constitute a threat to public health, safety and welfare by interfering with and obstructing the use of the public right of way and by offending community aesthetic sensibilities.

2.    The council recognizes, however, that the use of such rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and news periodicals that access to those areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The council further finds that these strong and competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can only be satisfactorily achieved through the means of this chapter which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the time, place and manner of using such newsracks.

B.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on the public rights of way so as to:

1.    Protect the right to distribute information, protected by the United States and California constitutions, through the use of newsracks;

2.    Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;

3.    Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any place of business or from the street to the sidewalk;

4.    Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes;

5.    Reduce visual blight on the public rights of way, encourage well-designed and aesthetically compatible newsracks and protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties;

6.    Reduce exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation.

C.    Preservation of Constitutional Rights. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. (Prior code § 13.52)

12.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates:

“City manager” means the city manager or the designee of the city manager.

“Double-slotted newsracks” means single newsracks containing separate provisions for two tabloid style (vertically formatted) publications, where each side has separate coin slots or merchandise receptacles or places where the publications are dispersed. A double-slotted newsrack shall be considered one newsrack for purposes of this chapter.

“Historic district” means Main Street between Spring Street and Pine Street, and any public street or alley located within fifty (50) feet of such portion of Main Street.

“Modular newsracks” means an attached group of two or more newsracks supported by a single pedestal.

“Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale or free distribution of newspapers, news periodicals, commercial handbills or other publications.

“Person” means any person or persons, or entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or joint venture. (Prior code § 13.53)

12.20.030 Newsracks regulated on roadways and sidewalks.
A.    Roadway Prohibition. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or over, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon any part of the roadway of any public street.

B.    Sidewalk Restrictions. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway in any manner inconsistent with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 13.54)

12.20.040 Permit required.
A.    No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city manager.

B.    The application for permit shall be filed with the city clerk upon a form provided by such clerk for that purpose and shall include the following information:

1.    The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2.    The address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any reasonable time concerning the applicant’s newsracks;

3.    The number of newsracks and names of publications to be contained in each newsrack, including any existing newsracks;

4.    Type or brand of newsrack, including description of the newsrack and supporting or enclosing structure;

5.    Site plan showing exact location of each newsrack and supporting or enclosing structure and sufficient information to determine that the location complies with Section 12.20.050;

6.    Such application shall also contain a statement that the applicant will, in consideration of being issued a permit for the use of space, be responsible for any damage or repairs caused by the removal or installation of any newsrack and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any loss, liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of the applicant’s newsrack within the city.

C.    A permit shall be issued within ten (10) days if the type of newsrack and location(s) proposed meet the standards set forth in this chapter. If a permit is disapproved, in whole or in part, the city manager shall immediately notify the applicant in writing, explaining the reasons for denial. The applicant shall have ten (10) calendar days within which to appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with the appeals provisions of this code.

D.    In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to be located or to remain if already in place, the city manager shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

1.    All publications in place on November 26, 1996, in the historic district shall be permitted to remain at the locations agreed upon among the affected vendors on July 17, 1997, provided the newsracks conform to the requirements of this chapter.

2.    Any publications other than those allowed under subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be issued permits on a first-come, first-serve basis, based upon the filing date of a complete application commencing August 13, 1997.

3.    If a permit cannot be issued because there are no available newsracks at the desired locations, the application, upon request, shall be placed on a waiting list. If the requested location becomes available, the applicant will be notified according to its placement on the waiting list and a permit shall be issued provided that the newsrack complies with the provisions of this chapter.

E.    A permit is issued to the owner of the newsrack and the owner may place its own publications in the newsrack so long as the permit is valid. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a permittee from sharing a double-slotted newsrack with another permittee, provided the new permittee is taken from the waiting list, if any, established by subsection (D)(3) of this section; if there is no waiting list, the permittee may share with another permittee of its choosing. If a double-slotted newsrack is shared by two permittees, they shall share the costs and responsibilities related to the newsrack equally.

F.    A permit shall be revoked automatically if the permitted newsrack is not in place and in full compliance with the provisions of the chapter within thirty (30) days of issuance. (Prior code § 13.55)

12.20.050 Standards for the installation, maintenance and operation of newsracks.
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:

A.    Placement.

1.    No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object; however, newsracks may be bolted to the sidewalk or a concrete footing under pavers, as the case may be, provided that the owner restores the sidewalk or pavers to their original condition upon removal of the newsrack.

2.    No modular newsracks may be placed within two hundred (200) feet of other modular newsracks on the same side of the street, with the exception of those permitted under subsection (C)(1) of this section.

3.    No single newsrack may be placed within two hundred (200) feet of another single newsrack or modular newsracks on the same side of the street.

4.    Where there are two more newsracks in one location, modular newsracks shall be required. The compartments of modular newsracks shall be placed in such a manner as to utilize no more than two horizontal rows of three compartments per row.

B.    Location. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:

1.    When such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property;

2.    When such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or other governmental use;

3.    When such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including legally parked or stopped vehicles; the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business; the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near the location;

4.    When such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery;

5.    Within five feet of any marked crosswalk not at an intersection;

6.    Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any intersection;

7.    Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

8.    Within five feet of any driveway;

9.    With the back to the roadway along the curb if located within five feet of any curb area designated by markings or signage to be a bus stop;

10.    At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;

11.    Within any area designated by curb markings or signage to be handicapped parking;

12.    So as to interfere with or impair the vision of operators of vehicles at street intersections. Because of the special circumstances related to the historic district as set forth in the recitals to this chapter, the specific locations in the historic district shall be as set forth in subsection (C) of this section.

C.    Total Number.

1.    In the historic district, a total of twenty-eight (28) newsracks may be located at the following locations:

a.    West side of Main Street:

i.    The bus shelter between Pine Street and Adams Street: two modular newsracks placed on either side of the garbage receptacle located immediately north of the bus shelter with the backs parallel to the back of sidewalk; each modular consisting of two newsracks stacked on two newsracks.

ii.    Between Main Street Books and Vasconi Pharmacy: one modular newsrack with the back to the roadway; three newsracks stacked on three newsracks.

iii.    Between St. Helena Hotel and Gillwoods: one modular newsrack placed with the back to the roadway; three newsracks stacked on three newsracks.

b.    East side of Main Street:

i.    Cornerstone Hotel frontage: two modular newsracks with the backs to the roadway located on each side of tree; each modular consisting of two newsracks stacked on two newsracks.

2.    In areas outside the historic district, no more than six newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within the same block of the same street. As used in this subsection “block” means one side of a street between two consecutive intersections.

D.    Dimensions and Design.

1.    Each newsrack shall be a pedestal style, either the KJ-50 as manufactured by K-Jack or the TK-4916, as manufactured by Sho-Rack, or similar thereto.

2.    The color of any newsrack shall be a dark brown solid; the city encourages the use of “federal brown” (as manufactured by “Sho-Rack”).

3.    No newsrack shall exceed fifty-eight (58) inches in height measured from the surface of the sidewalk or ground to the top surface of the newsrack, twenty-five (25) inches in width, or twenty (20) inches in depth.

E.    Maintenance. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times.

F.    Advertising. Newsracks shall carry no advertising or publicity notices. A logo or other information identifying the newspaper may be displayed on the sides and back of the newsrack and limited to a height of three inches on the bottom one-third of the front.

G.    Identification. The address and telephone number of a responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be displayed on the front of the newsrack in such manner as to be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer thereof, which display shall not exceed twelve (12) square inches in size. (Prior code § 13.56)

12.20.060 Newsrack violations.
A.    Notice of Intent to Revoke. If at any time it is determined by the city manager that any newsrack for which a permit has been issued is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, a notice of intent to revoke the permit shall be issued, in writing, to the permittee. The notice shall state the violation or violations which constitute the basis of the proposed revocation, the city’s intent to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected or a hearing requested within fifteen (15) days (“correction period”), and the procedure for requesting a hearing before the city manager, if desired. A timely request for a hearing shall stay any removal of the newsrack. If, however, the violation is not corrected within five days after the decision at such hearing becomes final, the newsrack may be summarily removed.

B.    Alternative to Issuing a Notice of Intent to Revoke. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations of this chapter relative to location of newsracks or restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack to fixed objects or to each other, the city manager may, as an alternative to issuing a notice of intent to revoke the permit, align, remove such attachment, or otherwise move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of a fee equal to the reasonable cost to the city of restoring them to a legal condition.

C.    Removal. Any newsrack installed without a valid permit, or not brought into compliance with this chapter pursuant to Section 12.20.090, or for which a notice of intent to revoke the permit has been issued remains in violation of the provisions stated in the notice past the fifteen (15) day correction period and where no hearing has been requested, shall be removed by the city manager and stored in any convenient place.

D.    Notification of Removal. The city manager shall notify the owner or his or her designate of the removal by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the owner/designate. Such notice shall be mailed within five days after removal of the newsrack and shall state: (1) the date the newsrack was removed; (2) the reasons for the removal; (3) the locations of and procedure for claiming the newsrack; and (4) the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the city manager if desired.

E.    Release. Any newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof within six months after the mailing of written notice of removal upon providing satisfactory proof of ownership and payment of an impound fee in an amount equal to the reasonable cost to the city of removing and storing the newsrack. If, after a hearing, the impounded newsrack is determined not to have been in violation of this chapter, the newsrack shall be returned to the owner without payment of any removal and/or storage fee. If such newsrack remains unclaimed after this six-month period, it shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the police division and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.12.020 of this code.

F.    Removal in Exigent Circumstances. In the case of any newsrack which in violation of the provisions of this chapter creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public which cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the newsrack, such newsrack may be summarily removed and stored in a convenient location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city manager shall notify the owner of the removal by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall be mailed within five days after the removal of the newsrack and shall contain the same information as set forth in subsection (D) of this section. Release of any such newsrack shall be accomplished in the same manner as set forth in subsection E of this section. (Prior code § 13.57)

12.20.070 Hearing procedure.
A.    Within fifteen (15) days of the notice of intent to revoke or the notice of removal, the owner may request a hearing before the city manager. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the city manager.

B.    The hearing shall be held within five working days of the filing of the request before the city manager, unless the owner and city manager otherwise agree. At the hearing any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack has been installed or maintained in violation of this chapter. Within two working days after the close of the hearing, the city manager shall render a decision in writing and shall give such written decision to the person who requested the hearing. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Prior code § 13.58)

12.20.080 Notices.
Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given in writing by United States mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. The giving of notice under this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Prior code § 13.59)

12.20.090 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall obtain a permit and be brought into compliance with these provisions within fifteen (15) days of this chapter’s effective date. Any newsrack not brought in compliance within this time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 13.60)

12.20.100 Abandoned newsracks.
A newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when no printed material is contained therein for a period of more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. If the city manager determines that a newsrack has been abandoned, the permit shall be deemed revoked and he or she may summarily impound such newsrack and shall mail a notice of removal as set forth in Section 12.20.060(D). Release of any such newsrack shall be accomplished in the same manner as set forth in Section 12.20.060(E). (Prior code § 13.61)

12.20.110 Enforcement authority.
Except as specifically provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city manager or his or her designee pursuant to Section 2.12.060(B)(16) of this code. (Prior code § 13.63)

Chapter 12.24
TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION
Sections:

12.24.010    Findings and purpose.

12.24.020    Definitions.

12.24.030    Tree committee.

12.24.040    Master tree plan.

12.24.050    Master street tree list.

12.24.060    Planting, maintenance and removal of city trees.

12.24.070    Responsibility for maintenance of street trees and plants in planting strips.

12.24.080    Hazardous vegetation deemed nuisance.

12.24.090    General provisions.

12.24.100    Pruning and removal permit for public utility.

12.24.110    Designation of heritage trees.

12.24.120    Maintenance, repair and removal of heritage trees in the public right-of-way.

12.24.130    Pruning, maintenance and removal of protected trees.

12.24.140    Damage to protected trees.

12.24.150    Protection of protected trees during and after construction activity.

12.24.160    Review of land use applications by tree committee.

12.24.170    Solar shade control.

12.24.180    Appeal.

12.24.190    Liability.

12.24.200    Enforcement.

12.24.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    The city council finds and declares that trees contribute greatly to the health, safety, and general welfare of all of the city’s citizens and that the preservation and proper maintenance of trees is a matter of city-wide concern. The city council further finds and determines that it is necessary to enact regulations prohibiting unnecessary damage, removal, or destruction of trees.

B.    The city council recognizes and finds that trees provide great aesthetic benefits, offer windbreaks, provide summer shade, noise abatement, and privacy screening, erosion control, act as filters against airborne pollutants, release oxygen, are wildlife habitats, and prevent landslides through their root systems. All trees perform these functions for the property on which they are growing. Trees of significant size and maturity perform these functions for all persons living in their vicinity. Trees are key elements in a living system the boundaries of which do not conform to the arbitrary property lines of individual lots and parcels and upon which the continued health and welfare of this community depends. In addition, trees in the community and in a neighborhood provide a sense of identity and tradition and enhance property values.

C.    The city council further finds and declares that careless treatment and arbitrary removal of trees detracts from scenic beauty, causes erosion, increase risks of landslides, reduces property values, increases construction costs and drainage costs, thereby further reduces the attractiveness of an area.

D.    A purpose of the city council in enacting the following regulations is to protect certain trees that are an essential part of the city’s natural heritage, referred to in this chapter as heritage trees and other protected trees, wherever they may be growing in the city, while at the same time, recognizing an individual property owner’s right to utilize his or her land in a way that is otherwise allowed by law. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.1)

12.24.020 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall apply:

“Alter” means to take an action that could foreseeable diminish the health and vigor of a tree. Alter includes but is not limited to, excessive or improper pruning of a tree, grade changes around or near a tree, excessive irrigation of a tree, and trenching in the root zone of a tree. Alter does not include periodic pruning of a tree to preserve or protect its health, growth or appearance, in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices.

Candidate Heritage Tree. The tree committee shall adopt and maintain a list of properties or parcels that contain a tree of a size, species or historical value that makes it eligible for heritage tree status.

“Certified arborist” means a person who has been tested by and is currently certified as an “arborist” by the International Society of Arboriculture.

“Certified tree worker” means a person who has been tested by and is currently certified as “tree worker” by the International Society of Arboriculture.

“City” means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

“City tree” means any tree growing on any city-owned property, right-of-way or easement dedicated to the city.

“Committee” means the tree committee established pursuant to this chapter.

“Director” means the director of public works or the

director’s designated representative.

“Drip line” means an area of the ground delineated by the vertical projection of the outside periphery of the foliage crown area of a tree down to the ground surface.

“Heritage tree” means any tree or grove of trees within the city boundaries designated by a resolution of the city council and having met the requirements set forth in this chapter.

“Maintain” or “Maintenance” means trimming, pruning, pest management, injecting, fertilizing, cabling, treating for injury and other similar acts which promote the life, growth, health or beauty of trees and other plants, excepting watering only, unless specifically so stated.

“Master street tree list” means the list of trees approved for planting in planting strips and planting easements, as approved by the city council.

“Master tree plan” means the plan designating specific trees and maintenance practices for specific locations in areas of the city, as approved by the city council.

“Planting easement” means an easement held by the city on private property for sidewalks, plantings and/or utilities.

“Planting strip” means the portion of the public right-of-way between the curb, gutter or edge of street surfacing and the property line, but excluding curbs and sidewalks.

“Property owner” means the person listed on the then-current assessor’s roll as the owner of a designated property.

“Protected replacement tree” means any tree that is planted on public or private property as a condition of mitigation for the removal of any existing native or heritage tree(s). The intent of this designation is to insure that trees planted as replacement trees for heritage trees or significant native trees that have to be removed will be protected and preserved so that over the course of time these replacement trees will mature to the size and uniqueness of the trees they replace. Protected replacement trees by definition are subject to all of the conditions and protections as those for heritage trees as set forth in this chapter.

“Protected tree” means heritage tree, protected replacement tree, street tree and city tree.

“Public utility” means every gas, electrical, telephone, telegraph, and water service, waste disposal or recycling corporation where such service is performed for the city and its residents.

“Qualified city employee,” with reference to tree maintenance, means any city park or public works employee who satisfies the definition of a qualified tree worker (Section 3.41) of ANSI A300-1995, complies with the standards of ANSI A300-1995 while performing tree maintenance, and is deemed so qualified by the director.

“Root zone” means an area surrounding a tree extending from the trunk of the tree to the natural drip line of the tree.

“Solar collector” means a fixed device or structure, or a part of a device or structure, which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal, chemical or electrical energy, and used as part of a system which makes use of solar energy for any or all of the following purposes: (a) water heating; (b) space heating or cooling; and (c) power generation.

“Street” means land which has been dedicated, condemned or legally established by use for a public thoroughfare, whether paved or unpaved in whole or in part, except state highways and freeways. “Street” includes all thoroughfares whether designated by that name or some other, such as avenue, court, way, boulevard or road.

“Street line” means the property line marking the boundary between private property and a city street or right-of-way.

“Street tree” means a tree planted in a planting strip or planting easement. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.2)

12.24.030 Tree committee.
The tree committee shall consist of five members, plus two alternates. Committee members shall be residents of the city; provided, that the mayor reserves the authority to appoint nonresidents to the committee on a case-by-case basis, with the consent of the city council. Each member shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The tree committee shall serve as an appeals board to decisions of the director on tree issues, shall perform other functions as defined within this chapter, and shall annually review and update the master tree plan and tree list. In all matters pertaining to trees in the city, the committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council, the director, the parks and recreation commission, the planning commission and to the public. The committee shall devise a set of bylaws governing its meetings. Committee members shall serve for a term of two years, with the term of office to expire at the end of the fiscal year. The city council may establish one-year terms for some committee members for the purpose of staggering term expirations. (Ord. 14-6 § 3: Ord. 02-5 § 15a; Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.4)

12.24.040 Master tree plan.
The tree committee, with the assistance of the director, shall prepare and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan of street trees for all streets of the city where planting areas are available and provided for trees. The plan may be reviewed and revised from time to time by the tree committee. In accordance with the plan, the director shall proceed each year to plant or replace trees to the extent that funds are appropriated for that purpose by the city council. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.5)

12.24.050 Master street tree list.
A.    The tree committee, with the assistance of the director, shall determine criteria for selection of street and park trees, and develop and recommend to the city council a list of trees which meet these criteria. When approved by the city council, the list shall be known as the “master street tree list” and shall be made available to the public. The master street tree list shall be reviewed and recommended for revision from time to time by the tree committee. Only trees on the master street tree list may be planted in planting strips and planting easements, except as may be approved according to provisions of this chapter.

B.    The tree committee shall also develop and recommend to the city council a list of undesirable trees which shall not be planted anywhere in the city unless the director approves the site as one where the trees’ roots will not interfere with a sewer line or public sidewalk or when measures are taken to protect such sewer lines and sidewalks using commercial barriers or root-control containers. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.6)

12.24.060 Planting, maintenance and removal of city trees.
A.    Supervision. The director shall authorize the planting, maintenance and removal of trees or other plants in any planting strip, planting easement, public way or place in the city.

B.    Planting and Maintenance. The selection, planting and maintenance of trees in all planting strips or planting easements within the city shall be in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the master street tree plan.

C.    Damaged, Injured or Hazardous Trees. City trees in a condition which, in the opinion of the director, are an immediate threat to life or property shall have such conditions corrected or the tree shall be removed. The director shall make this decision after consultation with a certified arborist if circumstances permit. Except in such emergency circumstances, city trees which are damaged, injured or destroyed shall have conditions corrected or removed upon recommendations of the director and a certified arborist and approval by the tree committee. In all cases the hazardous condition shall be corrected as soon as conditions permit. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.7)

12.24.070 Responsibility for maintenance of street trees and plants in planting strips.
A.    Except for heritage trees as set forth in Section 12.24.120 and as otherwise allowed by the city council, the property owner fronting a planting strip shall have the responsibility to maintain and care for the street trees and other plants in the planting strip in front of his or her property; to water, spray and trim for beauty; to pay the expense of repairs to property owner’s property or to sewer laterals which repairs are necessitated by damage caused by street trees or other plants in planting strips; to trim plants other than trees so as to prevent endangering the security, usefulness or safety of any public street; to repair curb and sidewalk damage caused by trees; and to remove and replace trees in the planting strip if removal is necessary to the public health or safety, including disease control.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city shall have the responsibility to maintain and care for the street trees and other plants in the planting strip along Main Street between Sulphur Creek Bridge and Pine Street; to water, spray and trim such trees for beauty; to trim plants other than trees so as to prevent endangering the security, usefulness or safety of such portion of Main Street; and to remove and replace trees in such planting strip if removal is necessary to the public health or safety, including disease control. The property owner fronting the planting strip along Main Street between Sulphur Creek Bridge and Pine Street shall continue to have the responsibility to pay the expense of repairs to the property owner’s property or to sewer laterals which repairs are necessitated by damage caused by trees or other plants in such planting strip; and to repair curb and sidewalk damage caused by such street trees. The city’s responsibility to trim and maintain tree roots in such planting strip shall arise only when the property owner repairs curbs and/or sidewalk damage caused by the tree roots.

C.    All maintenance, removal and replacement of street trees and other plants in planting strips shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, including Sections 12.24.060 and 12.24.090. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.8)

12.24.080 Hazardous vegetation deemed nuisance.
Any plant material or part thereof growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any public street, easement or right-of-way that in the opinion of the director endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public shall be declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.32 and 8.08. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.9)

12.24.090 General provisions.
A.    No person, other than the director or his or her authorized representative, shall plant or prune any tree within the planting strip or planting easement along any street without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the director. The request for such a permit shall state the type and number of trees, planting and pruning procedures, the location and such other information as may from time to time be required by the director.

B.    Any tree work or tree removal within the city right-of-way requires an encroachment permit. Encroachment permit fees for pruning or removal of street trees will be waived.

C.    All maintenance, removal and replacement of trees shall be performed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any tree standards adopted by the city.

D.    No person other than a property owner, the city, or a public utility may do any act for which a permit is required by this chapter except a person whose principal business is tree care, pruning or maintenance, who is an ISA certified arborist, or who in the opinion of the director, is qualified for such business and has obtained a business license to carry on such business in the city.

E.    No person shall interfere or cause any person to interfere with any tree related work being done pursuant to this chapter by any employee of the city or any person or firm working under the direction of the city. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.10)

12.24.100 Pruning and removal permit for public utility.
A.    Any public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the State Public Utilities Commission and any duly constituted public agency providing utility service must first obtain a permit from the director, valid for one year from the date of issuance, permitting such public utility to prune or cut, below or above the ground, or brace, remove or perform similar acts on any protected trees or trees growing on private property to the extent that they encroach upon the utilities. Such work is limited to that which may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of such commission and as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business.

B.    Any public utility holding such a permit shall notify the director in writing at least five days prior to commencement of tree work and shall state the type and location of work contemplated. Prior to commencement of work the permit holder shall provide notice to adjacent property owners. All pruning and removals shall be performed in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations, Section 5.7. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.11)

12.24.110 Designation of heritage trees.
A.    Candidate trees for designation as heritage trees shall be nominated by citizens of the community or the tree committee. Upon nomination, and with the written permission of the owner of the candidate tree, a candidate tree shall be submitted for review by the director of public works and the tree committee. Upon recommendation of the tree committee and resolution by the city council, after the holding of a noticed public hearing, a tree may be designated a heritage tree if it meets at least one of the following criteria:

1.    Historical significance;

2.    Over thirty (30) inches in diameter measured four and one-half feet above the ground;

3.    Unique or rare horticultural specimen;

4.    Uniqueness of size or age;

5.    Aesthetic value due to symmetry, form, color, other qualities;

6.    An outstanding specimen of a desirable species, especially native oak specie;

7.    Significance for habitat preservation, including where tree is one of a group of trees each dependant on the other for survival.

B.    The director of public works shall cause each tree designated a heritage tree to be identified by placing a tag as may be specified by the director on the tree approximately six feet above the ground, or in another manner as may be specified by the director. The director shall also keep a list of the heritage trees in the city by number and approximate location. No person shall remove the identification without written permission from the director.

C.    Upon designation, the city shall cause a notice of heritage tree status to be recorded with the Napa County recorder.

D.    The owner of a heritage tree shall receive a resolution of appreciation from the city and may be eligible for free consultation and advice from a certified arborist for the heritage tree.

E.    Heritage tree designation can be removed upon approval of the city council for good cause shown after a noticed public hearing. The tree committee shall make a recommendation to the city council regarding removal of the heritage tree designation.(Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.12)

12.24.120 Maintenance, repair and removal of heritage trees in the public right-of-way.
A.    The city shall be responsible for maintaining heritage trees in the public right-of-way and the costs associated with such maintenance. Maintenance shall include but not be limited to: watering; pruning for tree health, structure, from and for public safety; spraying for pathogens and insects; fertilizing; and managing the root zone for health and vigor.

B.    The city shall be responsible for repairing curb and sidewalk damage within the public right-of-way caused by heritage trees in the public right-of-way. The city shall also be responsible for removing and replacing heritage trees in the public right-of-way when necessary for public health and safety, including disease control.

C.    Property owners shall be responsible for damage to their properties or to water and sewer lines caused by heritage trees in the public right-of-way consistent with city utility maintenance policies.

D.    All maintenance and replacement of heritage trees in the public right-of-way shall be performed in compliance with the other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.13)

12.24.130 Pruning, maintenance and removal of protected trees.
A.    No person shall cut or prune, below or above ground, brace, move, remove, cause to cut, alter, or perform such other acts with respect to any protected tree without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the director. The application shall state the number and identify the location of each protected tree for which a permit is sought, and shall contain other pertinent information as the director may require. The application may also include documentation of any type, including written recommendations from a certified arborist concerning the health, quality and desirability of alternatives to the tree or trees in question. The necessity for the requested action shall be demonstrated to the director by the applicant.

B.    Upon receipt of the application, the director shall make a recommendation to the tree committee as to the acceptability of the requested action based on the following findings:

1.    The overall condition of the tree, including any diseases and pests that may be attacking it; the tree’s age with respect to its projected life span; the area the tree would hit if it, or any substantial part of it, were to fall; its symmetry and aesthetics; its proximity to existing structures; and any interference it has caused with underground or overhead utility lines;

2.    The topography of land and the effect the tree alteration or removal may have on possible erosion or soil retention problems or on increasing the flow or the diversion of surface waters;

3.    The number, species, size, and location of the other existing trees in the area and the effect the requested action will have on shade area, air pollution, historic values, scenic beauty, and the general welfare of the city;

4.    Whether the request is supported by good urban forestry practices and standards such as, but not limited to, the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support.

C.    The findings of the director will be presented to the tree committee for its review and approval. If the director recommends and the tree committee approves the application, the director shall issue a permit, subject to such conditions that the director and the tree committee deem appropriate, which may include the planting of replacement trees or protected replacement trees.

D.    All cutting or pruning, below or above the ground, bracing, or alteration of a protected tree shall be done only by a qualified city employee, certified tree worker, certified arborist, or with a certified arborist in attendance and supervising the entire process, except as otherwise allowed by the permit.

E.    A permit granted under the provisions of this section shall be valid for a period of sixty (60) days from the date of issuance unless a longer period is stated on the permit.

F.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a qualified city employee may prune or cut, below or above the ground, or brace a city tree that is not a heritage tree under the direction of the director and without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the tree committee.

G.    Notwithstanding the findings required in subsection B of this section, the city council may approve the removal of protected trees for good cause. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.14)

12.24.140 Damage to protected trees.
A.    Except as permitted in this chapter, no person shall break, injure, deface, mutilate, kill, remove or destroy any protected tree; or knowingly cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come into contact with any protected tree; or place, apply, attach or keep attached to any such tree a guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign, paint or other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever; or place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any protected tree.

B.    Any party determined to have caused damage to any protected tree as described in subsection A of this section shall be liable for the cost of repair or replacement of the tree. Costs shall be based on Napa County landscape industry costs and on tree valuation standards set by the International Society of Arboriculture. Such moneys shall be paid to the city and shall be used to repair or replace the damaged tree. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.15)

12.24.150 Protection of protected trees during and after construction activity.
A.    During any construction activity within the drip line of a protected tree, inside or outside the public right-of-way, no person shall, without permission from the director of public works, do the following:

1.    Change the amount of irrigation provided to any protected tree from that which was provided prior to the commencement of construction activity;

2.    Trench, grade or pave into the root zone of a protected tree;

3.    Change, by more than two feet, grade elevations within an area from the drip line of a protected tree outward to thirty (30) feet in distance;

4.    Park or operate any motor vehicle within the drip line area of any protected tree except in designated parking areas;

5.    Place or store any equipment or construction materials within the drip line area of any protected tree except in designated parking areas;

6.    Attach any signs, ropes, cables or any other items to any protected tree;

7.    Cut or trim any branch of a protected tree for temporary construction purposes;

8.    Place or allow to flow into or over the root zone area of any protected tree any oil, fuel, concrete mix or other deleterious substance.

B.    Where written permission of the director is sought under this section, the director may grant such permission with such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to effectuate the intent and purpose of this chapter.

C.    A protected tree shall be protected after construction activity in accordance with conditions imposed by the city and/or specifications adopted by the tree committee. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.16)

12.24.160 Review of land use applications by tree committee.
A.    The planning director shall refer all subdivision and parcel map applications to the tree committee for review and recommendation. All subdivision and parcel map applications shall include a map identifying all trees over six inches in diameter, measured four feet and six inches above the soil line or natural grade, upon the property proposed for division. All such trees shall be shown by size and species.

B.    The planning director shall refer all other discretionary planning project applications to the tree committee for review and recommendation if such applications pertain to property that has been identified as having a heritage tree or candidate heritage tree. Discretionary projects shall include, but not be limited to, design review, use permits, variances, and sign permits. Such applications shall include a site plan identifying the location of the heritage tree or candidate heritage tree.

C.    The tree committee may request the public works designated staff member to review planning project referrals as needed.

D.    Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the planning project referral, the tree committee shall notify the planning director if further review of the project is warranted or if additional information is needed for adequate review of the project. Such information may include, but is not limited to, the submittal of an arborist’s report noting the health of the tree, or the on-site identification of trees that are proposed for removal.

E.    Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the planning project referral or of the complete information requested for review of the referral, whichever is later, the tree committee shall forward recommendations to the planning director for consideration by the planning commission in its review of the project. Recommendations may include a requirement to prohibit the removal of trees, to redesign a project to lessen the impact upon trees, to plant additional trees to mitigate for tree removal, or to maintain the tree in accordance with conditions imposed.

F.    When applicable, the tree committee shall determine the type of tree that shall be planted in planting strips along the street frontage. Property owners shall be responsible for the planting and maintenance of the trees in the planting strips.

G.    The director shall be notified of any applications for curb, gutter, sidewalk, street light or driveway installations or other proposed improvements which might require the removal of protected trees, cause injury to any protected tree or interfere with the fulfillment of protected tree plantings. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.17)

12.24.170 Solar shade control.
A.    No person owning or in control of a property shall allow a tree or shrub to be placed, or, if placed, to grow on such property, subsequent to the installation of a solar collector on the property of another so as to impede reasonable use of the “collect or absorption area” as defined in Section 801.5 of the California Civil Code. For the purpose of this chapter, the location of a solar collector is required to comply with the local building and setback regulations.

B.    Nothing in this section shall apply to the replacement of a tree or shrub which has been growing prior to the installation of a solar collector and which, subsequent to the installation of such solar collectors, dies. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.18)

12.24.180 Appeal.
Any person shall have the right to appeal an action of the tree committee to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after the date of such action. Prior to scheduling the appeal for the city council the city clerk shall forward the appeal to the tree committee for comment and recommendation to the council. A decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 14-6 § 4: Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.19)

12.24.190 Liability.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers, employees or members of the tree committee nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree upon his or her property or under his or her control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 12.24.080. (Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.20)

12.24.200 Enforcement.
A.    The director shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

B.    The director shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to comply to any property owner who is violating the provisions of this chapter or rules, regulations and requirements adopted pursuant hereto. Upon failure of the property owner to comply, the director may cause compliance by having city employees or contractors perform the necessary work, may assess the cost thereof to the property owner, and impose a lien on the property for the cost thereof plus a fifteen percent (15%) administrative charge.

C.    Every person who violates this chapter is guilty of a “public nuisance” as defined in Sections 370 and 371 of the Penal Code and in Section 34808 of the Civil Code. For the purposes of this chapter, a violation is deemed an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the value of the tree. A second and any subsequent violation of this section within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable as a misdemeanor with a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the value of the tree, or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

D.    The remedies herein are not exclusive. The city may avail itself of any other remedies available in equity or at law. (Ord. 02-5 § 16; Ord. 01-6 § 3 (part): prior code § 17.21)

Chapter 12.28
MISCELLANEOUS STREET/SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
Sections:

12.28.010    Prohibited on portion of Main Street.

12.28.020    Exceptions to poles used for street lighting and traffic-control purposes.

12.28.030    Suspension by resolution.

12.28.040    City electroliers.

12.28.010 Prohibited on portion of Main Street.
It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person, as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee, for himself or herself or for another, to erect, use or maintain or cause to be erected, used or maintained, any pole used or designed to be used to carry any wires or cables or other apparatus, equipment or facilities for transmission or distribution of electrical energy or telegraphic or telephone sounds or signals upon the hereinafter mentioned street or portions of the following in the city:

Main Street between Pine Street and Pope Street.

(Prior code § 13.33)

12.28.020 Exceptions to poles used for street lighting and traffic-control purposes.
There is excepted from the operation of this chapter and nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the erection, maintenance or use of any pole necessary for street lighting or police call or traffic-control purposes. (Prior code § 13.34)

12.28.030 Suspension by resolution.
The city council shall have the power by resolution, upon application in writing, to suspend this chapter from operation and effect for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days at any one time for good cause in cases where compliance with this chapter would work a hardship or cause public inconvenience. (Prior code § 13.35)

12.28.040 City electroliers.
No person may use the city die moldings of the electroliers located on Main Street nor duplicate the design of such electroliers. (Prior code § 13.35.1)

Chapter 12.32
PARKS
Sections:

12.32.010    Municipal park defined.

12.32.020    Hours.

12.32.030    Prohibited activities.

12.32.040    Possession, consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages in parks.

12.32.050    Closing parks.

12.32.060    No permits.

12.32.010 Municipal park defined.
“Municipal park” means any park, building, swimming pool, playground or other area owned by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. (Prior code § 10A.1)

12.32.020 Hours.
Municipal parks shall be open for use during the hours of six a.m. to ten p.m. of any day and shall be closed for use during the hours of ten p.m. to six a.m. of any day with the exception of Meily Park on Pope Street which shall close at nine p.m. Based on the determination by the recreation director that a requested use would not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of nearby residents, he or she may approve the use of a park for a specific use beyond the closing time, but in no case will such use extend beyond twelve midnight. (Ord. 05-2: prior code § 10A.2)

12.32.030 Prohibited activities.
The following activities are prohibited in any municipal park:

A.    Boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent conduct so as to annoy the public in a manner which breaches the public peace and enjoyment of the municipal park;

B.    Commercial activities provided that the city council may approve and allow:

1.    Nonprofit organizations which are exempt from California income taxes to sell merchandise for not more than two successive days each calendar year, and

2.    The operation of a certified farmers’ market and its constituent activities, under such terms and conditions as the council may see fit;

C.    The persistent maintenance or emission of any noise or sound produced by human or mechanical means which by means of its raucous or nerve-racking nature shall disturb the peace and enjoyment of the municipal park;

D.    Operation of any radio, electrically powered or amplified musical instrument, or other sound reproducing equipment, excepting personal radios or players not audible from a distance of sixty (60) feet;

E.    Kindling of fires excepting in places expressly designated by the city for that purpose;

F.    Wilfully defacing, disfiguring, injuring or removing any building, structure, equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenance, either real or personal;

G.    Using restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex by persons over the age of five years;

H.    Constructing or erecting any building or structure, except by order of the city council;

I.    Going upon any lawn, play area or recreation facility where such prohibition is indicated by proper and legible signs;

J.    Hunting, molesting, killing, teasing or throwing objects at any living creature;

K.    Placing, by any means, any substance which will or may result in the pollution of waters within park areas;

L.    Dumping any refuse or trash, but shall place it in the proper receptacles. Where receptacles are not provided, waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and disposed of elsewhere;

M.    Failing to comply with all applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state in regard to equipment and operating of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and ordinances of the city regulating traffic;

N.    Riding or driving a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles an hour;

O.    Driving any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the recreation director;

P.    Riding a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist may wheel or push a bicycle by hand over the grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;

Q.    Leaving a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is space available;

R.    Driving, putting or in any other fashion playing or practicing golf or using golf balls or golf clubs on park facilities except in areas set aside for those specific activities;

S.    Swimming, bathing, wading in or polluting the water of any lake or stream, except that wading and swimming shall be permitted in pools provided for these purposes;

T.    Picnicking in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. Individual fireplaces or tables and benches shall be used on the basis of first-come, first-served;

U.    Leaving a picnic area before his or her fire is completely extinguished and before all trash and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere;

V.    Setting off or otherwise causing to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives or inflammable material, or discharging them or throwing them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints;

W.    Permitting a dog to enter or remain in a park unless it be led by leash;

X.    Entering an area posted as “Closed to the Public” or using any area in violation of posted notices;

Y.    Camping.

(Prior code § 10A.3)

12.32.040 Possession, consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages in parks.
A.    No person shall possess, consume, sell, give or deliver possession of any alcoholic beverage to any other person other than beer or wine in any public park.

B.    No person shall possess, consume, sell, give or deliver possession of any alcoholic beverage to any other person between the hours of eight p.m. through six a.m. of any day while in the public park commonly known as Lyman Park located in the city.

C.    No person shall possess, consume, sell, give or deliver possession of any alcoholic beverage to any other person while in the public park commonly known as Lewis Station located in the city. (Ord. 00-3 § 1: prior code § 10A.3.5)

12.32.050 Closing parks.
Any park or section or part of any park, may be declared closed to the public by the recreation director, police chief, public works director, or city manager at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as he or she shall find reasonably necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, and welfare and the protection of public property. (Prior code § 10A.4)

12.32.060 No permits.
A.    No permits shall be issued for exclusive use of all or any part of a municipal park, excepting that the recreation director may issue permits for exclusive use of the two designated picnic areas, tennis courts or other areas of Crane Park developed and designated for competitive sports, in accordance with any rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation commission. This prohibition against exclusive use does not prohibit the exclusive use of the baseball facilities at Crane Park by the Little League under the terms of its lease with the city.

B.    The recreation director may issue permits for the use of electrical musical instruments and sound amplifying equipment audible at distances greater than sixty (60) feet when such use is for an event of community-wide interest. (Prior code § 10A.5)

Chapter 12.36
SKATE PARKS
Sections:

12.36.010    Definitions.

12.36.020    Skate park regulations.

12.36.030    Penalty for violation.

12.36.040    Record of skate park injuries.

12.36.010 Definitions.
“Elbow pads” and “knee pads” shall mean protective devices that are partially constructed of durable foam-like materials for ground shock resistance that are fitted and fastened to cover the elbows and knees (respectively) and are specifically designed and manufactured to absorb the impact of a fall.

“Helmet” shall mean a properly fitted and fastened protective device that meets the standards of either the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) that is worn on the head and is specifically designed and manufactured to absorb the impact of a fall.

“Roller skate” shall mean any footwear or device that may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which non-metallic wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer for moving or propulsion, including but not limited to in-line skates commonly known as roller blades.

“Roller skating” shall mean the use of a roller skate for moving or propulsion.

“Safety equipment” shall mean, at a minimum, helmets, elbow pads and knee pads.

“Skateboard” shall mean all nonmetallic wheeled objects, coasters, conveyances, or similar devices used for transportation or sport which are propelled by human power and which are not classified as bicycles or roller skates.

“Skateboarding” shall mean the use of a skateboard for transportation or sport.

“Skate park” shall mean a public facility that is designed for use by persons riding skateboards or roller skates, and which is designated a “skate park” by the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 09-4 (part))

12.36.020 Skate park regulations.
The following regulations shall apply for all skate parks:

A.    No person shall use a skate park for uses other than for skateboarding or roller skating.

B.    No person shall skateboard or roller skate without wearing the required safety equipment as posted at a skate park.

C.    No person shall skateboard or roller skate when the skating surface is wet.

D.    No person shall engage in profanity, reckless or boisterous behavior (including, but not limited to, tandem riding, pushing, horseplay and bullying) or any other activity that could endanger the safety of persons using a skate park or spectators.

E.    Only skateboards and roller skates will be allowed to be used in a skate park. Prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, bicycles, scooters and any motorized device, whether electric or gas powered.

F.    No person shall use, consume or possess food, beverages, glass bottles or any breakable glass item on the skating surface.

G.    No person shall place or utilize additional obstacles or other materials, including, but not limited to, ramps or jumps, at a skate park.

H.    No person shall use, or be under the influence of, alcohol, controlled substances or illegal drugs while using a skate park.

I.    No person shall enter the skating surface area of a skate park unless actively skateboarding or roller skating in accordance with these regulations.

J.    No person shall use portable/personal stereos audible to the general public or any source of amplified music, such as stereos, boom boxes and amplifiers, within a skate park or its perimeter. Personal music or other listening devices not audible to the general public are permitted.

K.    No person shall have a dangerous weapon in his/her possession. Dangerous weapons shall include, but not be limited to, guns, knives, bats/clubs or martial arts weapons.

L.    No person shall litter or place trash or debris in or on the skating surface. All trash shall be placed in a designated trash receptacle.

M.    No person shall apply, or cause to be applied, any vandalism, including but not limited to graffiti, tagging, stickers or decals, to any facilities in the skate park.

N.    All persons shall skateboard or roller skate only on the skating surface, and shall not skateboard or roller skate on the curbs, planters, benches, steps, or railing in the area of a skate park or other city-owned area surrounding a skate park, except steps, railings, or other structures inside the skate park which are designed and intended as a skate surface.

O.    No person shall skateboard or roller skate at a skate park at any times other than those established as the hours of operation.

P.    Climbing on or over a skate park fence is prohibited. No person shall enter or exit a skate park by any means other than by walking though a gate, turnstile, door or other means provided and intended by the city for ingress and egress into a skate park.

Q.    Except for authorized guide dogs and service animals, animals are prohibited inside any fenced area of a skate park, and are prohibited from the skate surface.

R.    Skateboarding at a skate park is deemed to be a recreational hazardous activity whereby the city may avail itself of immunity from liability for injuries sustained by patrons of a skate park while skateboarding if all of the following conditions are met (pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 115800 and California Government Code Section 831): (1) the person skateboarding is twelve (12) years of age or older; and (2) the skateboarding activity that caused the injury was stunt, trick, or luge skateboarding.

S.    The parks and recreation director shall develop and institute policies that are consistent with this chapter. Any violation of such policy shall be subject to penalty as a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09-4 (part))

12.36.030 Penalty for violation.
A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); second and subsequent offenses within one year may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor. A second violation within a year that is prosecuted as an infraction may be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00); and a third or further violation within a year that is prosecuted as an infraction may be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction, and the prosecuting authority may impose an alternative penalty such as community service. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter continues shall be a new and separate violation. Any person cited and convicted of three or more violations of this chapter in a twelve (12) month period shall be permanently barred from the use of or entrance to a skate park.

B.    In addition to the penalties so described, any police officer or other person authorized to issue citations shall have the authority to impound any skateboard, bicycle, scooter or roller skates of a person found violating this chapter. Upon impoundment of any skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates as provided herein, the owner of such device shall be issued a receipt. Said receipt shall state the hours, location, time frame and manner for claiming the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates, as provided in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section.

1.    Upon presentation of the receipt, the owner may claim the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates at the police department during business hours. If the owner is a minor, such owner may claim the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates if accompanied by a parent or guardian. No fee may be assessed on the owner, parent or guardian.

2.    If the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates is/are not claimed within sixty (60) days after the date of impoundment, the city may dispose of the item(s) by destruction or public sale at auction.

C.    Any provision of this code or appendices thereto inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, is hereby repealed or modified to the extent necessary to effect the provisions of this chapter.

D.    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-4 (part))

12.36.040 Record of skate park injuries.
A.    The parks and recreation commission shall maintain a record of all known or reported injuries incurred by a skateboarder and/or other user in the skate park.

B.    The parks and recreation commission shall maintain a record of all claims, paid and not paid, including any lawsuits and their results, arising from those incidents that were filed against the city. Copies of these records shall be filed annually, no later than January 30th of each year, with the California Judicial Council. (Ord. 09-4 (part))

Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters:

13.04    Water Service System

13.08    Cross-Connection Control Program

13.10    Water Management Plan

13.12    Water Use Efficiency and New Development

13.16    Water Wells

13.20    Sewer Service System

13.24    Wastewater Discharge

13.28    Underground Utility Districts

13.32    Stormwater and Runoff Pollution Control

Chapter 13.04
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Article 1
General Provisions

Sections:

13.04.010    Definitions.

13.04.020    Applicability—Shutting off water for violations.

13.04.030    Application for water service—Deposit.

13.04.040    Water service connections—Costs.

13.04.050    Water service connections—Installation generally.

13.04.055    Conditions when connection to public water main required.

13.04.060    Meters generally.

13.04.070    Water main extensions.

13.04.080    Water rates.

13.04.090    Right of city to contract for water.

13.04.100    Rules and regulations generally.

13.04.110    Responsibility for payment of charges.

13.04.120    Notices.

13.04.130    Enforcement—Discontinuance of service upon delinquency.

13.04.140    When water charges become effective—Discontinuance of service at consumer’s request.

13.04.150    Service interruptions.

13.04.160    Duties of director of public works and director of finance.

13.04.170    Disposition of moneys—Funds.

13.04.180    Appeals.

13.04.190    Pollution of city reservoirs—Wading, swimming and cutting wood.

13.04.200    Private fire service—Requirements—Rates.

13.04.210    Public fire hydrants—Operation and maintenance—Rates.

13.04.215    City council authority and discretion to verify compliance.

Article 2
Water Shortage Emergencies, Drought and Water Conservation

Sections:

13.04.220    Procedure for establishing water emergency phases.

13.04.221    Water conservation.

13.04.230    Phase I water regulations.

13.04.240    Phase II water regulations.

13.04.250    Phase III water regulations.

13.04.270    Termination of water emergency phases.

13.04.280    Exception permits.

13.04.310    Violation—Misdemeanor.

Article 1
General Provisions

13.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 (Cross-Connection Control Program) and 13.12 (Water Use Efficiency and New Development), the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Agricultural purpose” means the breeding, raising, pasturing, and grazing of livestock for the production of food and fiber and the planting, raising, harvesting and producing of viticultural crops, food crops, fiber crops, horticultural crops, and forestry crops.

“Customer” means the person responsible for paying each water service account on the water distribution system, both inside and outside city limits, of the water enterprise owned by the city of St. Helena.

“Department” means the municipal water department of the city.

“Director of public works” means the individual filling the position of director of public works/city engineer for the city, or his or her designee.

“New development” means any of the following construction projects that have not received a certificate of occupancy from the city or county building department prior to May 24, 2011, or that were issued a building permit and did not construct a foundation prior to May 24, 2011:

1.    Any freestanding building that contains water-using fixtures;

2.    Any floor area additions to existing nonresidential structures;

3.    Any residential additions or remodeling that increases overall water usage at the water meter.

“New water connection” means a water connection for the benefit of any user or use of water, whether industrial, commercial, residential, institutional, who or which was not currently receiving water from the department at the time a water shortage phase was formally established. All new construction shall be deemed a new water connection, notwithstanding the fact that such new construction may have received all permits and consents required of it by any governmental agency, including the city, and notwithstanding the fact that the applicable fees for water connection may have been prepaid by the applicant.

“Nonresidential” means properties in which the primary use is not residential; hotels and motels are considered nonresidential.

“Premises” is a lot or parcel under one ownership, except that portions thereof having well-defined boundaries such as fences or hedges which prevent the common use of the property by all occupants shall be deemed separate premises.

“Residential” means all living or dwelling units (as defined by the Uniform Building Code) of a permanent, rather than a transient, nature, including but not limited to single-family residences, apartments, mobile homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, townhouses, apartment buildings and condominiums. A “dwelling unit” shall be defined as any structure containing sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities.

“Safe annual yield” of the St. Helena water supply system is that quantity of water which can be reliably delivered on an annual basis through most rainfall years, including a dry year (rainfall at twenty-two (22) inches to twenty-five and nine-tenths (25.9) inches) without undue hardship on water customers through water shortage restrictions. It is recognized that the safe annual yield, as so defined, could place significant hardship on water customers in a critically dry year (rainfall at twenty-one and nine-tenths (21.9) inches or less) or in periods of two or more consecutive dry years. “Undue hardship” is defined to mean Phase II or Phase III restrictions at any time, as these phases are set forth in this amended code. The safe annual yield shall be determined pursuant to the analytical methodology used by the safe yield committee, as identified in its report dated March 17, 2011. The safe annual yield shall be redetermined any time there is a material change in the city’s water supply.

“Supply/usage balance” is the difference between the safe annual yield and total current usage.

“Total current usage” is average usage as determined by taking total metered potable water supply entering the water system’s distribution system over the last five fiscal years, divided by five. The city shall calculate the supply/usage balance as soon after the end of each fiscal year as is practicable, as well as at any time that there is a material change in potable water supply. The balance is positive when the safe annual yield exceeds total current usage. The balance is negative, or in deficit, when the safe annual yield is less than total current usage.

“Water advisory board” is the board as may be constituted in Section 13.04.230(C)(8). (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 12-1 § 2; Ord. 11-7 (part): prior code § 18.1)

13.04.020 Applicability—Shutting off water for violations.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 for the management, control and use of the municipal water department, and penalties for the violation thereof, and rates to be charged for water or services furnished to consumers, are prescribed and established and are applicable to all consumers, whether inside or outside the city limits, in the absence of express limitations hereinafter set forth.

Every person taking water shall be considered as having expressed his or her consent to be bound by the provisions of this chapter, and whenever any one of such rules and regulations is violated the city may shut off the water to the user with proper notice as set forth in Division 5, Article 1, Chapter 1 of the California Public Utilities Code and the water shall not be turned on again until all unpaid rents and charges are paid and other requirements of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 are met. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): prior code § 18.2)

13.04.030 Application for water service—Deposit.
A.    To Be Signed and in Writing. Every person desiring a water supply from the department shall make written application at the office of the department. Such application shall be signed by the applicant. The application shall contain the stipulations, terms and provisions applicable to all water accounts as defined by resolution or the code. A printed application form shall be provided by the department, when requested. Water service will be turned on by a city representative during normal working hours, defined as after eight a.m. and prior to three-thirty p.m., Monday through Friday excluding legal holidays. Water service turn-on shall not be made after three-thirty p.m. or prior to eight a.m., Monday through Friday, nor on Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays unless the customer agrees to pay the appropriate fee as set by resolution for such after-hours service.

B.    Nonowner’s Deposit. Whenever an application is made for the furnishing of water to premises and the applicant is not the owner in fee of such premises, a deposit shall be made with the department at the time such application is made in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council. Such deposit shall be held by the department as a guarantee for the payment of all water consumed, and payment of all other charges owing from the applicant to the department. Whenever any applicant removes from such premises owing nothing for water by him or her used, or any other charges of the department, or whenever the applicant shall become the owner in fee of such premises, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant making the same. Otherwise, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant less all charges owing by the applicant to the department. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.3)

13.04.040 Water service connections—Costs.
A.    Generally. When the premises to which water is to be furnished under the application made in writing has no connection already installed for use on the premises, the applicant shall pay all costs of the installation and service connection. The costs which shall be included as charges for making service installations shall be: all materials costs, including fittings, valves, pipes, meter, meter box and other costs incurred by reason of peculiarities of the installation.

B.    Cost of Installation. The applicant shall be responsible for installation and cost of the water lateral both within the city right-of-way and on private property. All work within the city right-of-way shall require a city-issued encroachment permit, and the work shall be performed by an appropriately licensed contractor. Installation shall be performed in accordance with all applicable city standards including but not limited to trench backfill and pavement restoration.

C.    Director of Public Works to Fix Charges. The director of public works is empowered to estimate and fix the charges to be made for all service connections, subject to the approval of the city council.

D.    When Due and Payable. All such sums herein provided for to be paid by the applicant shall be due and actually paid before any of the work is commenced and in no event shall the work of installing any water service be commenced until all sums required to be paid have been actually paid by the applicant. None of such sums so paid, nor any portion thereof, shall be refundable to the applicant.

E.    Schedule of Water Connection Charges. Every person making a connection to the city water system shall, immediately prior to making such connection, pay to the city a connection charge as established by city council resolution.

There shall also be one of the following water connection charges:

1.    Standard Service Connection (Complete). Minimum charges for standard complete service connections are shown below. A “standard” complete connection is defined as one where the service pipe is tapped into a water main of eight-inch diameter or less, where open trench excavation can be used and where the distance from the main to the meter is not over forty (40) feet. The service connection is complete in that it includes service pipe, meter box, meter and necessary fittings. Extraordinary costs, as determined by the city engineer, shall be billed and paid by the applicant.

Minimum Connection Charge

Size of Meter

 

3/4 or 5/8 inch meter

$1,000.00

1 inch meter

1,200.00

1 1/2 inch meter

1,625.00

2.    Standard Service Connection (Partial). A “standard” partial connection applies to those cases where a copper service pipe has been stubbed in during the development of the subdivision and only the setting of the meter box and meter remains to be done by the water department.

Minimum Connection Charge

Size of Meter

 

3/4 or 5/8 inch meter

$150.00

1 inch meter

275.00

1 1/2 inch meter

550.00

(Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.4)

13.04.050 Water service connections—Installation generally.
A.    When Connection May Be Made. The applicant having complied with the requirements of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 relating to the application for service, and having paid all charges incurred, the property described in the application shall be connected with the water mains and water furnished to the applicant.

B.    Extension of Mains. No service shall be installed by the department on any private property, or extended beyond the curb of the street in which the department’s mains are installed, except where the city owns or controls water pipeline rights-of-way over private property and has water mains installed therein. The applicant for water service shall, at his or her own expense, extend service lines to the nearest open and accepted public street or place where service will be installed by the department, subject to all other terms and provisions set forth in this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12, except that the department may, at its option, allow water service connections to its water mains installed in the rights-of-way above described; provided, that the applicant at his or her own expense extends service lines to the water mains.

C.    Multiple Connections Prohibited Generally. No one service connection shall supply water to more than one premises.

D.    Exceptions to Multiple Connection Requirements. If under particular circumstances it be determined by the city council that it be impracticable to install one service connection for every premises and advantageous to the department to furnish water to more than one premises through one service connection, then water may be so furnished by the department. After any such installation of water service for more than one premises through one service connection, the city council may, if it determines that by reason of changed circumstances, it has become practicable to install one service connection for each of the premises, then the city council may elect to install a separate service connection and meter for each of such premises at the cost and expense of the owner of the premises, to be paid for by the owner of the premises.

E.    Service to More Than One Consumer Through One Connection and Meter. Where there is more than one consumer supplied through one service connection and one meter, the department shall hold the applicant or other person agreed upon responsible for payment of all water furnished through the one service connection or one meter; provided, that where practicable to serve each consumer through a separate service connection, the city council may at its election install a separate service connection and meter for each such consumer at the cost and expense of the property owner or consumer, to be paid for by the property owner or consumer, and thereafter collected at the established meter rates for water supplied through each meter.

F.    Extension Along Frontage of Premises Served. In no event shall a water service connection be installed unless a water main of adequate capacity and delivery pressure extends in a public street or public right-of-way across the entire frontage of the premises to be served; provided, however, that if, under particular circumstances, it is determined by the city council that no public purpose would be served to require the water main to extend across the entire frontage, such as, without limitation, those cases involving dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, the council may determine a lesser distance to which it is necessary to extend the water main across the frontage to serve the public purpose.

G.    Prohibitions. No service connection shall be given or made from which any consumer service line shall run lengthwise on any public street, nor shall any service connection be given or made from which two or more consumer service lines shall run lengthwise on any private road.

H.    Service Outside City Limits. No water service connection or water main extension shall be made or given to premises located outside the city limits except (1) to provide private fire service in accordance with Section 13.04.200 and (2) to provide reclaimed water in accordance with city policies and procedures. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 03-5 § 1; prior code § 18.5)

13.04.055 Conditions when connection to public water main required.
A.    The owner of any structure located within the city in which plumbing is to be installed shall, at the owner’s sole expense, connect the plumbing of such structure directly to the proper public water main in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not apply to wells installed pursuant to Chapter 13.16.

B.    If the closest water main is located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the property line of a residential lot, the property owner of the residential lot may request an exception to this requirement for existing lots of record.

C.    The following procedures shall be followed for the consideration of applications for exceptions to the requirements of this section:

1.    Applications for exceptions shall be filed by the property owner with the public works department on forms provided by the public works department. The application shall be accompanied by materials and information outlined on the application requirements list available in the public works department.

2.    The application shall be considered by the city council prior to the determination of completeness (pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code) of a development application for the property.

3.    Applications for exceptions shall be considered during a public hearing.

D.    The following criteria shall be considered by the city council in the evaluation of applications for exceptions to the requirements of this section:

1.    The proximity of existing public water mains to the subject lot;

2.    The ability to provide public water to the site at pressures adequate for domestic and emergency purposes by unmechanically augmented municipal systems;

3.    The likelihood of adjoining lot(s) to develop, and the need for the extension of public water facilities to accommodate such development;

4.    The potential environmental effects resulting from the installation of public facilities given the physical conditions and improvements present at the site including, but not limited to: slope, soil conditions, tree cover, existing features and structures, etc., which might present constraints to the extension of the public water facilities;

5.    The physical conditions and improvements present at the site including, but not limited to: slope, soil conditions, tree cover, existing features and structures, etc. which might present significant ongoing costs for maintenance of the public facilities;

6.    The ability to provide public water service to the frontage of adjoining lots(s);

7.    The adequacy of the proposed private system to provide adequate water flow rates, pressure, and facilities to address domestic and emergency needs as determined by the director of public works and the fire chief;

8.    The adequacy of the proposed private system to satisfy the requirements of the Napa County department of environmental management.

E.    The city council may impose conditions or requirements upon the granting of an application for an exception to the requirements of this section. Said conditions or requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1.    The property owner requesting the exception shall design and install the public water main across the frontage of the subject property including the extension, if any, of the public facilities from their existing closest point. Appropriate dedication of right-of-way shall be made to accommodate said installation. Said design, installation and dedication shall occur prior to the occupancy of the new development and shall not be subject to reimbursement or other credit by the city of St. Helena. An agreement for reimbursement from private development may be executed.

2.    A homeowners’ association (HOA) or other entity or binding agreement, acceptable to the city attorney, shall be created and maintained in perpetuity to ensure the long-term maintenance of the common and/or private facilities (wells, water lines, pressure tanks, holding tanks, backflow prevention devices, etc.). The HOA shall maintain a sufficient fund reserve as determined by the director of public works at all times to ensure that maintenance of the private facilities will occur as necessary. Duties and obligations of the HOA shall be stipulated in covenants, codes and restrictions (CC&Rs) which shall govern the private property. The city of St. Helena shall be a party to the CC&Rs, but shall not be responsible for the enforcement of the document.

3.    The property owner requesting the exception shall record a notice which shall run with the deed on the property, and all subsequent parcels resulting from a subdivision of the property, advising subsequent property owners of the lack of public facilities and of the potential for failure of the private system(s). The deed notice shall further advise successor property owners that the city of St. Helena has no obligation to provide public facilities to the property even in the event of the failure of the private system(s).

4.    The property owner requesting the exception shall execute and record a hold harmless agreement with the deed of the property, and all subsequent parcels resulting from a subdivision of the property. Said agreement shall relieve the city of St. Helena of any and all liability which might arise from the use and/or failure of the private system(s). Said hold harmless agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and shall be recorded prior to occupancy of any new development on the subject lot. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 12-1 § 3)

13.04.060 Meters generally.
A.    Location, Size, Etc. A water service meter shall be installed by the department for each service connection. Water service meters shall be installed only in public streets or places. It shall be unlawful for any consumer to obstruct access to water service meters. On every meter installation the size and exact location of the meter shall be determined by the director of public works or designee.

B.    To Remain City Property—Maintenance. All water meters installed by the department shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the department. The department will be responsible for the cost to replace and/or repair meters that are rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and damage by the elements. The property owner shall be responsible for the cost to replace and/or repair meters that are rendered unserviceable as a result of the negligence of the owner, occupant, agent, contractor or other person working on behalf of the owner or occupant. The department shall have sole discretion in determining if a meter requires repair or replacement; and sole discretion in determining if the cause for repair or replacement is ordinary wear and tear or the result of negligence.

C.    Tests. Upon the deposit of the sum as established by council resolution with the finance department by any consumer, the director of public works or designee shall test the meter at the premises of the consumer. The consumer shall be notified by the director of public works at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance and may be represented at such test. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.6)

13.04.070 Water main extensions.
A.    Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to water main extensions, both within and without the boundaries of the city, except that they shall not apply to any water main extensions within the boundaries of any subdivision.

B.    Duties of Applicants—Materials—Payments. Applicants for water main extensions to service premises where such extensions are necessary, which necessity shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council, shall be required: (1) to pay to the department the estimated reasonable cost of the necessary facilities before construction is commenced; and (2) to transfer and convey to the city all water mains, pipes and necessary easements therefor. The size, type and quality of the materials and the location of lines shall be specified by the city council in its sole and absolute discretion. All such sums herein provided for to be paid by the applicant for water main extensions shall be due and actually paid before any of the work is commenced and in no event shall the work of installing any water service be commenced until all sums required to be paid have been actually paid by the applicant. Any excess of the amount so paid in by the applicant over the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant, and in the event the actual costs thereof exceed the amount actually paid by the applicant, the water service shall not be turned on until the differential is paid to the department.

C.    Additional Connections. Additional water service connections to any such extended water mains shall be permitted only at the sole and absolute discretion of the department.

D.    Size. All water main extensions shall be of size and shall be connected to the city water system at a point where there is an adequate water supply under proper pressure as determined by the city council.

E.    Special Extension Prorate Charge—Determination, Etc. In addition to the usual costs of a water service connection as provided in Section 13.04.040, a special extension prorate charge shall be required and collected from applicants for water service in those instances where the present or past owners of the premises to be served have not participated in the cost of installing the main fronting their premises and which main was installed within a period of twenty (20) years prior to the date of granting the application for the water service connection but after the effective date of this section, September 12, 1961. The charge shall be determined by multiplying the footage of the premises lying along and which may be served directly from the main extension by one-half of the lineal per-foot cost of the main extension, but not to exceed the costs of a six-inch main if installed by the department. The charge shall not be applied more than once to any premises. The charge shall be estimated and fixed by the director of public works, subject to the approval of the council, and shall be payable prior to the installation of water service. Except in unusual circumstances, as determined by the city council, premises already served by the department at the date of installation of the main extension will be exempt from the payment of the special extension prorate charge.

F.    Special Extension Prorate Charge—When Effective. The special extension prorate charge shall be in effect for a period of twenty (20) years from:

1.    The date of execution of the main-extension agreement, if the main extension is financed by property owners; or

2.    The date of official completion of the main extension, if financed by the city.

G.    Special Extension Prorate Charge—Rights of Applicant Financing Main Extension. The applicant who has financed the main extension shall be entitled to the special extension prorate charges collected by the department as a part of the service connection costs. The amounts collected shall be refunded to the applicant in accordance with the terms of the main-extension agreement between the city and the applicant. The refunds shall be made within ninety (90) days following the date of collection thereof by the city. No refunds of the extension prorate charges shall be made after twenty (20) years from the date of execution of the main-extension agreement.

H.    Subdivision Off-Tract Facilities. If the city council determines that there is not a sufficient off-tract water main from a point where there is an adequate water supply under proper pressure to a point of connecting to in-tract subdivision water mains, the city shall have no obligation to make a connection or extension unless and until the applicant shall finance and make a special agreement with the city for the construction and installation of required off-tract water mains. It is found and determined that at the time no uniform rule can be laid down with respect to the sharing of the cost of such off-tract water main, but that each case must be evaluated on its own merits. Such special agreement need not provide for refunds according to subsection G of this section but may provide for refund or reimbursement to the applicant in such manner as the council determines to be in the best interests of the city. If such an off-tract water main shall be constructed, it shall be a limited purpose through line not designed or intended to serve the properties through which it passes and the city shall not be deemed to have “assumed to serve” any such area through which it passes unless and until the city council shall expressly so declare by later motion or resolution. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.7)

13.04.080 Water rates.
A.    Charges Imposed. No water and no services of facilities of the water system shall be furnished to any consumer or to any person free of charge or in amounts less than those established by resolution of the city council. The city shall pay for all water furnished or made available by the water system for municipal purpose of the city. Customers shall pay for water service on a monthly basis. In the event a customer is undercharged for water service, the city shall backbill the customer to recover the amounts due to the city.

B.    Nontreated (Raw) Water from Lower Reservoir. City in its discretion may provide nontreated (raw) water from its lower reservoir to be used for grading, dust control, street, pipeline, or similar construction activities, as well as for irrigation. Nontreated (raw) water shall only be used within the St. Helena city limits, except for users of nontreated (raw) water pursuant to agreements with the city entered into prior to November 2016. A permit fee as established by council resolution is required for all persons utilizing nontreated water (raw), unless otherwise stated under a separate water agreement. All persons utilizing nontreated water through the permit process are also required to pay the use fee as identified by council resolution. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 11-4 § 2: Ord. 08-1 § 1; Ord. 05-5 § 1; Ord. 04-9 § 1; Ord. 04-1 § 1; Ord. 01-1 § 1: prior code § 18.8)

13.04.090 Right of city to contract for water.
Under special circumstances, the city council reserves the right and power to contract separately with any person for the sale and delivery of water within or outside the corporate limits of the city at wholesale rates to be fixed and agreed upon by resolution of the council. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.9)

13.04.100 Rules and regulations generally.
A.    Right of Access. Duly authorized representatives of the department shall have the right of access at all reasonable hours to any premises where water from the department’s water system is used for the purpose of inspection and examination.

B.    Persons Authorized to Make Connections. No person other than the duly authorized representatives of the department shall connect the consumer’s service to or disconnect the same from the water mains of the department.

C.    Shutoff Valves. Every water consumer shall install and maintain at his or her own expense a shutoff valve inside the property line at a location accessible in event of emergency.

D.    Permission to Supply Additional Premises. No person whose premises are supplied with water shall furnish water to other premises, unless he or she shall first make application in writing to the department and secure approval in writing.

E.    Agricultural Use. Water purchased from the department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 may not be used for any agricultural purpose except in one of the following conditions:

1.    The products or results of such agricultural purpose are consumed or enjoyed solely by or on the premises of the water customer;

2.    The water used for an agricultural purpose is recycled from some nonagricultural use by the water customer;

3.    The city council has expressly granted permission to the water customer to use water for the agricultural purpose;

4.    Water serving the premises has been used for an agricultural purpose during the six months preceding August 9, 1994, in which case only that particular agricultural use may continue and may not be expanded; or

5.    Parcels are less than one-half acre in size.

F.    Bills for Charges. All bills for water charges will be rendered by the city monthly. All bills shall become due and payable upon presentation and shall be paid at the office of the finance department.

G.    Supplemental Rules. The city council may, by resolution, provide such supplementary rules and regulations as it deems necessary or advisable to accomplish the interest and purposes of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12.

H.    Previous Agreements. None of the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 shall apply to or in any manner affect any agreement for furnishing water, for extension of water mains or installation or maintenance of water service made before June 10, 1952, and to which the city is a party, but as to such agreements, the provisions and requirements of ordinances and resolutions in force at date of such agreement shall apply and any and all such agreements so made are ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Amended by city 4/17/13; Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): prior code § 18.10)

13.04.110 Responsibility for payment of charges.
All water charges shall be billed to the person making application for water service per Section 13.04.030, unless requested by the owner to be billed differently. Where allowed by law, all water charges shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises upon which the charges fixed are levied and assessed or his or her successor in interest. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.11)

13.04.120 Notices.
A.    Notices from the city to any consumer will be given in writing, either delivered to the consumer or mailed or emailed to his or her last known address or contact, except that where conditions warrant or in any emergency the city may give verbal notice by telephone or in person.

B.    Notices from a consumer to the city may be given by the consumer or his or her authorized representative verbally or in writing at the office of the finance department, to the city clerk, or to the director of public works’ office. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.12)

13.04.130 Enforcement—Discontinuance of service upon delinquency.
A.    Discontinuance of Service to Abate Dangerous Conditions, Waste, Etc. The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where apparatus, appliances or equipment using water is found by the director of public works or designee to be dangerous or unsafe or where the use of water on such premises is found by the director of public works or designee to be detrimental or injurious to the water service furnished by the city to other consumers, or where the director of public works or designee finds that negligent or wasteful use of water exists on any premises which affects the city’s water service. The city shall have the right to refuse or discontinue water service to any premises if necessary to protect itself against fraud or abuse.

B.    Enforcement by Director of Public Works. The director of public works is charged with the enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12.

C.    Discontinuance for Certain Violations. In the event of violation, other than nonpayment of water service charges, of any terms of this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12, the director of public works may disconnect any premises from the water system after first notifying in writing the person causing, allowing or committing such violation, specifying the violation and, if applicable, the time after which, upon the failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation, the director of public works will exercise his or her authority to disconnect the premises from the water system; provided, that such time shall not be less than five days after the deposit of such notice in the United States Post Office at St. Helena, Napa County, California, addressed to the person to whom notice is given; provided, however, that in the event such violation results in a public hazard or menace, then the director of public works may enter upon the premises without notice and do such things and expend such sums as may be necessary to abate such hazard, and the reasonable value of the things done and the amounts expended in so doing shall be a charge upon the person so in violation.

D.    Failure to Pay Bill. Bills are due and payable upon presentation and delinquent after thirty (30) days. Upon failure of any consumer billed or the owner of any premises to pay any water service charge prior to the delinquency, the following action or actions shall be taken by the city to enforce such payment after such bill becomes delinquent:

1.    Impose a penalty for delinquency of ten percent (10%) of the amount then delinquent;

2.    Assess interest in the amount of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount delinquent from the date on which the bill remittance first became delinquent until paid;

3.    Disconnect the premises from the water system for nonpayment of water bills with proper notice as set forth in Division 5, Chapter 1, Article 1 of the California Public Utilities Code;

4.    Cause an action at law to be brought on behalf of the city against the person responsible for payment of such bill to recover the amount of such bill and the cost of such action including reasonable attorney fees incurred in an amount fixed by the court;

5.    Any person wishing to appeal penalties and interest imposed in this section shall adhere to provisions in accordance with Section 13.04.180, Appeals.

E.    Hardship Agreements. City finance department may in its discretion offer hardship agreements which create payment plans for delinquent bills. All requests for hardship agreements and payment plans must be submitted in writing. Hardship agreements are approved at the discretion of the finance director based on amount owed and payment history.

F.    Reconnection Fee. Whenever any premises have been disconnected from the water system for any violation of this chapter or Chapters 13.08 and 13.12, such premises shall not be reconnected to the water system until all delinquent fees, charges, penalties and interest have been paid, together with a reconnection charge as may be set by resolution of the city council.

G.    Lien for Delinquencies. In addition and as an alternative to any other remedy for enforcement and collection, all delinquent water service charges, including late charges and interest for nonresidential properties, shall become a lien upon the nonresidential real property upon which water is furnished prior to all other liens, encumbrances or exemptions, other than state and county taxes, and shall have the force and effect of a tax lien. The lien shall continue until it is paid together with the penalties and interest set forth in this section. The lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this lien. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): prior code § 18.13)

13.04.140 When water charges become effective—Discontinuance of service at consumer’s request.
A.    Water charges shall become effective against all premises immediately upon connection to the water system.

B.    Any consumer may have his or her water service discontinued by giving notice requesting discontinuance at least two business days prior to the requested date of discontinuance. Each such consumer shall pay all water charges up to and including the date of discontinuance stated in such notice. In any case where such notice is not given, the consumer shall be required to pay for water service until two business days after the city has knowledge that the consumer has vacated the premises or otherwise discontinued water service. The city shall set a charge per council resolution for restoring water service to any consumer whose water service has been discontinued at his or her request. Water service will be turned off by a city representative during normal working hours, defined as after eight a.m. and prior to three-thirty p.m., Monday through Friday excluding legal holidays. Water service turn off shall not be made after three-thirty p.m. or prior to eight a.m., Monday through Friday, nor on Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays unless the customer agrees to pay the appropriate fee as set by resolution for such after-hours service.

C.    If the discontinuance of a water service under subsection B of this section continues more than thirty (30) days, the consumer may request that the water service be placed on a standby basis. While on a standby basis, the water service rates established by council resolution will apply. In order to reestablish water service, the customer will be responsible for the fee associated with restoring water service and must pay any delinquent charges for which the customer is legally liable before service will be reconnected. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.14)

13.04.150 Service interruptions.
A.    Temporary Suspension of Service. The city will exercise reasonable diligence to provide continuous and adequate water service to consumers and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of water, but cannot guarantee complete freedom from interruption. The city shall have the right to suspend water service temporarily to make necessary repairs or improvements to the water system. In each case of temporary suspension of service, the city will notify the consumers affected as soon as circumstances permit and will prosecute the work of repair or improvement with due diligence and with the least possible inconvenience to consumers.

B.    Apportionment Among Consumers. During any period of threatened or actual water shortage the city shall have the right to apportion its available water supply among consumers in such manner as appears most suitable under the circumstances then prevailing and with due regard to public health and safety.

C.    City’s Responsibility. The city shall not be liable for interruption, shortage or insufficiency of water supply or water pressure or any loss or damage occasioned thereby. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.15)

13.04.160 Duties of director of public works and director of finance.
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to supervise all connections to the water system, to fix all connection charges and to enforce all provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to collect all water bills and charges and all connection and other fees herein provided for, and to deposit the same with the appropriate account. The director of finance shall keep an accurate accounting and records showing the source, amount and disposition of all monies received by them hereunder. The city will carry fidelity insurance with respect to all city officers and employees who respectively receive, collect or have in their care or custody any moneys referred to in this section, such insurance to be in an amount at least equal in the aggregate to the maximum amount of such moneys at any one time in the care or custody of all such officers or employees. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.16)

13.04.170 Disposition of moneys—Funds.
All moneys received by the city under this chapter, excepting only all connection charges and portions of water bills refundable to consumers in respect of water main extensions pursuant to Section 13.04.070, shall be deposited by the director of finance in a timely manner each month in the manner and for the purposes provided and with the fiscal agent designated and/or adopted as best practices.

All connection charges collected by the city under this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 shall be deposited in a separate account entitled “water connection fund,” which is created and shall be applied in the manner and for the purposes provided for in this chapter and Chapters 13.08 and 13.12.

All portions of water bills refundable to consumers in respect of water main extensions pursuant to Section 13.04.070 shall be deposited in a separate account entitled “water main extension refund fund,” which is created and shall be applied in the manner and for the purposes provided for in Section 13.04.070. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.17)

13.04.180 Appeals.
A.    Procedure Generally. Any person who shall have a right to appeal as provided in any section of this chapter or Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 or who shall be dissatisfied with any determination hereafter made by the director of public works or director of finance may, at any time within thirty (30) days after such determination, appeal to the city council by giving written notice to the director of public works and to the city clerk, setting forth the determination with which such person is dissatisfied. The city council may, at any time, upon its own motion, appeal from any determination made by the director of public works hereunder. In the event of any such appeal, the director of public works shall transmit to the city council a report upon the matter appealed. The city council shall cause notice to be given, at least ten (10) days prior to the time fixed for such hearing to all persons affected by such appeal, of the time and place fixed by the city council for hearing such appeal. The city council shall direct the city clerk to mail a written notice, postage prepaid, to all such persons whose addresses are known to the city council.

B.    Refunds. Pending decisions upon any appeal relative to the amount of any charge under this chapter or Chapters 13.08 and 13.12, the person making such appeal shall pay such charge. After the appeal is heard, the city council shall order refunded to the person making such appeal such amount, if any, as the city council shall determine should be refunded. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.18)

13.04.190 Pollution of city reservoirs—Wading, swimming and cutting wood.
No person shall wade or bathe in or otherwise pollute the waters of the reservoirs supplying drinking water to the inhabitants of the city or the watercourses supplying such reservoirs. No person shall cut wood or shrubbery on the property on which such reservoirs are situated and which property is now or hereafter owned and used by the city for the purpose of its municipal water supply. No person shall fish in the reservoirs or picnic on such property without a permit to do so, issued and conditioned as prescribed by the city manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.19)

13.04.200 Private fire service—Requirements—Rates.
The department may install a private fire service; provided, that the applicant complies with the general requirements governing water services set forth in this chapter or Chapters 13.08 and 13.12, together with the following special requirements:

A.    The applicant shall enter into a private fire service agreement with the department, the terms of which shall be satisfactory to the department.

B.    The services shall be satisfactory to the head of the public agency responsible for fire protection on the premises involved and to the Pacific Fire Rating Bureau. Each private fire service shall have installed therein a detector check valve of pattern and design approved by the director of public works. A “detector check valve” is defined as a spring-loaded or weight-loaded swing check valve equipped with a metered bypass.

C.    The private fire service shall be used only for fighting fires and testing the fire protection system. The charge for the service shall be set by council resolution. The charge shall include the cost of water used to fight fires and for authorized testing of the fire protection system. Any other use of water from the private fire service shall constitute a breach of the private fire service agreement. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.21)

13.04.210 Public fire hydrants—Operation and maintenance—Rates.
The department shall install, relocate or remove a public fire hydrant when the following requirements are met:

A.    A written request has been submitted to the department by the public agency responsible for fire protection setting forth the location and type of hydrant.

B.    The estimated charges for the installation, relocation or removal as determined by the director of public works have been paid by such public agency or by a duly authorized private person.

C.    Public fire hydrants shall belong to the city and be maintained by the water department. Public fire hydrants shall be operated only by authorized firefighting personnel, department personnel and such other persons as are granted specific permission to do so by the director of public works. Public fire hydrants shall be used only for fire suppression, testing of the fire protection system, fire drills and flushing and cleaning of mains, except where specific permission to use the hydrants for other purposes has been granted by the director of public works. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 18.22)

13.04.215 City council authority and discretion to verify compliance.
A.    The city council shall have the authority and discretion to take those actions it deems necessary and appropriate to determine the amount of water used by the city’s water users, and to verify and ensure compliance with agreements for the provision by the city of water, including without limitation the authority, consistent with requirements of state and federal law, to designate a city council subcommittee to review customer water use data and documents. Council subcommittee members shall report their findings to the full city council, and, except as set forth in subsection B of this section, shall maintain the confidentiality of the water customers’ usage data and information.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, upon the referral from the subcommittee that there has been a violation of or noncompliance with an agreement for the provision of water by the city, or a city water usage policy, the city council may determine that a water customer has used services in a manner inconsistent with applicable local usage policies, and on that basis order disclosure of any water customer’s water usage data and information. (Ord. 19-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 19-1 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article 2
Water Shortage Emergencies, Drought and Water Conservation

13.04.220 Procedure for establishing water emergency phases.
At any time that the city council finds and determines that a water shortage emergency condition exists within the criteria of Sections 13.04.230 through 13.04.250, and that it is necessary to limit usage by the customers of the municipal water department, the city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the applicable phase. As soon as is practicable after adoption of such resolution, the city clerk shall cause to be published at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city, a notice declaring the establishment of such regulatory phase. Such notice shall set forth the limitations of water use applicable to the particular phase being established and shall further declare that violations of such limitations are punishable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 13.04.230 and 13.04.310. The establishment of a particular phase shall be completed and effective as described in the resolution adopting the water shortage phase.

Whenever the cumulative rainfall for the current water year (beginning November 1st) is less than the median amount for the same time period, the director of public works or designee shall report at least monthly to the city council and recommend whether the city should enter into a water shortage phase, and if so, which phase is recommended.

At any time the state of California may require the city to conform with emergency drought regulations. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city council may, at the recommendation of the director of public works, activate a water shortage phase as a means of compliance with emergency drought regulations adopted by the state. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.23)

13.04.221 Water conservation.
St. Helena has limited water resources and has adopted both required and encouraged conservation measures. All customers shall comply with all mandatory water use efficiency requirements within this chapter for water conservation. Any customer who fails to comply with the mandatory water conservation measures shall immediately stop the water waste by installing the appropriate water-saving devices in their plumbing, appliances, or improvements, or take other such actions as directed by the city to bring about full compliance.

A.    All persons are encouraged to use the following water use efficiency guidelines to minimize water waste:

1.    Establish procedures in the home and business to recycle water;

2.    Install water-saving devices in existing facilities including low flow showerheads, faucet aerators, ULF (ultra low flush) toilets, and WaterSense certified (or successor certification) appliances;

3.    Refrain from additional irrigation and unnecessary use of water, such as car washing, when the temperature exceeds ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit;

4.    Limit the expansion or installation of new water-using appliances, plumbing or improvements, such as lawns, landscaping, pools, sprinkler irrigation systems, wash-down equipment, larger washing machines or garbage disposal units. In the event that a new water-using appliance is necessary, installation of water efficient devices are encouraged;

5.    All schools, social and professional groups, churches, etc., should discuss water conservation as a regular agenda item and forward worthwhile suggestions to the department for consideration and implementation;

6.    Limit irrigation of potable water to landscaping between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m.; and

7.    All sites with irrigated landscapes or gardens are encouraged to establish the following irrigation practices:

a.    Turn off irrigation systems during the off-peak season (November through April) as defined in Section 13.04.080;

b.    Reduce the amount of time for all outdoor irrigation.

B.    Mandatory Conservation Measures. The following water conservation prohibitions and limitations are required by all persons:

1.    The application of potable water to any driveway or sidewalk is prohibited, unless the person proposing such application of potable water documents to the director of public works’ satisfaction that application is necessary to abate a condition constituting a public health hazard.

2.    Using a hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle is prohibited, unless the hose is fitted with a shut-off nozzle.

3.    Customers shall install new landscaping in existing or new development that is water efficient within the meaning of the state’s water efficient landscape ordinance.

4.    Using potable water to water outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff to adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots or structures is prohibited.

5.    Using potable water in a fountain or decorative water feature is prohibited, unless the water is part of a recirculating system.

6.    Withdrawing water from fire hydrants, except for firefighting, firefighting training, and water system maintenance purposes, is prohibited.

7.    Use of potable water for grading, dust control, street, pipeline or similar construction is prohibited.

8.    The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes during and up to forty-eight (48) hours after measurable rainfall is prohibited.

9.    No person shall use potable water to irrigate ornamental turf on public street medians.

10.    Restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars or other public places where food or drink is served and/or purchased shall supply water to patrons only upon request.

11.    Operators of hotels and motels shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The hotel or motel shall prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

12.    All projects for which the planning department requires approved landscape plans must adhere to the city’s xeriscape standards or the state’s Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, whichever is stricter, in order to obtain plan approval.

13.    Any new water connection for new development must offset new demand by an amount of water equal to the new demand on the city water system using the methodology defined in Section 13.12.030. The offset must be clearly demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)))

13.04.230 Phase I water regulations.
A.    The criteria for establishing Phase I shall be any or all of the following:

1.    The supply/usage balance, as calculated at the beginning of the fiscal year, is in deficit;

2.    The volume of water to be delivered by the city of Napa in any fiscal year will not exceed four hundred (400) AF;

3.    The volume of water anticipated to be available prior to the next November 1st, as determined by the director of public works, is not sufficient to meet projected demand through November 1st without demand reduction measures being implemented; or

4.    Conditions requiring the establishment of a Phase II water emergency, as determined by the director of public works, appear to be imminent.

B.    During the Phase I water emergency, the following mandatory conservation measures by customers of the department shall be enforced by the department and publicized by the city:

1.    All customers must be in compliance with all water conservation requirements of Section 13.04.221(B) (Water Conservation). If a customer is found to be out of compliance with any part of Section 13.04.221 or provisions of these water shortage emergency requirements, the customer must immediately stop the water waste by installing the appropriate water-saving devices in their plumbing, appliances, or improvements, or take other such actions to bring about full compliance.

2.    All customers are prohibited from expanding or installing landscaping or appliances that will increase the overall water use of the property. Replacement of existing appliances, landscaping, plumbing, or improvements shall be allowed only if the change can be documented to the satisfaction of the director of public works to result in more efficient water-using fixtures or systems.

3.    Customers shall cease the operation of air-cooling outdoor misting systems using treated water supplied by the city, unless on a timer.

4.    Outdoor irrigation of ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water is limited to no more than two days a week. The director of public works shall specify the two days per week in accordance with the needs of any geographical area within the city.

5.    No person shall use potable water to irrigate landscaping between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m.

6.    Irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings shall be in a manner consistent with regulations or other requirements established by the California Building Standards Commission and the Department of Housing and Community Development. If irrigation systems are installed as a part of new development, they shall be drip or microspray irrigation systems or a system determined by the director of public works or designee to be more efficient.

7.    Draining and refilling of swimming pools shall be permitted only as needed for the purpose of pool repair or to correct a severe chemical imbalance. Draining and refilling of decorative ponds and lakes shall be permitted only as needed for the purpose of lining the bottom to prevent absorption.

8.    All new or replacement industrial and commercial clothes washers shall be high efficiency as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. All new or expanded car washing facilities shall include water-saving methods.

9.    In accordance with Section 864 of Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations or any successor regulation, the taking of any action prohibited in this subsection B, in addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalties (including the penalties set forth in Sections 13.04.230 and 13.04.310), is an infraction, punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day in which the violation occurs.

C.    During the Phase I water emergency, the following actions shall be carried out by the city:

1.    The city shall notify customers that one or more of the criteria for Phase I has been met, and shall identify and explain in sufficient detail each criterion that forms a basis for establishing a Phase I water emergency.

2.    The city shall notify customers of the water usage allocation for each account that would be allowed under a Phase II water emergency if a Phase II water emergency appears to be imminent.

3.    The city shall advise customers of the Phase I water shortage and of restrictions and opportunities for exception permits that are available under Section 13.04.280 if a Phase II water emergency appears to be imminent.

4.    Any applicant for, or holder of, a building permit for construction that may be affected by the existence of this or future water emergency phases shall be informed of the impact of such phases, but lack of such notice shall not permit a new water connection that is otherwise prohibited.

5.    The city shall not issue permits for construction of any new swimming pool unless the pool is to be supplied with water other than treated water supplied by the city. Customers are encouraged to fill existing pools from water other than treated water.

6.    If a Phase II water emergency appears to be imminent, the city shall make plans for implementation of a water shortage disaster plan, which shall include provisions for:

a.    Emergency water stations;

b.    Acquisition of private property under the right of eminent domain, with immediate possession to alleviate the emergency; and

c.    Application for relief assistance from county, state, and federal sources.

7.    The city council shall give notice to any customer that has a terminable contract with the department (whereby the department is the supplier) that such contract will be terminated upon implementation of Phase III by the city council.

8.    If the declaration of a Phase II emergency appears reasonably imminent, the city council shall cause a water advisory board to be formed consisting of one city council member, one planning commissioner, one winery customer, and two public members, one of whom shall be solely a residential customer. The director of public works shall be an ex officio member of this board. Unless the city council otherwise directs, the board will disband when the water emergency is no longer in effect. The water advisory board shall have access to all records in the possession of the water enterprise necessary in its judgment to perform its duties, including customer records. The board shall maintain the confidentiality of individual customer records unless the board determines by resolution that release of such information is necessary in the pursuit of its duties.

D.    In addition to the mandatory measures defined in subsection B of this section, customers of the department and members of the community are encouraged to do the following:

1.    Reduce all indoor water use to not more than an average of seventy-five (75) gallons per person per day within the residence, including single-family residences, apartments, condominiums, townhomes, mobile homes and manufactured homes.

2.    Reduce indoor water use in the work place and commercial establishments by a minimum of ten percent (10%) from customary consumption.

3.    Eliminate or defer all nonessential water use such as topping off swimming pools.

4.    All schools, social and professional groups, churches, etc., are encouraged to discuss water conservation as a regular agenda item and to forward worthwhile suggestions to the department for consideration. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 14-11 § 3 (Exh. A): Ord. 14-9 § 5 (Exh. A): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.23.1)

13.04.240 Phase II water regulations.
A.    The criteria for establishing Phase II shall be:

1.    The volume of water anticipated to be available prior to the next November 1st from all potable water sources is not sufficient to meet the projected demands through November 1st without demand reduction measures beyond the Phase I reductions being implemented; or

2.    Conditions requiring the establishment of a Phase III water emergency appear imminent.

3.    In assessing the need to impose Phase II restrictions, due weight shall be accorded to the trigger system developed by the safe yield committee for use by the director of public works. The trigger system is based on water levels in Bell Canyon Reservoir, with the level necessary to trigger a water emergency being adjusted each month to reflect the supply capacity of groundwater and water to be delivered by the city of Napa at that time. Details of the system can be obtained from the director of public works.

B.    All mandatory and voluntary measures established by Section 13.04.221, Water Conservation, and Phase I, Section 13.04.230(B), (C) and (D) shall be included in Phase II and publicized by the city except insofar as they are inconsistent with subsections C and D of this section.

C.    The following mandatory conservation measures by customers of the department shall be enforced by the department:

1.    Commercial, industrial, and institutional users other than dedicated irrigation accounts will receive an allocation per billing period which will be ten percent (10%) less than the average use during the four winter months of the preceding nonshortage year; provided, that no commercial, industrial, or institutional user will be required to reduce usage to less than sixty (60) gallons per day. Users with no prior record of use shall be governed by comparable facilities’ usage records as determined by the department. Commercial, industrial, and institutional customers with irrigation and domestic use provided by the same water meter may receive an additional landscape allocation of up to seventy (70) gallons per day per thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area during April through October by documenting the landscaped square footage served by city water to the satisfaction of the director of public works. For purposes of landscape allocation, the April allocation period will begin on the date the water meter is read in April, and the October allocation period will end on the date the water meter is read in November.

2.    Residential users in the single-family residential, multifamily residential, mobile home and manufactured homes customer classes will receive an allocation per billing period which will be limited to sixty-five (65) gallons per person per day. Single-family residences will receive an additional twenty-five hundred (2,500) gallons per month from April through October for landscape irrigation. Multifamily residential, mobile home and manufactured homes customers may receive a landscape allocation of up to seventy (70) gallons per day per thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area during April through October by documenting the landscaped square footage served by city water to the satisfaction of the director of public works. For purposes of landscape allocation, the April allocation period will begin on the date the water meter is read in April, and the October allocation period will end on the date the water meter is read in November.

3.    For a lawn, landscaping, vineyard or field watered or irrigated through a meter dedicated to that use, usage shall be limited to sixty percent (60%) of current reference evapotranspiration as established in the California Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO) or successor regulations.

4.    No new water connections shall be permitted during a Phase II water emergency.

D.    During the Phase II water emergency, the following actions shall be carried out by the city:

1.    The city shall notify customers of the water usage allocation for each account that would be allowed under a Phase III water emergency.

2.     The department of public works shall make available, or arrange to have delivered, nonpotable water from either lower reservoir or, if permitted and available, tertiary treated wastewater to city-owned properties for irrigation purposes.

3.    Nothing herein shall restrict the authority of the director of public works from imposing more severe usage restrictions on each class of water customer if circumstances so warrant. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part))

13.04.250 Phase III water regulations.
A.    The criteria for establishing Phase III shall be:

1.    The volume of water anticipated to be available prior to the next November 1st from all potable water sources is not sufficient to meet the projected demands through November 1st without demand reduction measures beyond the Phase II reductions being implemented.

2.    In assessing the need to impose Phase III restrictions, due weight shall be accorded the trigger system developed and defined by the safe yield committee for use by the director of public works. The trigger system is based on water levels in Bell Canyon Reservoir, with the level necessary to trigger a water emergency being adjusted each month to reflect the supply capacity of groundwater and water to be delivered by the city of Napa at that time. Details of the system can be obtained from the director of public works.

B.    All mandatory and voluntary measures established by Section 13.04.221, Water Conservation, and Phases I and II, Sections 13.04.230(B), (C) and (D) and 13.04.240(B), (C) and (D), shall be included in Phase III and publicized by the city, except insofar as they are inconsistent with subsections C and D of this section.

C.    The following mandatory conservation measures by customers of the department shall be enforced by the department:

1.    Commercial, industrial, and institutional users other than dedicated irrigation accounts will receive an allocation per billing period which will be twenty percent (20%) less than the average use during the four winter months of the preceding nonshortage year; provided, that no commercial, industrial, or institutional user will be required to reduce usage to less than fifty (50) gallons per day. Users with no prior record of use shall be governed by comparable facilities’ usage records as determined by the department. The allocation for landscape irrigation will be fifty percent (50%) of the allocation in Phase II and will be based on the same meter reading period as for Phase II. Landscape allocations are provided for established nonturf plants only.

2.    Residential users in single-family residential, multifamily residential, mobile home and manufactured homes customer classes will receive an allocation per billing period which will be limited to sixty (60) gallons per person per day. The allocation for landscape irrigation will be fifty percent (50%) of the allocation in Phase II and will be based on the same meter reading period as for Phase II. Landscape allocations are provided for established nonturf plants only.

3.    For a vineyard or approved field (as approved by the water advisory board) watered or irrigated through a meter dedicated to that use, the allocation shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of current reference evapotranspiration as established in the California Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO) or successor regulations, and irrigation will be allowed for established nonturf plants only.

4.    All nonessential uses of water shall be prohibited. Nonessential uses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a.    The use of water for irrigation of turf, lawns, or landscaping;

b.    The refilling of swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, except as required by the fire chief for use as standby neighborhood fire protection. The fire chief shall maintain a list of such pools to be on file at the fire department.

5.    No new water connections for new development shall be permitted.

D.    During the Phase III water emergency, the following actions shall be carried out by the city:

1.    The department shall terminate all nonessential contracts which are terminable. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.25)

13.04.270 Termination of water emergency phases.
Water emergency phases shall be terminated or changed to a less critical phase in the same manner as they are established in accordance with criteria set forth in the preceding sections and at the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.28)

13.04.280 Exception permits.
A.    Under a Phase II or Phase III water emergency, the director of public works shall, with such conditions as seem to him or her to be reasonable, grant exception permits in addition to any basic allocation, on application of a water customer submitted under penalty of perjury, based on the conditions defined in this section. The city may provide a process for certification of efficiency, lot size, medical condition, or efficient and essential use prior to declaration of a water shortage emergency condition which could result in a customer being prequalified for exception.

1.    For any customer with an allocation based on previous water use, if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of public works that water conservation measures beyond those required in Chapter 13.12 were in place prior to the preceding nonshortage year, an additional quantity of water may be allocated to recognize the higher efficiency in place prior to the water emergency condition.

2.    For single-family residential parcels exceeding seven thousand (7,000) square feet in area, the quantity of up to twenty (20) gallons per day for each one thousand (1,000) square feet that the property area exceeds seven thousand (7,000) square feet for the purpose of maintaining mature landscape or orchard plants. For purposes of this subsection, multiple parcels maintained and fully landscaped as one property may be computed as being one parcel. An exception granted based on this subsection shall allow the use of no more than an additional two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day for this purpose.

3.    For medical conditions of a resident, a quantity as required to maintain health standards.

4.    For any customer with an allocation based on previous winter water use, if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of public works that efficient and essential water uses are not represented in average winter water use, an additional quantity of water may be allocated to provide for these efficient and essential needs.

B.    The water advisory board shall meet at least monthly and may grant permits for uses of water or for exceptions to water conservation measures or for water connections otherwise prohibited by Sections 13.04.230, 13.04.240, and 13.04.250 if it finds and determines that such regulations would:

1.    Cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the applicant or to the public;

2.    Cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection, or safety of the applicant or public; or

3.    Promote water conservation by providing for the establishment of water efficient landscaping meeting the standards of Section 17.112.140 and such policies and regulations as have been adopted to implement the provisions of that chapter, replacing more water-intensive landscaping.

C.    The water advisory board of the city shall prescribe necessary procedures for application for and use of exception permits.

D.    Any decision of the director of public works in granting or denying exceptions may be appealed by the applicant or any other person to the water advisory board by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the date of mailing of written notice to the applicant of the decision rendered. The water advisory board shall use its best efforts to hear and determine such appeal within twenty (20) days, and shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision.

E.    Any decision of the water advisory board may be appealed by the applicant to the city council according to the provisions of Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.28.1)

13.04.310 Violation—Misdemeanor.
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the provisions of Section 377 of the California Water Code shall be applicable to any violation of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail and/or fined in accordance with the penalties as set forth in the provisions of Section 377 of the California Water Code. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 15-5 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-7 (part): Ord. 02-7A § 1 (part): prior code § 18.30)

Chapter 13.08
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
Sections:

13.08.010    Purpose.

13.08.020    Definitions.

13.08.030    Cross-connection protection requirements.

13.08.040    Backflow prevention devices.

13.08.050    User supervisor.

13.08.060    Administrative procedures.

13.08.070    Water service termination.

13.08.010 Purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is: (1) to protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) to eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; and (4) to prevent the making of cross-connections in the future.

B.    These regulations are adopted pursuant to the California Administrative Code, Title 17, Public Health, entitled Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections.

C.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the water department and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the department and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the department. (Prior code § 18.31)

13.08.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“AWWA Standard” means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).

“Air-gap separation” means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch.

“Approved backflow prevention device” means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services.

“Approved water supply” means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

“Auxiliary supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.

“Backflow” means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back-siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.

“Contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

“Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur shall be considered to be cross-connections.

“Double check valve assembly” means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve.

“Health agency” means the California Department of Health Services, or the local agency with respect to a small water system.

“Local health agency” means the Napa County health department.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility or other public body or institution.

“Premises” means any and all areas on a customer’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

“Public water system” means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption which has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year.

“Reclaimed water” means wastewater which as a result of treatment is suitable for uses other than potable use.

“Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.

“Service connection” refers to the point of connection of a user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

“Water supplier” means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.

“Water user” means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (Prior code § 18.32)

13.08.030 Cross-connection protection requirements.
A.    General Provisions.

1.    Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited.

2.    Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the department will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and at his or her expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted.

3.    Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user’s premises, any and all water supply lines from the department’s mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

B.    Where Protection is Required.

1.    Each service connection from the department water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the department, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.

2.    Each service connection from the department water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the department water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.

3.    Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: (a) internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health agencies and the department; or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.

C.    Type of Protection Required.

1.    The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle back-flow prevention device (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the department. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply at the user’s water connection to premises, with varying degrees of hazard, are given in the following table. Situations which are not covered in the following table shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow prevention shall be determined by the department or health agency.

 

TYPE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED

Degree of Hazard

Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention

a.

Sewage and Hazardous Substances.

 

i.

Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.

AG

ii.

Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the department.

AG

iii.

Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the department.

AG

iv.

Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the department.

AG

v.

Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected.

RP

b.

Auxiliary Water Supplies.

 

i.

Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the department.

AG

ii.

Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and department.

RP

c.

Fire Protection Systems.

 

i.

Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not inter-connected).

DC

ii.

Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and department.

AG

iii.

Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used.

DC

d.

Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities.

DC

i.

Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessels for any purpose.

RP

ii.

Premises where there are marine facilities.

RP

e.

Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist.

RP

f.

Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.

RP

2.    Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow prevention is deemed necessary to protect the department’s mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases the installation of approved backflow prevention devices at such service connections shall be required. (Prior code § 18.33)

13.08.040 Backflow prevention devices.
A.    Approved Backflow Prevention Devices.

1.    Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the department shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the department’s potable water system.

2.    The department will provide a list of approved backflow prevention devices to any affected customer upon request.

B.    Backflow Prevention Device Installation.

Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user’s connection. The department shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device.

1.    Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.

2.    Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and not more than thirty six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve (12) inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the reduced pressure device shall be protected in a manner approved by the department.

3.    Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user’s connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the “Y” type. These devices must be installed on their side with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel.

C.    Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who is certified pursuant to state law. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The department may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.

D.    Backflow Prevention Device Removal.

Approval must be obtained from the department before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced.

1.    Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from the service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the department to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future;

2.    Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the department that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device;

3.    Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the department. A retest will be required following repair of the device; and

4.    Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the department and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. (Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): prior code § 18.34)

13.08.050 User supervisor.
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the department, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connection. In the event of contamination of pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the department shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the department of the user supervisor’s identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. (Prior code § 18.35)

13.08.060 Administrative procedures.
A.    Water System Survey.

1.    The department shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow prevention is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the department upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted.

2.    The department may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The department will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his or her piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the department considers necessary.

3.    The department may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The department will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the department considers necessary.

B.    Customer Notification—Device Installation.

1.    The department will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty (60) days will be given to complete all corrective action required, including installation of backflow devices.

2.    A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty (60) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the department may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required correction actions are taken.

C.    Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance.

1.    The department will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty (30) days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the department.

2.    A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his or her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his or her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the department may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. (Prior code § 18.36)

13.08.070 Water service termination.
A.    In General. When the department encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply and that cannot be immediately abated, the department shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the department service.

B.    Basis For Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:

1.    Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device;

2.    Refusal to test a backflow prevention device;

3.    Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device;

4.    Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device;

5.    Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;

6.    Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

7.    Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; or

8.    A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.

C.    Water Service Termination Procedures.

1.    For conditions in subsection (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section, the department will terminate service to a customer’s premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated.

2.    For conditions in subsection (B)(4), (5), (6), (7) or (8) of this section, the department will take the following steps:

a.    Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service; and

b.    Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the department. (Prior code § 18.37)

Chapter 13.10
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.020    Allocation of water resources.

13.10.030    Effects of allocation.

13.10.010 Purpose.
The city of St. Helena recognizes that its sources of water are limited, and therefore that it must conserve and manage water resources to achieve adopted land use planning objectives. The city’s water resources are currently (and for the foreseeable future) derived from three sources: the city of Napa under its long-term water supply contract with the city of St. Helena; Bell Canyon Reservoir; and groundwater from city-owned and operated wells. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a water management program that:

A.    Provides a process for dedication of the city’s limited water resources in new development; and

B.    Establishes a process for determining the broad land use categories to be served through allocations of water resources during periods when the city is not by resolution of the city council declared to be in any water shortage emergency phase pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 13.04. (Ord. 12-10 § 1 (part))

13.10.020 Allocation of water resources.
A.    Allocation. Following a public hearing, the city council shall establish an allocation of water resources when the city is not in a declared water shortage emergency pursuant to Section 13.04.220 by adopting an allocation resolution. The resolution shall define:

1.    The quantity of water in acre-feet available to the city for allocation during the July 1st through June 30th water year;

2.    A list of defined land use or project categories for which water will be made available;

3.    A discrete quantity of water, expressed in acre-feet, to be allocated to each defined land use category; and

4.    A discrete quantity of water to be held in unallocated reserves.

B.    Unallocated Reserves. Water held in unallocated reserves shall not be used for any purpose or land use change until transferred to a defined allocation category. Such transfers shall be made through adoption of a new allocation resolution in conformity with subsection A of this section.

C.    Term of the Allocation Resolution. In the absence of a declared water shortage emergency, the allocation resolution shall remain in effect until replaced by a subsequent resolution pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Ord. 12-10 § 1 (part))

13.10.030 Effects of allocation.
The purpose and effect of establishing categories of water supplies are to limit access to water to those categories that are consistent with the general plan. No change in land use shall be allowed through any permit or license that could result in a net increase in water use unless such change has been approved in accordance with all applicable provisions of the water management plan.

A.    Acceptance of Applications. The director of public works or his or her designee shall monitor the water allocations established by resolution of the city council. Each proposed change in land use or project for which an application is submitted shall be evaluated to determine whether its approval could result in a net increase in water use. For projects that will result in a net increase in water use, the following procedure shall be used by the director of public works or his or her designee:

1.    The project shall first be classified into one or more land use categories based on the type of project (for example, a mixed-use project would be classified into both the commercial and multifamily residential categories).

2.    An estimate shall then be made of the net increase in water use that would result from the project within each land use category.

3.    If the project would require water from a land use category for which no allocation has been made, the application shall be returned to the applicant and shall not be processed.

4.    If the project would require more water from a land use category than currently remains in that category, after considering the original allocation minus all existing precommitments and dedications, the application shall be returned to the applicant and shall not be processed or shall be denied.

5.    If the project requires water and there is sufficient supply remaining in the allocation for each category affected by the project to meet fully the anticipated demand, the application may be accepted for processing after meeting all requirements for a complete application established by the city.

6.    Upon acceptance of an application as complete by the planning director, a precommitment of water resources shall be temporarily assigned by the director of public works or his or her designee to the project during the processing of the application. The director of public works or his or her designee shall keep a single record of the remaining balance of water within each allocation category and a running total of all temporary precommitments and dedications to ensure that applications are not accepted for processing for which water would be unavailable upon approval. For projects that are denied or abandoned, the precommitment shall be terminated and the water shall be administratively restored to its original allocation category.

B.    Approval of Applications. Once an application for a project requiring water resources has received final approval, the director of public works or his or her designee shall permanently reduce the remaining balance within each water allocation category affected by the project. This action shall terminate the temporary precommitment of water resources and create a permanent dedication of water resources to the project, subject to all applicable time limits established in the permit or by municipal code.

C.    Abandonment of Dedicated Water Resources. Upon making a determination that time limits applicable to a project have expired without implementation, all water previously dedicated to a project, but not used, shall be considered abandoned. All water abandoned or not used by such unimplemented projects shall be returned to the allocation category from which it originated and shall become available for use by subsequent projects. For projects that are implemented and water demand was overestimated, any remaining, unused water shall be credited back to the city’s unallocated reserve.

D.    Treatment of Approved and Completed Projects. Once a project has been approved and completed and commences to use city water, it is no longer counted against that allocation category. That project’s water usage then becomes part of overall city water usage, and the amount of water usage for the project will be reflected as part of the future years’ supply/usage balance, as defined in Section 13.04.010, for determining future water availability. Because the water usage portion of that calculation uses a five-year rolling average to smooth out yearly variability, a new project’s water usage will not be fully realized in the supply/usage calculation for five years. This could result in the inadvertent assumption that there is more surplus water than is actually available in the first few years after the project is completed.

To account for the foregoing, the following procedure will be enacted. If the new project has an expected usage in excess of two acre-feet of city water per year, an amount equal to the expected water usage for the project will be subtracted from any surplus water for a period of two years from the date when the project begins using city water. No adjustment will be made if the city’s water supply/usage balance is in deficit. Further allocations of surplus water to usage categories will be made after subtraction of all projects approved or completed within the past water year. (Ord. 12-10 § 1 (part))

Chapter 13.12
WATER USE EFFICIENCY AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
Sections:

13.12.010    Purpose and scope.

13.12.020    Definitions.

13.12.030    New development.

13.12.040    Residential remodeling.

13.12.050    Appeals.

13.12.060    Responsibility of customers, employers, property managers and contractors.

13.12.070    Violations—Penalties.

13.12.110    Remedies not exclusive.

13.12.120    City council authority and discretion to verify compliance.

13.12.010 Purpose and scope.
This chapter adopts regulations to deal with the limited supply of water which the city council has found to exist. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.40)

13.12.020 Definitions.
The following terms are defined for the purpose of this chapter:

“Customer” means the person responsible for paying for each water service account on the water enterprise’s water distribution system, both inside and outside the city limits.

“Domestic use” means any treated water used by a person for cooking, cleaning, bathing, washing clothes, drinking and sanitation.

“Efficient” means performing or conducting effectively with a minimum of waste, expense, or water use as set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

“New development” means any of the following construction projects that have not received a certificate of occupancy from the city or county building department prior to September 13, 1994, or that was issued a building permit and did not construct a foundation prior to September 13, 1994:

1.    Any freestanding building that contains water-using fixtures;

2.    Any floor area additions to existing nonresidential structures;

3.    Any residential additions or remodeling that increases the number of independent living units.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or governmental agency.

“Retrofit” means to replace all toilets, showerheads and faucet aerators in the building not complying with the flow regulations as stated in this chapter.

“Ultra-low flush (ULF) toilet” means any toilet which meets or exceeds the current California Green Building Standards Code.

“Water” means any treated water that is supplied by the city’s water enterprise water distribution system unless otherwise indicated. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.41)

13.12.030 New development.
A.    All new development shall apply the following water use efficiency measures, as applicable:

1.    Installation of ultra-low flush (ULF) toilets, low flow showerheads and faucet aerators;

2.    Installation of water efficient hot water instantaneous dispensing systems;

3.    Installation of swimming pool covers.

Except as allowed in subsection B of this section, new development shall completely offset its water requirement by installing city-approved ULF toilets and associated water efficient hardware in a sufficient number of existing homes or nonresidential properties having toilets that use one and six-tenths gallons per flush or greater. The required retrofits shall be calculated as specified in the city’s water neutrality policy as adopted by council resolution and approved by the director of public works/city engineer.

B.    If the city council determines that retrofitting of existing residential or nonresidential buildings is impractical or constitutes an unusual hardship on an applicant, it may authorize the payment to the city of an in-lieu retrofit fee in lieu of complying with the requirements of subsection A of this section. The in-lieu fee shall be the equivalent of the cost of retrofitting a sufficient number of existing homes with the ULF toilets and other required water-saving devices as described in subsection A of this section. The in-lieu fee shall also include the cost of staff time to accomplish the required retrofitting using the fees collected. The in-lieu fee will be established by resolution. The public works department is authorized to require retrofitting and not accept in-lieu retrofit fee, regardless of hardship, if it appears likely that existing home retrofitting prior to the expected occupancy by the new development can be completed. In the event that an in-lieu fee is accepted, the city will administer a rebate program to retrofit existing homes using the fees collected or may use the fees for another water use efficiency purpose as approved by the council. In-lieu fees must be paid upon issuance of a building permit. An applicant may petition the city council to allow an alternative innovative method of mitigating water use for new development.

C.    All new development that is retrofitted with toilets shall also be retrofitted with the following water-saving devices that meet or exceed the current California Green Building Standards Code or successor regulations as applicable: showerheads, interior faucet aerators, urinals. Existing fixtures that currently meet the California Green Building Standards Code or successor regulations are not required to be replaced.

D.    The developer shall be responsible for identifying residential or nonresidential properties eligible for retrofitting and verify to the department of public works that the required number of retrofits have been completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the certificate of occupancy has been issued without completion of the retrofit requirement, in-lieu fees will be retained by the city. In-lieu fees will be maintained in a separate account and administered by the director of public works for water use efficiency program elements.

E.    Nonresidential projects will have their water demand evaluated during the project review or use permit review stage by the director of public works. They will be required to mitigate their water demand through off-site retrofitting according to a schedule of water use factors.

F.    All new development shall use toilets, associated flush-o-meter valves and urinals, if any, that meet or exceed current California Green Building Standards Code or successor regulations.

G.    In the city, building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or water connections can be withheld pending compliance with these regulations. In the county, water service from the city of St. Helena water enterprise shall require a water agreement limiting water use and can be withheld pending compliance. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.44. Formerly 13.12.050)

13.12.040 Residential remodeling.
Residential remodeling will trigger a retrofit of the remodeled residence only if the remodeling involves work that would increase water use (determined by the director of public works), such as adding or remodeling a bathroom, adding a bedroom, granny unit, hot tub, spa, pool, or laundry. Remodeling that does not increase water use, such as reroofing, adding a family room, or increasing the size of a room would not trigger a retrofit unless the remodel exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the total valuation of the building as determined by the building official. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.45. Formerly 13.12.060)

13.12.050 Appeals.
Exceptions to the above allocations and prohibitions may be made for the protection of public health or safety or undue hardship. Any exceptions are subject to the following requirements and procedures:

A.    Any person who wishes to make an appeal shall do so in writing by using the form provided by the water department.

B.    The appeal shall be reviewed by the director of public works or his or her designee or designees.

C.    It must be shown that there are no alternatives to the use of city water and that all appropriate conservation measures are being used.

D.    Verification may be required of any condition/situation listed on the application for exception.

E.    The decision of the director of public works may be appealed to the city council within ten (10) days.

F.    The decision of the city council will be final. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.46. Formerly 13.12.070)

13.12.060 Responsibility of customers, employers, property managers and contractors.
A.    Every customer who has requested city water service is responsible for civil penalties for water waste whether or not the acts of water waste are committed by that person or third parties. The civil penalty may be reduced or discharged if the water waste was beyond the control of the customer and if all reasonable means had been previously taken to prevent water waste. All reasonable means includes, but is not limited to, securing hose bibs, written warnings to tenants or other water users, and amendments to rental agreements where permitted by the lease.

B.    Every employer is responsible for civil penalties for acts of water waste committed by employees if the employer shows gross negligence.

C.    Every property manager is responsible for civil penalties for acts of water waste resulting from irrigation prohibited by this chapter if the property manager shows gross negligence.

D.    Every licensed contractor or development owner is liable for acts of water waste committed on the job site. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.47. Formerly 13.12.080)

13.12.070 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 18 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.50. Formerly 13.12.100)

13.12.110 Remedies not exclusive.
Remedies herein are not exclusive. In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, the remedies established by Section 18.04.130 are also available to the city. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 04-2 (part): Ord. 01-11 § 2 (part): prior code § 18.51)

13.12.120 City council authority and discretion to verify compliance.
A.    The city council shall have the authority and discretion to take those actions it deems necessary and appropriate to determine the amount of water used by the city’s water users, and to verify and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, including without limitation the authority, consistent with requirements of state and federal law, to designate a city council subcommittee to review customer water use data and documents. Council subcommittee members shall report their findings to the full city council, and, except as set forth in subsection B of this section, shall maintain the confidentiality of the water customers’ usage data and information.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, upon the referral from the subcommittee that there has been a violation of or noncompliance with an agreement for the provision of water by the city, or a city water usage policy, the city council may determine that a water customer has used services in a manner inconsistent with applicable local usage policies, and on that basis order disclosure of any water customer’s water usage data and information. (Ord. 19-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 19-1 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Chapter 13.16
WATER WELLS
Sections:

13.16.010    Purpose.

13.16.020    Findings.

13.16.030    Definitions.

13.16.040    Design standards.

13.16.050    Existing wells.

13.16.060    Permit required.

13.16.070    Permit approval/denial.

13.16.080    Limitations upon well drilling permits.

13.16.090    Appeals.

13.16.100    Inspections.

13.16.110    Enforcement.

13.16.120    Violations.

13.16.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate all water wells within the incorporated limits of the city and to protect and preserve the surface waters and the groundwater aquifers lying under and adjacent to the city. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 19.1)

13.16.020 Findings.
The city council finds and determines as follows:

A.    It is necessary to establish standards for construction, placement, maintenance and destruction of water wells in order to assure that water wells will produce pure, wholesome and potable water, to prevent pollution of and damage to potable underground water stratas, and to ensure an adequate supply of groundwater is available to the community.

B.    The city of St. Helena has an obligation to protect the groundwater aquifer from, among other things, contamination and undue waste.

C.    The city council, in exercising its police powers, has the authority to adopt ordinances and resolutions for the regulation of groundwater, thereby conserving said waters and materially benefiting the public welfare.

D.    Improperly constructed, operated or maintained water wells and water supply sources can affect the public health and safety adversely by affecting the community’s supply and quality of drinking, commercial or industrial, and irrigation water.

E.    The city desires to require the location, construction and repair of water wells and other water systems to conform to California State Department of Water Resources Standards as noted in DWR Bulletin Numbers 74-81 and 74-90 and as required in California Water Code Section 13801.

F.    At its regular meetings of February 28 and March 13, 2012, the city council introduced and considered, at duly noticed and open public meetings, the adoption of an ordinance to amend Chapter 13.04, Water Service System, and Chapter 13.16, Water Wells, of the St. Helena Municipal Code to require connection to the public water supply system and to limit and regulate construction of water wells. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 19.2)

13.16.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Agricultural purpose” means the breeding, raising, pasturing, and grazing of livestock for the production of food and fiber, and the planting, raising, harvesting and producing of viticultural crops, food crops, fiber crops, horticultural crops, and forestry crops.

“Public works director” or “director” means the public works director, including his or her designee.

“Well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into, the ground. This definition does not include test wells, monitoring wells, or wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillside or earth embankments. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 19.3)

13.16.040 Design standards.
The design and construction of water wells shall be in accordance with the current California water well standards contained in Department of Water Resources Bulletins 74-81 and 74-90 and applicable regulations contained in the Napa County Code Chapter 13.12 and subsequent revisions. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.050 Existing wells.
The use and maintenance of existing water wells within the city shall be allowed. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.060 Permit required.
A.    No person shall drill, modify, construct or reconstruct, or destroy a water well without first submitting an application to, and receiving a permit from, the director of public works.

B.    Such application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall provide information sufficient to determine that such well will comply with the provisions of this chapter, all laws of the state of California, and rules and regulations issued thereunder.

C.    The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be fixed from time to time by resolution, to cover the administrative costs of issuing a well permit, including, but not limited to, plan check and inspection related to initial well construction and ongoing operation.

D.    The applicant shall also submit a well permit application to, and receive a permit from, the Napa County department of environmental management pursuant to Chapter 13.12 of the Napa County Code and subsequent revisions. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.070 Permit approval/denial.
A.    The director of public works shall provide notice of a well permit request to property owners within three hundred (300) feet from the lot on which the proposed well is located prior to the approval of the well permit request.

B.    The director of public works shall evaluate each application for a water well permit and may issue such permits which, in his or her sole discretion, are deemed to be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The director, in issuing such permits, may impose conditions as may be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.

C.    Applying the criteria contained in a separate resolution established by the city council, the director of public works may require, as a part of the well permit request, the preparation of a study by a qualified hydrogeologist, or equivalent professional, to ascertain the potential effects of the proposed well on the Napa Valley Floor-St. Helena Subarea groundwater basin or upon existing wells in the immediate vicinity of the subject well. Such a study shall be prepared at the applicant’s expense by an individual found, by the director of public works, to possess the appropriate qualifications. The scope of the study shall be determined by the director of public works. Should the director of public works conclude upon review of the study that the proposed well will have a significant adverse impact upon the Napa Valley Floor-St. Helena Subarea groundwater basin or existing well(s) in the immediate vicinity of the proposed well, the director of public works shall either deny the request or apply appropriate conditions upon the well permit to avoid the adverse effects. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, a volumetric limit on the groundwater which may be extracted annually from the approved well. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.080 Limitations upon well drilling permits.
Permits for water wells issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the following limitations:

A.    Wells shall not be drilled nor the water produced therefrom used for residential, commercial or industrial land use activities except that replacement well(s) for residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses may be established for well(s) which existed and were in active use prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, that no net increase in water production results from the replacement well(s).

B.    No well permit for uses other than agricultural purposes, as defined in Section 13.16.030 and as determined by the public works director, shall be granted without first receiving approval of an exception pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.055. Groundwater extracted from wells approved for agricultural purposes shall not be used for any other purpose including, but not limited to, landscaping and residential and commercial uses.

C.    All property owners with approved well permits pursuant to this chapter shall meter the well’s water production and report the amount of groundwater extracted each calendar year. This report shall be submitted to the department of public works prior to July 1st of each year on a form approved by the director of public works, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the director. The property owner shall maintain the meter in sound operating condition at all times.

D.    All property owners with wells approved pursuant to this chapter shall meter the well’s water level on a monthly basis and submit such water level data to the department of public works on a form approved by the director. This report shall be submitted annually to the director of public works prior to July 1st of each year, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the director. The property owner shall maintain the meter in sound operating condition at all times.

E.    As a condition of all approved well permits pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall assume all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage resulting from any work performed by the permittee or his agent under a permit, or resulting from the failure of the permittee to perform his obligation under a permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, employees, or agents, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claims. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.090 Appeals.
Any person whose application for a permit has been suspended, revoked or denied, or any person excepting to any administrative decision made by the director of public works pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this code. Said appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee, if any, as established by the city council. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.100 Inspections.
The director of public works shall have the right to enter upon any property at any reasonable time to make inspections and examinations for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq. Prior to entry, the director of public works shall present proper identification, state the purpose of the visit, and request permission of the owner or responsible person to enter the premises. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.110 Enforcement.
The director of public works may suspend or revoke a well permit issued under this chapter whenever he/she determines that a condition resulting from any work performed under such a permit constitutes a nuisance, or when the applicant, his/her agents, employees, or the licensed well drilling contractor performing the work: (A) violates any condition of the permit; (B) violates any provision of this chapter; or (C) misrepresents any material facts in the application for a permit. Upon notification by the director of public works that no valid permit has been issued or that the permit is suspended or revoked, no further work shall be performed until such violation has been abated. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

13.16.120 Violations.
A.    Any property owner who drills, modifies, constructs, reconstructs, destroys, maintains or operates a water well in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day in which such well is used or operated in violation of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code.

B.    In addition or as an alternative to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section, it is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and is thus declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any water well to be operated or used in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, any other provision of the municipal code, or any other applicable law. Any such nuisance may be abated and/or restored by the enforcement official and also may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code, except that the civil penalty for a violation shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000). Each day the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The city attorney also is authorized to pursue any remedy he or she deems necessary or appropriate to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance.

C.    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the city, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than six months, or by both. The city attorney, upon order of the city council, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. (Ord. 12-1 § 1 (part))

Chapter 13.20
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Sewer charges.

13.20.030    Use of funds.

13.20.040    Annexation to Municipal Sewer District No. 1.

13.20.050    Special extension prorate charge.

13.20.060    Connection to sewer main of adequate capacity.

13.20.070    Compulsory connection.

13.20.080    Details and specifications adopted by resolution.

13.20.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Car wash” means a business whose principal activity involves motor vehicle washing, including automatic and self-service washing.

“Garage and repair shop facilities” means any garage/repair facility that performs minor or major repairs on automobiles, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, and/or boats. These establishments may be combined with automotive dealers or gasoline service stations. Gasoline stations and gasoline stations combined with other activities, such as convenience stores, are considered general commercial unless there is on-site food preparation; then it is classified as mixed retail with food.

“General commercial and office” means all businesses, offices, and similar users not otherwise included in another user category.

“Grocery” means all businesses whose principal activity involves retail sale of groceries and which have on-site preparation of fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh and prepared meats, fish, and/or poultry; baked goods; and similar items.

“Hotel/motel with food” means a full service facility having rooms, restaurant(s), and/or a bar serving food attached to the same water meter. Also included in this category are bed and breakfasts serving food prepared on site, and any visitor-serving structure, which contains facilities for cooking and eating.

“Hotel/motel without food” means all living units of a transient nature, including hotel and motel rental room units, which do not contain any kitchen facilities, and bed and breakfast units that only serve continental breakfasts where baked goods and similar items are prepared off site. Excluded from this category are full service hotels.

“Laundromat/laundry” means all self-service clothes washing establishments or an establishment which is primarily engaged in supplying residences and/or businesses with laundered shirts, pants, household linens, and similar items on an over-the-counter basis. This does not include commercial or industrial laundries. Dry cleaners without on-site cleaning facilities are general commercial.

“Mixed retail with food” means all establishments where more than one retail business is attached to a water meter and the primary water use on that meter is from a business or businesses as defined in the restaurant category.

“Nonresidential properties” means, for the purposes of the wastewater service system and wastewater rates, all properties in which the primary purpose is not residential. Hotels and motels are considered nonresidential.

“Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.

“Religious place/community center” means establishments of religious organizations operated for worship, religious training or study. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, such as educational institutions, hospitals, social services, and secondhand stores are classified according to their primary activity.

“Residential” refers to all living or dwelling units (as defined by the Uniform Building Code) of a permanent, rather than a transient nature, including but not limited to single-family residences, apartments, mobile homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, townhouses, apartment buildings and condominiums. A dwelling unit shall be defined as any structure containing sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities.

“Restaurant” means all establishments whose principal activity involves on-premises preparation of meals and food, including fast food restaurants, coffee shops, cafes, juice bars, delicatessens, and bakeries. Excluded from this category are establishments serving food prepared off site (general commercial category), bars without on-site food preparation (general commercial category), restaurants on the same water meter as a hotel/motel (hotel/motel with restaurant category), and restaurants that are on the same water meter as other general commercial users (mixed retail with food category).

“Sanitation facilities and sewage facilities” means all devices and structures for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

“School” means an educational facility in which instruction takes place, including public, private and religious schools and colleges.

“Sewage” means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.

“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 00-6 § 1: prior code § 12.1)

13.20.020 Sewer charges.
A.    Charges Imposed. Owners of property shall pay to the city a charge based on user categories for the connection of the property to the public sewage system in the amounts set forth by council resolution for every month or any fraction thereof. Properties which are susceptible to classification under two or more user categories shall be subject to charges of the higher classification.

B.    Collection and Billing Generally.

1.    Sewer charges to occupants of property not billed for water service by the municipal water department shall be billed directly for such sewer charges.

2.    All other sewer charges shall be collected from the occupants with the charges for water of the municipal water department of the city and shall be billed upon the same bill.

C.    Failure to Pay Bill. Bills are due and payable upon presentation and delinquent after thirty (30) days. Upon failure of any consumer billed or the owner of any premises to pay a sewer charge prior to the delinquency, the following action or actions shall be taken by the city to enforce such payment after such bill becomes delinquent:

1.    Impose a penalty for delinquency of ten percent (10%) of the amount then delinquent;

2.    Assess interest in the amount of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount delinquent from the date on which the bill first became delinquent until paid;

3.    At the city’s election, cause an action at law to be brought on behalf of the city against the person responsible for payment of such bill to recover the amount of such bill and the cost of such action, including reasonable attorney fees incurred in an amount fixed by the court.

4.    Any person wishing to appeal penalties and interest imposed in this section shall adhere to provisions in accordance with Section 13.04.180, Appeals.

D.    Delinquencies. In addition and as an alternative to any other remedy for the enforcement and collection of sewer charges, all delinquent sewer charges shall become a lien upon the real property upon which sewage is furnished or supplied, prior to all other liens, encumbrances or exemptions, other than state and county taxes, and shall have the force and effect of a tax lien, and shall be enforced as follows: on or about September 1st of each year the city clerk shall note the amount of all delinquent sewer charges upon the assessment of such real property as shown upon the assessment roll of the city for the current fiscal year, and shall add the amount of such delinquent sewer charges to the tax assessed against such real property and the amount shall be collected with such taxes in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes, and if not so paid, the same penalties shall be added as are now, or may thereafter be added to delinquent taxes, and thereafter the real property upon which it is a lien, shall be sold and be subject to redemption in the same manner as real property is now, or may hereafter be sold for delinquent taxes.

E.    Hardship Agreements. City finance department may in its discretion offer hardship agreements which create payment plans for delinquent bills. Such agreements are available at the finance department. All requests for hardship agreements and payment plans must be submitted in writing. Hardship agreements may be approved at the discretion of the finance director based on amount owed and payment history. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 11-4 § 3: Ord. 08-1 § 1; Ord. 04-9 § 2; Ord. 00-6 § 2: prior code § 12.3)

13.20.030 Use of funds.
A.    Revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter shall be used only for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of sanitation or sewage facilities, to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction or reconstruction of such sanitary or sewage facilities and to repay federal or state loans or advances made to the city for the construction or reconstruction of sanitary or sewage facilities; provided, however, such revenues shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers.

B.    There is established and created a fund of the city entitled “wastewater fund” and all revenues derived under this chapter shall be deposited in such fund, subject to withdrawal as allowed by the provisions hereof. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 12.4)

13.20.040 Annexation to Municipal Sewer District No. 1.
A.    The owner(s) of any property to be annexed to the St. Helena Municipal Sewer District No. 1 shall pay to the city at the time of initiating the annexation proceedings a filing fee in an amount set by resolution, the amount of the fee that the city is required to pay to the State Board of Equalization to file statements pursuant to Government Code Section 54900 and following, and the amount of the fee that the city is required to pay to the Napa County assessor’s office for mapping services.

B.    All applications for annexations shall be approved by the city council pursuant to the requirements of state law. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 00-9: prior code § 12.5)

13.20.050 Special extension prorate charge.
A.    In addition to the usual costs of a sewer service connection as provided in this chapter, a special extension prorate charge shall be required and collected from applicants for sewer service and those property owners compelled to connect pursuant to Section 13.20.070 in those instances where the present or past owners of the premises to be served have not participated in the cost of installing the main fronting their premises and which main was installed within a period of ten (10) years prior to the date of granting the application for the sewer service connection or compelling connection under Section 13.20.070, but after the effective date of this section. The charge shall be determined by multiplying the footage of the premises lying along and which may be served directly from the main extension by one-half of the lineal per-foot cost of the main extension, but not to exceed the cost of an eight-inch main if installed by the department. The charge shall not be applied more than once to any premises. The charge shall be estimated and fixed by the director of public works subject to the approval of the city council and shall be payable prior to the installation of sewer service. The charge against each premises shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) of the total charge fixed for each full calendar year that passes after the effective date specified in subsection C of this section in which the subject premises have not obtained approval of an application for sewer connection nor qualified for compulsory connection to the city sewer under Section 13.20.070.

B.    Exemptions. Except in unusual circumstances as determined by the city council, premises already served by the department at the date of installation of the main extension will be exempt from the payment of the special extension prorate charge.

C.    When Effective. The special extension prorate charge shall be in effect for a period of twenty (20) years from:

1.    The date of execution of the main-extension agreement, if the main extension is financed by property owners; or

2.    The date of official completion of the main extension, if financed by the city.

D.    Rights of Applicant Financing Main Extension. The applicant who has financed the main extension shall be entitled to the special extension prorate charges collected by the department as a part of the service connection costs. The amounts collected shall be refunded to the applicant in accordance with the terms of the main-extension agreement between the city and the applicant. The refunds shall be made within ninety (90) days following the date of collection thereof by the city. No refunds of the extension prorate charges shall be made after ten (10) years from the date of execution of the main-extension agreement.

E.    Effective Date. All provisions of this section as effective prior to the effective date of the amending ordinance codified in this section shall remain in effect unmodified with respect to all sewer main extensions installed and main-extension agreements executed prior to the effective date of such amending ordinance.

F.    Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the city council prior to fixing and approving the special extension prorate charge in the manner described in subsection A of this section and prior to executing any sewer main extension refund agreement. Written notice of such hearings and of the charges estimated and fixed by the director of public works shall be mailed by certified mail to all owners of all properties upon which the charges are or could be prorated at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearings. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as determined by the latest county assessor’s records at the property owner’s address shown on the latest county assessor’s records, and if any owner’s address is different than the address of the property to which charges are or could be prorated, a further copy shall be mailed to the owner at such address of the property subject to the proration charges. The director of public works shall maintain his or her papers and calculations supporting his or her estimation and fixing of charges in a file available for public inspection in the city offices during the city’s regular business hours from the time of mailing such public hearing notices until conclusion of the public hearings. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 12.6)

13.20.060 Connection to sewer main of adequate capacity.
In no event shall a sewer service connection be installed unless a sewer main of adequate capacity extends in a public street or public right-of-way across the entire frontage of the premises to be served; provided, however, that if, under particular circumstances, it is determined by the city council that no public purpose would be served to require the sewer main to extend across the entire frontage, such as, without limitation, those cases involving dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, the council may determine a lesser distance to which it is necessary to extend the sewer main across the frontage to serve the public purpose. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 12.7)

13.20.070 Compulsory connection.
When the city’s public sewer is available, every building or other permanent structure which has plumbing fixtures shall connect to the city’s public sewer at the time of the occurrence of any one or more of the following events:

A.    Approval by the city of any use permit or variance applied for by or with the consent of the owner of the parcel on which the building or structure is located;

B.    Approval by the city for recordation of any final parcel map, subdivision map or lot line adjustment affecting any portion of the parcel upon which said building or structure is located, in which case the prorated charge under Section 13.20.050 shall be paid for the entire parcel as constituted prior to recordation of any such parcel or subdivision map or documents affecting the lot adjustment;

C.    Issuance of a building permit or permits for any parcel on which the building or improvements are located for improvements totaling more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in value within any continuous sixty (60) month period or for improvements which comprise replacement, relocation, or substantial reconstruction of an existing discrete sewage disposal system serving the parcel;

D.    Determination by the city’s health officer or city engineer that the existing discrete sewage disposal system serving a parcel on which the building or structure is located, or the nonexistence of such a discrete disposal system, constitutes a public health hazard. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 12.8)

13.20.080 Details and specifications adopted by resolution.
Standard sewer construction details and specifications shall be adopted by resolution by the city council and made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Prior code § 12.18)

Chapter 13.24
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
Sections:

13.24.010    Purpose and policy.

13.24.020    Definitions.

13.24.030    Regulations.

13.24.040    Wastewater volume determination.

13.24.050    Administration.

13.24.060    Wastewater user charges and fees.

13.24.070    Enforcement.

13.24.080    Abatement.

13.24.090    Findings.

13.24.100    Greasetraps.

13.24.010 Purpose and policy.
This wastewater discharge chapter sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system and enables the agency to comply with the administrative provisions of the Clean Water Grant Regulations, the water quality requirements set by the regional water quality control board and the applicable effluent limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of waste-water discharged into those systems. The provisions set out in Sections 13.24.010 through 13.24.080 of this chapter provides for the setting of user charges and fees for the equitable distribution of cost to all users, and the issuance of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of Sections 13.24.010 through 13.24.080 of this chapter shall be used to defray the agency’s cost of operating and maintaining an adequate wastewater collection and treatment system and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements, and depreciation. (Prior code § 12.9.01)

13.24.020 Definitions.
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall be as adopted in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be measured by Standard Methods and unless expressly stated, or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies.

“Agency” means the city of St. Helena.

“Beneficial uses” means uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation include, but are not necessarily limited to, domestic, municipal agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified by federal or state law.

“Building sewer” means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a community sewer.

“Community sewer” means a sewer owned and operated by the agency or other public agency tributary to a treatment facility operated by the agency.

“Compatible pollutant” means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the Agency’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.

“Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste water, whether or not waters of the state are affected.

“Critical users” means a user who is required to obtain a permit, as defined in Section 13.24.050(B).

“Federal Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.

“Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.

“Incompatible pollutant” means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in this section. The pre-treatment standard for incompatible pollutants introduced into a publicly owned treatment works by a major contributing industry not subject to Section 307(c) of the Federal Act shall be for sources within the corresponding industrial or commercial category, that established by a promulgated effluent limitations guideline defining best practicable control technology currently available pursuant to Sections 301(b) and 304(b) of the Federal Act; provided, that if the publicly owned treatment works which receives the pollutants is committed in its NPDES permit, to remove a specified percentage of any incompatible pollutant, the pretreatment standard applicable to users of such treatment works shall be correspondingly reduced for that pollutant; and provided further that even when the effluent limitations guideline for each industry category is promulgated, a separate provision will be proposed concerning the application of such guideline to pretreatment.

“Manager” means the city engineer or designated representative.

“Mass emission rate” means the weight of material discharged to the sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the “mass emission rate” means pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or public agency including the state of California and the United States of America, or any political subdivision thereof.

“Pollution” means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination.

“Premises” means a parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon which is determined by the agency to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for service.

“Unpolluted water” means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.

“User” means any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into a community sewer.

“User classification” means a classification of user based on the 1972 edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the Executive Office of Management and Budget.

“Waste” means includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.

“Wastewater” means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a community sewer.

“Wastewater constituents and characteristics” means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flowrate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.

“Waters of the state” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the state. (Prior code § 12.9.02)

13.24.030 Regulations.
A.    Prohibitions on Discharges. No person shall discharge to a community sewer wastes which cause, threaten to cause, or are capable of causing either alone or by interaction with other substances:

1.    A fire or explosion;

2.    Obstruction of flow in a sewer system or injury of the system or damage to the wastewater collection treatment or disposal facilities;

3.    Danger to life or safety of personnel;

4.    A nuisance or prevention of the effective maintenance or operation of the sewer system, or a strong unpleasant odor;

5.    Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gas-producing substances;

6.    Interference with the wastewater treatment process;

7.    The agency’s effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process;

8.    A detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters of the state or a condition unacceptable to the agency or any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the agency;

9.    Discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the conditions at or near the agency’s treatment works which violate any statute or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal regulatory body;

10.    Quantities or rates of flow which overload the agency’s collection or treatment facilities or cause excessive agency collection or treatment costs, or may use a disproportionate share of the agency facilities.

B.    Prohibitions on Storm Drainage and Ground Water. Storm water, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage will not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer unless a permit is issued by the agency. The agency may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available.

If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the agency.

C.    Prohibition on Unpolluted Water. Unpolluted water, including but not limited to cooling water, process water or blowdown from cooling towers or evaporative coolers will not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to a community sewer unless a permit is issued by the agency. The agency may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available.

If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the agency.

D.    Limitations on Radioactive Wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any radioactive waste into a community sewer except:

1.    When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials;

2.    When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17) and the Atomic Energy Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal; and

3.    When the person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies.

E.    Limitations on the Use of Garbage Grinders. Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a community sewer except:

1.    Wastes generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises; or

2.    Where the user has obtained a permit for that specific use from the agency, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the agency to equitably determine the user charges based on the waste constituents and characteristics.

Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the community sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse.

F.    Limitations on Point of Discharge. No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless upon written application by the user and payment of the applicable user charges and fees, the agency issues a permit for such direct discharges.

G.    Holding Tank Waste. A user proposing to discharge holding tank waste into a community sewer must secure a permit. Unless allowed by the agency under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge and the wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the agency.

H.    Limitations on Wastewater Strength.

1.    No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:

0.1

mg/l arsenic

0.2

mg/l cadmium

2.0

mg/l copper

1.0

mg/l cyanide

1.0

mg/l lead

0.01

mg/l mercury

1.0

mg/l nickel

0.2

mg/l silver

0.5

mg/l total chromium

3.0

mg/l zinc

2.    No person shall discharge any wastewater:

a.    Having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius);

b.    Containing more than seventy-five (75) milligrams per liter of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin;

c.    Containing more than seventy-five (75) milligrams per liter of oil or grease of mineral or petroleum, or any other origin;

d.    Having a pH lower than 6.0;

e.    Containing in excess of 0.02 mg/l total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons which cannot be removed by the agency’s wastewater treatment process;

f.    Containing in excess of 1.0 mg/l phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the Agency’s wastewater treatment process.

3.    Effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply in any instance where they are more stringent than those in this chapter. Under Section 307(b) of the Act, Federal pretreatment standards are designed to achieve two purposes: (a) to protect the operation of publicly owned treatment works; and (b) to prevent the discharge of pollutants which pass through such works inadequately treated. Users in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued under Section 304(b) of the Act, which are discharging incompatible pollutants to publicly owned treatment works, are required to adopt best practicable control technology currently available, as defined by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(b) of the Act. Where the agency treatment works was designed to and does achieve substantial removal of pollutants other than the four pollutants listed in the definition for compatible pollutants in section 13.24.020 (BOD, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria), it is not appropriate to require the industrial user to achieve best practicable control technology currently available, since this would lead to an uneconomical duplication of treatment facilities. While the term “substantial removal” is not subject to precise definition, it generally contemplates removals in the order of eighty percent (80%) or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of ten percent (10%) to thirty percent (30%) are not considered substantial. For some industrial categories it may be necessary to deny pretreatment guidelines for problems that may arise as a result of the discharge into publicly owned treatment works. However, any adjustments required for particular industrial categories should be considered in connection with the agency’s limitations on wastewater strength in subsection (H)(1) and (2) of this section may be supplemented with more stringent limitations pursuant to Section 13.24.050(D):

a.    If the agency determines that the limitations in subsection (H)(1) and (2) of this section may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the agency’s treatment works; or

b.    If the Agency determines that the limitations in subsection (H)(1) and (2) of this section may not be sufficient to enable the agency’s treatment works to comply with water quality standards or effluent limitations specified in the agency’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. (Prior code § 12.10)

13.24.040 Wastewater volume determination.
A.    Metered Water Supply. User charges and fees shall be applied against the total amount of water used from all sources unless, in the opinion of the agency, significant portions of water received are not discharged to a community sewer. The total amount of water used from public and private sources shall be determined by means of public meters or private meters, installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the agency.

B.    Metered Wastewater Volume and Metered Diversions. For users where, in the opinion of the agency, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the community sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means. the user charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water distributed from such premises into the community sewer.

Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the agency of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the manager.

C.    Estimated Wastewater Volume.

1.    Users Without Source Meters. For users where, in the opinion of the agency, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, the quantity of wastewater may be based upon an estimate prepared by the agency. This estimate shall be based upon a rational determination of the wastewater discharged and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of goods and services, of such other determinants of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged.

2.    Users With Source Meters. For users who, in the opinion of the agency, divert a significant portion of their flow from a community sewer, the user charges may be based upon an estimate of the volume prepared by the user, provided the user obtains a wastewater discharge permit and pays the applicable user charges and fees. The estimate must include the method and calculations used to determine the wastewater volume and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity population equivalents, annual production of goods and services, or such other determinations of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged. (Prior code § 12.11)

13.24.050 Administration.
A.    Discharge Reports. The agency may require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater into a community sewer file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, or other information which relates to the generation of waste including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the agency may require information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports.

B.    Wastewater Discharge Permits.

1.    Mandatory Permit. All critical users proposing to connect or to discharge into a community sewer must obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into a community sewer. All existing critical users connected to or discharging into a community sewer must obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. For purposes of said ordinance, a “critical user” is defined as any user whose user classification is identified in the Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) Manual in any of Divisions A, B, D, E, and I and who: (a) has a discharge flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work day; or (b) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the agency’s wastewater treatment system; or (c) has in his or her wastes toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a), of the Federal Act; or (d) is found by the manager to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment or collection system; (e) those discharging holding tank waste into the community sewer; (f) those discharging directly into the community sewer at any opening other than through an approved building sewer.

2.    Optional Permits. The manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user, upon application, in accordance with the terms of this section in the following categories:

a.    A user who requires the user charges and fees to be based on an estimation of wastewater flow;

b.    Any user whose wastewater strength is less than the normal range for the user classification to which he or she is assigned because of pretreatment, process changes or other reasons.

3.    Permit Application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the manager, an application in the form prescribed by the manager, and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

a.    Name, address, and SIC number of applicant;

b.    Volume of wastewater to be discharged;

c.    Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in Section 13.24.030(H) as determined by a laboratory approved by the agency;

d.    Time and duration of discharge;

e.    Average and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;

f.    Site plants, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;

g.    Description of activities, facilities and plant process on the premises including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged;

h.    Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production;

i.    Number and type of employees, and hours of work;

j.    Any other information as may be deemed by the manager to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

The manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.

4.    Permit Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the agency. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the manager in accordance with this chapter, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits may contain the following:

a.    The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;

b.    The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

c.    Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;

d.    Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities;

e.    Pre-treatment requirements;

f.    Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;

g.    Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;

h.    Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the agency, and affording agency access thereto;

i.    Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants (as defined by Section 13.24.020) are proposed or present in the user’s wastewater discharge;

j.    Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the agency to insure compliance with this chapter.

5.    Duration of Permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the agency thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the agency during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Section 13.24.030(H) are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.

6.    Transfer of a Permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.

7.    Revocation of Permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of the permit or of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his or her permit revoked:

a.    Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;

b.    Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

c.    Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or

d.    Violation of conditions of the permit.

C.    Monitoring Facilities. The agency may require the user to construct at his or her own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the user’s expense. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the agency may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

If the monitoring facility is inside the user’s fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for agency personnel, such as a gate secured with an agency lock. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The manhole, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.

Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the agency’s requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the agency; unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the agency.

D.    Inspection and Sampling. The agency may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the agency or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The agency shall have the right to set up on the user’s premises such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification personnel from the agency will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.

E.    Pretreatment. Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to any community sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the agency shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the agency for review, and shall be acceptable to the agency before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the agency under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Agency.

F.    Protection from Accidental Discharge. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the agency for review, and shall be acceptable to the agency before construction of the facility.

The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this section.

G.    Confidential Information. All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the agency that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods which would be detrimental to the user’s competitive position.

When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.

Information accepted by the agency as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the agency until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to the user.

H.    Special Agreements. Special agreements and arrangements between the agency and any persons or agencies may be established when in the opinion of the agency unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. (Prior code § 12.12)

13.24.060 Wastewater user charges and fees.
A.    Classification of Users. All users shall be classified by assigning each one to a user classification category according to the principal activity conducted on the user’s premises and based on the typical wastewater constituents and characteristics for that type of user as determined by the agency. The purpose of such classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to provide an effective means of source control, and to establish a system of user charges and fees which will insure an equitable recovery of the agency’s cost. Wastewater constituents and characteristics may include but not be limited to the following: suspended solids, BOD, COD, oil and grease, and chlorine demand.

B.    Types of Charges and Fees. A user classification charge may be adopted for each user category based upon the charges for the average wastewater constituents and characteristics for each user classification. The charges for each waste-water constituent and characteristic shall be established by the agency and set forth in the agency’s schedule of charges and fees included herein or adopted by the agency. The agency may adopt a schedule of charges and fees which may include:

1.    User classification charges;

2.    Fees for monitoring;

3.    Fees for permit applications;

4.    Appeal fees;

5.    Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to include industrial cost recovery provisions of the Federal Act.

C.    Determination of User Charges.

1.    Nonwastewater Discharge Permit Users. Each user, not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, shall pay the applicable user charge as established by the agency and set forth in the agency’s schedule of user charges and fees. This charge shall be determined by multiplying the user classification charge by the determined wastewater volume. The agency may elect to set a fixed unit charge as set forth in the agency’s schedule of user charges and fees for certain user classifications based on wastewater constituents and characteristics. For the purpose of determining wastewater user charges the minimum standard classification charge shall be based upon a typical average strength of domestic wastewater such as:

BOD — 250 mg/l

COD — 375 mg/l

Suspended solids — 250 mg/l

Oil and grease — 40 mg/l

2.    Wastewater Discharge Permit Users. Users who are issued a wastewater discharge permit under the provisions of this chapter shall pay a user charge determined by multiplying the charge for each wastewater constituent and characteristic by the volume of water discharged. (Prior code § 12.13)

13.24.070 Enforcement.
A.    Accidental Discharges.

1.    Notification of Discharge. Users shall notify the Agency immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the agency to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment facility, treatment processes and the receiving waters.

This notification shall be followed, within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.

Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the Agency on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code.

2.    Notice to Employees. In order that employees of users be informed of agency requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter and together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the agency from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.

3.    Preventive Measures. Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the user’s plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such action is impractical or unreasonable the user shall appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in violation of this chapter.

B.    Issuance of Cease and Desist Orders. When the agency finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this chapter, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the manager may issue an order to cease and desist, and direct that those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions to:

1.    Comply forthwith;

2.    Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the agency; or

3.    Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation.

C.    Submission of Time Schedule. When the agency finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this chapter, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the agency may require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements.

D.    Appeals. Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders made by the manager, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or in any permit issued herein may file with the manager a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user’s request for reconsideration.

If the ruling made by the manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he or she may within ten (10) days after notification of agency action, file a written appeal to the agency’s governing body. The written appeal shall be heard by the body within thirty (30) days from the date of filing. The agency’s governing body shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten (10) days of the close of the meeting. The manager’s decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. (Prior code § 12.14)

13.24.080 Abatement.
A.    Public Nuisance. Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the manager as authorized by this chapter, is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the manager. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.    Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the agency may petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge.

C.    Damage to Facilities. When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to agency facilities, the agency may assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user’s charges and fees.

D.    Penalties.

The city attorney may seek the maximum civil and criminal penalties allowed under state and federal law as set forth in 33 U.S.C. Section 1319, and California Water Code sections 13385 and 13387.

E.    Criminal Penalties. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter or permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution or who violated any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation, national standard of performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be liable to a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day in which such violation occurs, or to imprisonment for not more than one year in the county jail, or both.

If the conviction is for a violation committed after the first conviction of such person, punishment shall be by a fine of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each day in which such violation occurs, or by imprisonment for not more than two years in the county jail, or both. The attorney or the agency, upon order of the agency’s governing body, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums.

F.    Falsifying of Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the agency, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than six months, or by both. The attorney of the agency, upon order of the agency’s governing body, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums.

G.    Termination of Service. The agency may revoke any wastewater discharge permit, or terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater service to any premises if a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance as defined in this chapter. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment. (Ord. 02-5 § 13; prior code § 12.15)

13.24.090 Findings.
A.    The city council finds and determines that:

1.    The city wastewater treatment plant is not capable of complying with the regulations and requirements of and is currently operating under a cease and desist order issued by the San Francisco Bay Area Regional Water Quality Control Board;

2.    Forty-seven (47) additional residential housing units have been awarded project allocations under the project allocation system ordinance in prior years which have not yet been constructed;

3.    Construction of the forty-seven (47) additional units already awarded project allocations will completely exhaust the wastewater treatment capacity of the city’s wastewater treatment facilities, unless additional capacity is added through the temporary and potentially hazardous means of raising the freeboard at the wastewater treatment plant;

4.    Twelve (12) inches of freeboard is the maximum amount the freeboard can be raised at the city’s wastewater treatment facility with provision for necessary emergency reserve conditions. A twelve (12) inch increase in the freeboard would increase the capacity of the city’s wastewater treatment facility sufficiently to allow service of approximately fifty-five (55) additional connections, provided that each connection does not exceed six hundred (600) gallons per day of wastewater discharge into the city’s wastewater treatment facilities. The six hundred (600) gallon per day measurement standard is the estimate by the city of the average daily usage of a typical four-bedroom single-family residence in the city;

5.    Except for the areas designated as woodlands and water shed on the city’s general plan map, the use of discrete wastewater disposal systems for new residential housing units or for other uses allowed by the residential, commercial and industrial zoning ordinances of the city, rather than requiring connection to the city’s wastewater treatment facilities, would be contrary to the policies of the city and the regional water quality control board and would be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare;

6.    The construction or establishment of each additional residential housing unit or other use allowed by the residential, commercial and industrial zoning ordinances of the city which are served by the city’s wastewater treatment facilities increases the violations by the city’s facilities of the regulations, requirements and cease and desist order of the regional water quality control board, decreases the small amount of remaining capacity of the city’s wastewater treatment facilities, and, if not carefully managed to allocate the remaining capacity fairly among the competing needs of the citizens and property owners of the city, would be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare;

7.    The city has no presently approved plan or project for either increasing the capacity of or improving the quality of treatment of the city’s wastewater treatment facilities to comply with the regulations and requirements of the regional water quality control board, and there is little probability that additional sewer treatment plant capacity will become available to the city prior to 1985;

8.    By adoption of Ordinance No. 81-12, the city did not intend to restrict new or additional facilities for discrete wastewater treatment for winery processing waste materials disposal for wineries located in W (winery) zones, which facilities are necessary for maintenance of businesses processing agricultural crops which are of primary significance to the city.

B.    Certain Discrete Wastewater Treatment Facilities Prohibited. The construction of or use of any new or additional discrete wastewater treatment facilities is prohibited upon any parcel of real property within the city, except those facilities:

1.    Constructed or used upon an existing lot of record, which facilities do not establish or service uses which generate in excess of six hundred (600) gallons of wastewater for treatment and/or storage of any single calendar day; or

2.    Constructed or used in the areas designated as woodlands and watershed on the city’s general plan map; or

3.    Constructed or used solely for treatment and disposal of winery processing waste materials (but not domestic waste) from offices, visitors’ facilities or other business uses by wineries located within the city’s W (winery) zoning district.

C.    Definitions.

1.    As used in subsection B of this section:

“Discrete wastewater treatment facility” means any system for treatment or disposal of wastewater other than one discharging all wastewater generated on a lot of record directly into a city sewer line; and

“Lot of record” means a parcel of land existing as a separate parcel on the Napa County Assessment Roll on July 9, 1980, or if the property is located south of Sulpher Creek between Crane Avenue and a line two thousand two hundred (2,200) feet easterly of and parallel to Main Street, a parcel for which a tentative or final subdivision or parcel map was approved by the city council prior to July 9, 1980, or if said property is located within any other area of the city, a parcel for which a tentative or final subdivision or parcel map was approved by the city council prior to May 26, 1981.

2.    If a transfer of a portion of a lot of record to another lot of record occurs in conformance with Title 16 of this code, the resultant parcels shall each remain a “lot of record” within the meaning of this subsection, except any such resultant parcel which prior to such lot line adjustment contained any structures generating wastewater shall be charged with such wastewater uses in applying the usage restrictions of subsection B of this section and Sections 17.52.090(F) and 17.60.080(A). (Prior code § 12.18)

13.24.100 Greasetraps.
A.    All restaurants and food preparation businesses producing discharges of wastewater that at any time exceed the limitations of Section 13.24.030(H)(2) shall install and maintain in good operating condition at all times a greasetrap or grease interceptor sufficient to process all wastewater containing grease or oil produced or occurring on the premises, and all wastewater containing grease or oil shall be processed through said greasetrap prior to any discharge thereof into the community sewers.

B.    All greasetraps or grease interceptors installed and maintained pursuant to subsection A of this section shall conform to the approved designs and specifications maintained on file by the public works director or shall conform to the Uniform Plumbing Code and be approved in design and specifications by the public works director.

C.    All restaurants and food preparation businesses existing on the effective date hereof, which are required by subsection A of this section to install a greasetrap or grease interceptor shall complete installation of the same within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof. All restaurants and food preparation services required to comply with subsection A of this section which are established after the effective date hereof shall complete installation of the required greasetrap or grease interceptor prior to opening for business.

D.    All parties maintaining a greasetrap or grease interceptor shall maintain the same in good operating condition and shall clean and dispose of the accumulated waste as frequently as is necessary to maintain proper operating conditions. None of the waste materials cleaned from any such wastetrap or waste interceptor shall be disposed of into any city storm drain or sewer manhole nor in any other manner which constitutes a public or private nuisance. Violations of this subsection shall constitute an infraction.

E.    The city’s public works director and any Napa County environmental health personnel acting under his or her directions may enter any restaurant or food preparation business premises where any such greasetrap or grease interceptor is required to be maintained to inspect such devices periodically or whenever deemed necessary to ascertain whether all requirements of this section are being complied with. (Prior code § 12.19)

Chapter 13.28
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

13.28.010    Definitions.

13.28.020    Public hearing by city council.

13.28.030    Council may designate underground districts by resolution.

13.28.040    Unlawful acts.

13.28.050    Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.

13.28.060    Other exceptions.

13.28.070    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

13.28.080    Responsibility of utility companies.

13.28.090    Responsibility of property owners.

13.28.100    Responsibility of city.

13.28.110    Extension of time.

13.28.120    Undergrounding utilities in areas outside existing districts—Required.

13.28.130    Underground utilities in areas outside existing districts—Locations where applicable.

13.28.140    Undergrounding utilities in areas outside existing districts—Exceptions.

13.28.010 Definitions.
When in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

“Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

“Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

“Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

“Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.030.

“Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 17A.1)

13.28.020 Public hearing by city council.
The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and places of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 02-5 § 17: prior code § 17A.2)

13.28.030 Council may designate underground districts by resolution.
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 17A.3)

13.28.040 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.28.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.28.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 17A.4)

13.28.050 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission on such terms as the director of public works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 17A.5)

13.28.060 Other exceptions.
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B.    Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C.    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;

E.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location of the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F.    Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts;

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 17A.6)

13.28.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 17A.7)

13.28.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 17A.8)

13.28.090 Responsibility of property owners.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.28.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

B.    In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.28.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. (Prior code § 17A.9)

13.28.100 Responsibility of city.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owners or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.28.030. (Prior code § 17A.10)

13.28.110 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 17A.11)

13.28.120 Undergrounding utilities in areas outside existing districts—Required.
All electrical energy and communication service laterals to any new building or structure, or to any building or structure other than a single-family residential building or structure, being remodeled or repaired when such remodeling or repair work requires the relocation or replacement of the main electrical energy or communication service equipment, shall be placed underground in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of, and the tariffs on file with, the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. With the written consent of the owner of a single-family residential building or structure, all electrical energy and communication service laterals to such building or structure being remodeled or repaired when such remodeling or repair work requires the relocation or replacement of the main electrical energy or communication service equipment shall be so placed underground. This requirement shall be stated in each building permit issued for such kinds of types of construction. (Prior code § 17A.13)

13.28.130 Underground utilities in areas outside existing districts—Locations where applicable.
This requirement to underground electrical energy and communication service laterals shall be applicable only to those buildings or structures located or to be constructed within an area of the city being served from an overhead source from the street at the time the building permit is obtained and is not applicable to such service from rear lot easements, or public alleys or ways. (Prior code § 17A.14)

13.28.140 Undergrounding utilities in areas outside existing districts—Exceptions.
Where compliance with the requirement to underground electrical energy and communication service laterals is not economically or practicably feasible, the building official of the city may authorize different arrangements for electrical and communication service. The extension of an underground service lateral across a street or to a pole in front of adjacent property shall be considered uneconomical. Whenever an exception is granted as provided for herein, the new service shall be of a type that will permit an economical change to underground service at a later date. (Prior code § 17A.15)

Chapter 13.32
STORMWATER AND RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Sections:

13.32.010    Title.

13.32.020    Purpose and intent.

13.32.030    Definitions.

13.32.040    Conflicts with other laws.

13.32.050    Discharge prohibitions.

13.32.060    Exceptions to discharge prohibition.

13.32.070    Proof of compliance with NPDES permit.

13.32.080    Concealment and abetting.

13.32.090    Reduction of pollutants in stormwater.

13.32.100    Containment and notification of spills.

13.32.110    Inspection authority.

13.32.120    Enforcement authority.

13.32.130    Appeal.

13.32.140    Violations constituting misdemeanors.

13.32.150    Remedies not exclusive.

13.32.160    Costs and expenses of enforcement—Civil penalties—Authorization for special assessment against subject property—Notice.

13.32.170    Civil actions.

13.32.180    Violations deemed a public nuisance.

13.32.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “city of St. Helena stormwater and runoff pollution control ordinance,” and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.020 Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this chapter are to protect the health, safety and general welfare of city of St. Helena residents; to protect water resources and to improve water quality; to protect and enhance watercourses, fish, and wildlife habitat; to cause the use of management practices by the city and its citizens that will reduce the adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the state; to secure benefits from the use of stormwater as a resource; and to ensure the city is compliant with applicable state and federal law. This chapter seeks to promote these purposes by:

A.    Prohibiting illicit discharges to the stormwater conveyance system;

B.    Establishing minimum requirements for stormwater management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution;

C.    Establishing requirements for development project site design, to reduce stormwater pollution and erosion;

D.    Establishing requirements for the management of stormwater flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect and enhance existing water-dependent habitats;

E.    Establishing standards for the use of off-site facilities for stormwater management to supplement on-site practices at new development sites. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.030 Definitions.
A.    The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

“BASMAA Post Construction Manual” means the most recent version of the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies (BASMAA) Post Construction Manual.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

“City” means the city of St. Helena, situated in Napa County, California.

“Construction activity” means any activity that involves soil disturbing activities including, but not limited to, clearing, paving, grading, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation.

“Development” means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or manmade cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal, exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety.

“Development runoff requirements” means the provisions in the Phase II Stormwater Permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address both the construction and post construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity.

“Director of public works” or “director” means the director of the city of St. Helena department of public works.

“Discharge of a pollutant” means: (1) the addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source; or (2) any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term includes additions of pollutants to waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances leading into privately owned treatment works.

“Employee training program” means a documented employee training program which may be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system.

“Enforcement agency” means the city of St. Helena public works department.

“Enforcement official” means the director of public works or his or her designee or any agent of the city authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter.

“Erosion and sediment control plan” or “ESCP” means a plan prepared to control erosion and sediment discharges from a construction site that meets those criteria identified in the most recent version of the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued technical bulletins.

“Illicit connection” means a pipe, facility, or other device, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater conveyance system or receiving water regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency.

“Illicit discharge” means any discharge to a storm drain or receiving water that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term “illicit discharge” does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES permit (other than the Phase II Stormwater Permit) and discharges that are identified under the exceptions to discharge prohibition section of this chapter (Section 13.32.060).

“Incidental irrigation runoff” means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence.

“Low impact development (LID)” means a sustainable practice that benefits water supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and stormwater management to maintain the site’s predevelopment runoff rates and volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site’s predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to the source of rainfall.

“Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means a technology-based standard established by Congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) for stormwater discharge that municipalities must meet. MEP is generally the result of emphasizing pollution prevention and source control best management practices (BMPs) primarily (as the first line of defense) and in combination with treatment methods serving as backup (additional line of defense). The MEP approach is an ever evolving, flexible and advancing concept, which considers technical and economic feasibility. As knowledge about controlling urban runoff continues to evolve, so does what constitutes MEP.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means a permit issued by the U.S. EPA, State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA) that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States and requires the reduction of pollutants in the discharge.

“NCSPPP” is the Napa Countywide Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program.

“Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving water that is not entirely composed of stormwater.

“Occupant” means any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise occupying a premises.

“Person” means any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise.

“Phase II Stormwater Permit” means the NPDES general stormwater permit applicable to the city of St. Helena, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit.

“Plan standard” means any and/or all applicable requirements of the Water Quality Control Plan for Basin 2, adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region, and all subsequent amendments.

“Pollutant” means any “pollutant” defined in Section 502(6) of the CWA (33 U.S.C. 1362) or incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Residential, commercial and industrial waste (such as trash, litter, fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge);

2.    Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, silver, nickel, chromium, copper and nonmetals such as phosphorous and arsenic;

3.    Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease);

4.    Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state;

5.    Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); and

6.    Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.

“Post construction measures requirements” means the provisions in Section E.12 of the Phase II Stormwater Permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address the post construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

“Receiving waters” means all waters that are “waters of the United States” within the scope of the federal Clean Water Act or “waters of the state” within the scope of the California Water Code, including but not limited to natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean, and groundwater.

“Stormwater” or “storm runoff” means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events, which is free of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.

“Stormwater control plan (SCP)” means a plan that meets those criteria contained in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any technical bulletins.

“Stormwater conveyance system” or “storm drains” means those artificial and natural facilities within the incorporated area of the city of St. Helena, whether publicly or privately owned, by which stormwater may be conveyed to a watercourse or receiving waters, including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, aqueducts, streambeds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, and natural and artificial channels or storm drains.

“Stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan” means a plan identifying the locations and characteristics of stormwater management facilities on a newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities, schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those facilities.

“Stormwater management facility” means any device designated to detain, retain, filter, or infiltrate stormwater.

“Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means a document which describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business or construction site to eliminate illicit discharges and/or reduce pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system.

“Technical bulletin” means a document issued by and under the authority of the director of public works to revise, amend, or augment guidance manuals, documents, and templates including but not limited to the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template.

“Urban runoff” means stormwater runoff from an urbanized area including streets and adjacent domestic and commercial properties that carries pollutants of various types into the storm drainage system and receiving waters.

“Watercourse” means any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation, rivers, creeks, runs, and rivulets.

B.    Any term(s) defined in the federal Clean Water Act and the California Water Code, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and/or defined in the Phase II Stormwater Permit and which are not specifically defined in subsection A of this section shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in the act or regulation. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.040 Conflicts with other laws.
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law or regulation, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. Nothing in this chapter is intended to duplicate nor shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or permit. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.050 Discharge prohibitions.
A.    Illicit Discharges. Except as provided in Section 13.32.060, it is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any illicit discharge. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by Sections 13.32.060(A) and (B), if the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan standard, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water(s) or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system.

B.    Illicit Connection. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to a storm drain or watercourse is prohibited. This prohibition includes illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

C.    Litter, Dumps, and Stockpiles. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illicit discharge is prohibited. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.060 Exceptions to discharge prohibition.
Subject to the authority granted to the enforcement official in this chapter, the following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 13.32.050:

A.    Any discharge or connection regulated under an NPDES permit (other than the Phase II Permit) issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code; provided, that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations.

B.    Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities unless they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.

C.    Discharges from the following activities, which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any plan standard provided any pollutant discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented:

1.    Waterline flushing and other discharges from potable water sources;

2.    Rising groundwaters or springs;

3.    Passive foundation and footing drains;

4.    Uncontaminated infiltration to storm drains;

5.    Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps;

6.    Air conditioning condensate;

7.    Individual residential car washing;

8.    Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

9.    Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;

10.    Diverted stream flows;

11.    Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. Section 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;

12.    Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

13.    Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the conditions in subsection D of this section are met.

D.    Incidental irrigation. Irrigation runoff from landscaped areas is the unintended amounts of runoff that leave the area of application such as minimal overspray. Water leaving the intended area of application is not incidental if it is due to the design, excessive application, or intentional overflow or application. Irrigation systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area of application. Persons responsible for controlling irrigation systems shall prevent excessive irrigation runoff by:

1.    Detecting and correcting leaks and correcting from the irrigation system within seventy-two (72) hours of discovering the leak.

2.    Properly designing and aiming sprinkler heads to only irrigate the planned application area.

3.    Not irrigating during precipitation events.

4.    Where recycled water is used for irrigation, designing and managing holding ponds to such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the twenty-five (25) year twenty-four (24) hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to the Regional Water Board and the city of St. Helena within twenty-four (24) hours of the discharge.

E.    Any discharge which the enforcement official, the local health officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines in writing is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety.

F.    Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster, which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official.

G.    Any exceptions under state or federal law. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.070 Proof of compliance with NPDES permit.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit and provide proof of compliance with the permit in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.080 Concealment and abetting.
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.090 Reduction of pollutants in stormwater.
Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, comply with the requirements set forth in this section to reduce the risk of illicit discharge and/or pollutant discharge.

A.    Urban Runoff.

1.    Compliance with Best Management Practices (BMPs). Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or non-stormwater discharges shall implement BMPs consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association BMPs or equivalent, and pollution control requirements as may be established by resolution of the city council.

2.    Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers or at lawfully established dumping grounds, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, such that, in the opinion of the authorized enforcement official, the same might be or become a pollutant discharged to the waters of the United States.

3.    The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor, of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt and/or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for recycling or disposal of garbage.

B.    Business Related Activities.

1.    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which shall, without limitation, include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors.

C.    Best Management Practices for Development and Redevelopment.

1.    Prior to and/or during construction, the enforcement official may establish controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume, and/or to mimic the predevelopment site hydrology. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on site.

2.    The enforcement official may require, as a condition of project approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants and for control on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from the project’s added or replaced impervious surfaces. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal, state, local agencies, and where required, the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any issued technical bulletins. Where physical and safety conditions allow, the preferred control measure is to retain drainageways above ground and in as natural a state as possible or other biological methods such as bioretention areas.

3.    Stormwater Control Plan Requirements.

a.    For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the post construction measures requirements, or where required by the nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the agency, every applicant shall submit a stormwater control plan (SCP) that meets the criteria in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any technical bulletins, and shall implement conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact development design, site design measures, stormwater treatment measures and hydromodification management measures. Increases in runoff shall be managed in accordance with the post construction requirements.

b.    The SCP is separate and distinct from the ESCP requirements described in subsection D of this section.

c.    Where projects are required to have an SCP, project applicants shall follow the appropriate SCP template, based on the project type, in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any technical bulletins.

d.    Implementation of an approved SCP and submittal of an approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit or a construction permit for a project subject to this section.

e.    When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the enforcement official authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and does not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal, provided in the City of St. Helena Municipal Code.

f.    Financial security may be required to ensure that stormwater management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a period which may be determined by the agency. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the agency.

g.    All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any technical bulletins.

h.    All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and the approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facilities at least annually. The stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan shall describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to maintain the stormwater management facilities in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the city may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Section 13.32.160.

i.    For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the post construction measures requirements, or where deemed appropriate by the agency, access by the city to stormwater management facilities for inspections, as provided in Section 13.32.110 and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be provided by the property owner.

j.    All project proponents and their successors, or successors in fee title, in control of a new development and redevelopment project subject to the post construction measures requirements, shall submit one of the following as a condition prior to final inspection and approval of building permit closure:

i.    The project proponent’s signed statement accepting responsibility for the operations and maintenance of stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

ii.    Written conditions in the sales or lease agreements or deed for the project that requires the buyer or lessee to assume responsibility for the operations and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

iii.    Written text in project deeds, or conditions, covenants and restrictions for multi-unit residential projects that require the homeowners association or, if there is no association, each individual owner to assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity; or

iv.    Any other legally enforceable agreement or mechanism, such as recordation in the property deed, that assigns the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities to the project owner(s) or the permittee.

D.    Best Management Practices for Ground Disturbing Activities.

1.    Any person performing construction activities in the city shall implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or contaminants from construction materials, tools and equipment from entering a city storm drain or watercourse.

2.    All construction plans and applications submitted to the city pursuant to any permit applications shall implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering a city storm drain or watercourse.

a.    Construction phase BMPs include erosion and sediment controls and pollution prevention practices. Erosion control BMPs may include, but are not limited to, scheduling and timing of grading activities, timely revegetation of graded areas, the use of hydroseed and hydraulic mulches, and installation of erosion control blankets. Sediment control may include properly sized detention basins, dams, or filters to reduce entry of suspended sediment into the storm drain system and watercourses, and installation of construction entrances to prevent tracking of sediment onto adjacent streets. Pollution prevention practices may include designated washout areas or facilities, control of trash and recycled materials, tarping of materials stored on site, and proper location of and maintenance of temporary sanitary facilities. The combination of BMPs used, and their execution in the field, must be customized to the site using up-to-date standards and practices. The agency will provide references to current guidance manuals and BMP information on request.

b.    Financial security may be required to insure that temporary measures to control stormwater pollution are implemented and maintained during construction and after construction for a period determined by the agency. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the agency.

c.    When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the enforcement official authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and does not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal, provided in the City of St. Helena Municipal Code.

d.    The city has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post construction).

e.    All construction plans and applications for construction activity submitted to the city shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

3.    Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements.

a.    An erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) shall be required for:

i.    Any project subject to a grading permit under Chapter 15.12;

ii.    Any project subject to another city permit that has the potential for significant erosion and/or significant non-stormwater discharges of sediment and/or construction site waste including:

(A)    Projects within fifty (50) feet of the storm drain system, or

(B)    Projects disturbing ten thousand (10,000) square feet (sf) of soil or more, or

(C)    Projects installing new storm drains that discharge to the storm drain system or watercourse, or

(D)    Projects on slopes of five percent or more; or

iii.    Any other project as required by the enforcement official considering factors such as whether the project involves hillside soil disturbance, rainy season construction, construction near a watercourse or any other condition or construction site activity that could lead to a non-stormwater discharge to a storm drain if not managed by effective implementation of an ESCP.

b.    The ESCP shall be submitted for review and approval by the enforcement official. The project applicant shall follow the most recent version of the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued technical bulletins to prepare the ESCP. At a minimum, the ESCP shall include:

i.    Description of the proposed project and soil disturbing activity.

ii.    Site specific construction phase BMPs.

iii.    Rationale for selecting the BMPs, including, if needed, soil loss calculations.

iv.    List of applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity, such as: Construction General Permit (CGP); Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit; Clean Water Act Section 401 Water Quality Certification; Streambed/Lake Alteration Agreement (1600 Agreements).

v.    Proof that the applicant has obtained the applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity must be submitted prior to approval of the ESCP.

vi.    Project information as required by the ESCP applicant checklist provided in the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued technical bulletins:

(A)    Owner and contractor contact information.

(B)    Site information (location, status, size of project, size of disturbed area).

(C)    Project watershed.

(D)    Planned start date and anticipated completion date (as may be revised from time to time).

c.    For projects subject to the state’s General Construction Activity Stormwater Permit (CGP), project applicants may submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan developed pursuant to the CGP in lieu of submitting an ESCP.

d.    Implementation of an approved ESCP shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit, a grading permit, or other permit issued by the city for a project subject to this section. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site. Any modifications to the ESCP shall be submitted to the city for review and approval.

E.    Compliance with General Permit. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall provide permit registration documents, shall comply with, and shall undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.100 Containment and notification of spills.
Any person owning or occupying a premises who has knowledge of any release of any pollutant or illicit discharge from or across those premises which might enter the stormwater conveyance system, other than a release or discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the release of pollutants or illicit discharge, and also shall promptly notify the enforcement agency within twenty-four (24) hours of the release of any pollutant or illicit discharge. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.110 Inspection authority.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter. Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharge, non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors.

A.    Sampling Authority. During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples.

B.    Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Authority. The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the stormwater conveyance system. Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested.

C.    Fee Authority. The enforcement agency has the authority to conduct inspections and collect fees for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter from any person or business issued one or more of the following permits:

1.    Hazardous material business plan;

2.    Food establishments except restricted food service transient occupancy establishments;

3.    Building permits;

4.    Grading permits.

A fee schedule for the purpose of enforcing this chapter shall be set by council resolution.

D.    Records Review. The enforcement official may demand the production of such records as is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and for the purpose of examination and copying. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.120 Enforcement authority.
The enforcement official is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to exercise any enforcement powers authorized or provided in this chapter, including without limitation the imposition of administrative requirements, orders and penalties pursuant to this chapter, as may be necessary to effectively implement and enforce this chapter. Without limitation on the enforcement authority set forth in this section, the enforcement official is authorized to exercise any and all of the following supplemental enforcement powers as he or she determines may be necessary or appropriate in the enforcement official’s judgment under the circumstances:

A.    Administrative Actions. In addition to any other enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may issue an order to a person to cease and desist from the discharge, practice, operation or other activity causing or likely to cause a violation of this chapter. Such order shall be directed to those persons in violation of the chapter stating clearly and concisely the nature of the violation, the requirements for compliance, a timetable for compliance and such other remedial and/or preventive action as may be necessary. Upon the violator’s failure to comply with such an order, the city shall take further enforcement action as specified in this chapter, or in accordance with any other appropriate provision of local, state or federal law. At the discretion of the authorized enforcement official, enforcement may take the following forms:

1.    Verbal warnings, as may be issued during inspections;

2.    Warning letters and orders to abate pollution;

3.    Warning letters with requirements to submit written reports;

4.    Administrative citations. The following penalty schedule applies to the administrative citation process for violations within a twelve (12) month period. First offense: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation; second offense: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation; each additional offense: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation;

5.    Civil actions or criminal enforcement actions as authorized by the City Municipal Code.

B.    Notice of Violation (NOV). Whenever the enforcement official determines that any person owning or occupying a premises has violated or is violating this chapter or order issued hereunder, the enforcement official may serve, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail, upon the person a written NOV. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, or shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, the person to whom the NOV has been issued shall provide the enforcement official a written explanation or denial of the violation and, if the person does not deny the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall include without limitation specific actions or mitigations required by the enforcement official in the NOV. Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person of liability for any violation before or after receipt of the NOV.

C.    Cease and Desist Orders. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying a premises to cease and desist all activities that may cause or contribute to discharge in violation of this chapter. This order may also require such person to: (1) comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter within a designated period of time; or (2) take such other appropriate remedial or preventative action the enforcement official determines to be necessary to prevent the violation from recurring.

D.    Notice to Clean and Abate. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying a premises to clean up and abate any release of one or more pollutants on those premises which otherwise would result in a violation of this chapter. The enforcement official may also order abatement of activities or practices which otherwise reasonably would result in such a violation.

E.    Mitigation. The enforcement official shall have authority to order the mitigation of any condition, activity or circumstance which otherwise would result in or contribute to illicit discharges.

F.    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish elements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and to require any business or person to adopt and implement such a plan, as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

G.    Best Management Practices. The enforcement official may establish and impose the requirements of best management practices for any premises.

H.    Seasonal and Recurrent Nuisance. If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the enforcement official shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing.

I.    Emergency Orders and Abatements. The enforcement official may order the abatement and cleanup of any discharge from any source to the stormwater conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition which presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment. Discharges in violation of this chapter are considered as presenting an imminent danger to the environment. In emergency situations where the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment or a violation of a NPDES permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate the threat or danger. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

J.    Contents of Notice. Any NOV, cease and desist order, or other civil notice or civil order issued by the enforcement official pursuant to this chapter shall include a copy of Section 13.32.130 outlining appeal rights.

K.    The city is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to CWA Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and other appropriate relief.

L.    The city may notify EPA Region IX, the regional board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter, including without limitation regarding notices and orders issued by the city, the timeframe for cleanup, and, if the parties agree that cleanup activities cannot be completed within the original timeframe, notification to such state or local agency within five business days that such timeframe requires revision. (Ord. 16-12 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.130 Appeal.
Any person served with an NOV, who is subject to a cease and desist order, who is subject to an abatement order, who is required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement official, or who is otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the enforcement official, may appeal the decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall fully state all legal and factual bases for the appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days following the service of the NOV or decision on the person. Upon receipt of such appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing by the city council at the earliest practical date, and notice of the hearing shall be provided to the person appealing. At the hearing, the city council may hear additional evidence, and shall overrule, affirm or modify the enforcement official’s decision. The decision by the city council shall be in writing, shall set forth the city council’s findings, and shall be final. Any appeal that does not satisfy all of the requirements of this chapter shall be invalid, and shall not be heard or considered by the city council, in which case the enforcement official’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.140 Violations constituting misdemeanors.
In addition to any enforcement authority under this code, any violation of this chapter may be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-12 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.150 Remedies not exclusive.
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.160 Costs and expenses of enforcement—Civil penalties—Authorization for special assessment against subject property—Notice.
A.    The city shall be entitled to reimbursement from any person violating any requirement or provision of this chapter for all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. Such reimbursable costs and expenses shall include, but are not limited to, costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit, salaries, attorney’s fees, expert fees, testing and monitoring expenses, and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection or investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. In addition to any and all other costs and expenses, any person who or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable and responsible for, and shall pay to the city, a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation.

B.    The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized statement of costs and expenses as set forth in Section 1.12.120.

C.    If the property owner does not pay the costs, expenses and civil penalties in full within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement of costs pursuant to subsection B of this section or, if requested, after any decision on appeal by the city council pursuant to this subsection which confirms in whole or in part the costs, expenses and civil penalties, the costs, expenses and civil penalties shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the violation(s) of this chapter occurred. A special assessment may be filed against the property as set forth in Sections 1.12.220 and 1.12.230.

D.    Any monies recovered under this section shall be used exclusively for costs and programs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems, implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter and/or creating educational and/or remedial programs relating to stormwater discharge pollution. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.170 Civil actions.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city attorney. In any such action, the city attorney shall be authorized to any or all of the following remedies:

A.    A temporary restraining order and/or preliminary and/or permanent injunction;

B.    Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection;

C.    Costs incurred or required to remove, correct, or terminate the adverse effects resulting from the violation;

D.    Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life;

E.    Attorney’s fees. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

13.32.180 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition or as an alternative to the penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and is thus deemed a nuisance. Any such nuisance may be abated and/or restored by the enforcement official and also may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.12. The city attorney also is authorized to pursue any remedy he or she deems necessary or appropriate to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance. (Ord. 15-3 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-5 § 2 (part))

Title 14
RESERVED
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

15.04    General Provisions

15.08    Administration of the California Building Standards Code

15.12    California Building Code Adopted

15.16    California Mechanical Code Adopted

15.18    California Energy Code Adopted

15.20    California Plumbing Code Adopted

15.24    California Electrical Code Adopted

15.26    Expedited Permit Process for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Systems

15.28    California Residential Code Adopted

15.32    California Existing Building Code

15.36    California Fire Code Adopted

15.40    Retrofitting of Unreinforced Masonry Buildings

15.44    Building Numbering System

15.48    Trailers and Trailer Camps

15.52    Flood Damage Prevention

15.53    California Green Building Standards Code

15.54    California Administrative Code Adopted

15.55    California Referenced Standards Code Adopted

Chapter 15.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

15.04.010    Short title.

15.04.020    Purpose.

15.04.030    Authority.

15.04.040    Building division—Created.

15.04.050    Building official—Powers and duties generally.

15.04.060    Building official—Recordkeeping duties.

15.04.070    Jurisdiction.

15.04.090    Inspections—Authority—Concealment prohibited.

15.04.100    Violations of other ordinance.

15.04.110    Conformance with zoning ordinance.

15.04.120    Copies of codes.

15.04.130    Specific findings for code amendments.

15.04.140    Violations—Penalties.

    Prior legislation: Prior code § 4.8.

15.04.010 Short title.
The provisions codified in this title shall be known as the “St. Helena Building Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referenced to in this title as “this building code.” (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.1)

15.04.020 Purpose.
The city council expressly finds that the purpose of this building code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city, and certain equipment specifically regulated in this building code. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.2)

15.04.030 Authority.
This building code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 11 of Article XI of the State Constitution to a city to make and enforce within its limits all such local police, sanitary, and other regulations as are not in conflict with general laws. It is further adopted in conformity with the provisions of Sections 50022.1 to 50022.10, inclusive, of the California Government Code relating to the adoption of codes by reference. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.3)

15.04.040 Building division—Created.
There is contained within the city the building division, which shall be under the jurisdiction of the building official designated by the appointing authority. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.4)

15.04.050 Building official—Powers and duties generally.
Section 104.1, General, California Building Code 2016 Chapter 1, is amended to read as follows:

The Building Official is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this building code and of the codes adopted by reference by this building code. The Building Official is authorized to consult experts that he or she deems to be qualified in all fields related to the subject matter of this building code and of the codes adopted by reference by this building code to the extent that he or she deems it reasonably necessary to assist him or her in carrying out his or her duties hereunder. The decision of the Building Official in enforcing the provisions of this building code or of the codes adopted by reference by this building code or in interpreting the provisions thereof or in exercising the authority delegated thereby shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in Section 113 of the 2016 California Building Code Chapter 1.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.5)

15.04.060 Building official—Recordkeeping duties.
The building official shall cause a permanent record to be kept of all pertinent transactions of the building division under this building code and the codes adopted by this building code and to render a monthly report to the city council of all permits issued and fees collected. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.6)

15.04.070 Jurisdiction.
This building code shall apply within all of the territory of the city. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.7)

15.04.090 Inspections—Authority—Concealment prohibited.
A.    All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official to insure compliance with all requirements of this building code.

B.    It shall be the responsibility of the owner or person doing work authorized by a permit to notify the building official orally or in writing when such work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected.

C.    No portion of any building, structure, wiring, plumbing or equipment which is required to be inspected shall be permanently covered or concealed without approval of the building official.

D.    The building official shall have authority to remove or require the removal of any obstruction which prevents the required inspection of any portion of a building, structure, wiring, plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.9)

15.04.100 Violations of other ordinance.
No permit shall be issued pursuant to this title if at time of issuance there exists in respect to the premises for which the permit is to be issued any violation of the city’s zoning ordinance, the city’s subdivision ordinance, or of any other ordinance of the city whether such violation was committed by the then owner of the premises or his or her predecessors or by anyone claiming under the owner or his or her predecessors. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.10)

15.04.110 Conformance with zoning ordinance.
No building permit shall be issued which is inconsistent with the St. Helena zoning ordinance. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.11)

15.04.120 Copies of codes.
The building official shall make available in the offices of the building division, for review by the general public, at least one copy of all uniform codes or state building standards adopted by Sections 15.08.010, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.20.010, 15.24.010, 15.28.010, 15.32.010, 15.36.020, 15.53.010, and 15.54.010, as well as local amendments and any other state regulations relating to buildings or structures, or building service equipment published in Titles 8, 19, 20, 24, and 25 of the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.12)

15.04.130 Specific findings for code amendments.
Each amendment to the California Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, adopted by this title, is reasonably necessary because of the following determinations due to local climatic, geological, or topographic conditions pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5:

A.    The city is characterized by a narrow valley floor surrounded and intermingled with steep hill terrain, containing areas which are very susceptible to wildland fires. Wildland fires are considered a significant threat in St. Helena. Native vegetation of brush, woodland, grassland and forest become extremely flammable during summer and remain so if drought conditions prevail during the winter months. Drought cycles appear in this area every seven to eleven (11) years.

B.    Earthquake is considered to be one of the most potentially destructive threats to life and property in the city. A moderate to severe seismic incident on any of the several fault zones in relative close proximity to St. Helena is expected to cause extensive property damage, disruptions to communications systems, and damage to public utility systems.

C.    St. Helena is divided geographically into two parts by the north to south flow of the Napa River. Significant damaging flooding occurs in portions of the city approximately every five to ten (10) years. Warnings are usually given several hours to a few days before such floods. This natural barrier can serve as a severe impediment to the delivery of public safety services in time of flood.

D.    Several areas within the city offer poor access for the delivery of public safety services because of the severity of slopes and the existence of natural barriers such as the Napa River, Sulphur Creek, and York Creek. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4.13)

15.04.140 Violations—Penalties.
Section 114, Violation Penalties, California Building Code Chapter 1, is amended to read as follows:

A.    Generally. No person whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title. Maintenance of equipment which was unlawful at the time it was installed and which would be unlawful under this title, shall constitute a continuing violation of this title.

B.    Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued, or permitted.

C.    Consistent with Section 109.4 and 114.4 of the 2016 California Building Code Administration, any person who violates a provision of this building code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this building code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this building code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

D.    Authority to File. Where a public nuisance exists, the city may immediately commence action or actions, proceedings at law and in equity, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such public nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from maintaining such nuisance.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 4 (part): prior code § 4.25)

Chapter 15.08
ADMINISTRATION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.08.010    California Building Standards Code 2016 Chapter 1, Administration—Adopted.

15.08.020    California Building Code 2016 Chapter 1, Administration—Amendments.

15.08.030    Unsafe structures and equipment.

15.08.040    Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments.

15.08.050    Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.

15.08.070    Enforcement and penalties.

15.08.010 California Building Standards Code 2016 Chapter 1, Administration—Adopted.
For the purpose of establishing proper regulations for the administration of the various codes covered in this building code, each of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code of the state of California, Chapter 1 of the Plumbing Code, Chapter 1 of the Mechanical Code, and Annex H of the Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety excepting additions, revisions and omissions listed in Section 15.08.020. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.14)

15.08.020 California Building Code 2016 Chapter 1, Administration—Amendments.
A.    Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, California Building Code 2016 Chapter 1, items 1 through 5 only, is amended to read as follows:

1.    One-story residential detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, not over 12 feet in height, and the structure contains no plumbing, electrical, or heating systems or appliances.

2.    Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.

3.    Oil derricks (subject to approval of Napa County Environmental Management).

4.    Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, III A liquids.

5.    Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 200 gallons.

B.    Section 109.2, Schedule of permit fees, California Building Code 2016 Chapter 1, is amended to read as follows:

On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the most current City Council fee resolution.

C.    Section 109.6, Refunds, California Building Code 2016, is amended to read as follows:

The Building Official is authorized to establish a refund policy.

1.    The Building Official may authorize refunding of the permit fee paid, less the hourly rate set forth by the most current City Council fee resolution, when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this building code.

2.    The Building Official may authorize refunding the plan review fee paid, less the hourly rate set forth by the most current City Council fee resolution, when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

3.    The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty days after the date of fee payment.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.15)

15.08.030 Unsafe structures and equipment.
Section 116, California Building Standards Code 2013 Chapter 1, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, is amended to read as follows:

For the purpose of this building code, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.

(Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)); Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part))

15.08.040 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments.
For the purpose of regulation and governing the conditions and maintenance for all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standard for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; that certain code known as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition including Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, hereinafter referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code,” save and except such portions as are hereinafter changed, added to or amended by Section 15.08.050. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part))

15.08.050 Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows:

A.    Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of St. Helena (hereinafter referred to as “the code”).

B.    Section 102.7. Where the term “International Building Code” appears in this code, it shall mean the California Building Code as adopted by this jurisdiction with amendments. Where the term “International Fire Code” appears, it shall mean the California Fire Code as adopted by the City Council with amendments. Where the term “International Existing Building Code” appears, it shall mean the California Building Code as adopted by City Council with amendments. Where the term “International Fuel Gas Code” appears, it shall mean the California Plumbing Code as adopted by the City Council with amendments. Where the term “International Mechanical Code” appears, it shall mean the California Mechanical Code as adopted by the City Council with amendments. Where the term “International Plumbing Code” appears, it shall mean the California Plumbing Code as adopted by the City Council with amendments. Where the term “International Zoning Code” appears, it shall mean the St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17.

C.    Section 103 is hereby deleted.

D.    Section 104.3 is amended to add the following phrase to the end of the last sentence: “including the warrant provisions of Section 1822.50 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California.”

E.    Sections 106.2, 106.3, 106.4, and 106.5 are hereby deleted.

F.    Section 107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice may be given in the manner prescribed in the St. Helena Municipal Code Section 1.12.

G.    Sections 107.2, 107.3, 107.4, 107.5, and 107.6 are hereby deleted.

H.    Section 108.3. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 1.12 of the St. Helena Municipal Code. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 1.12.150 of the St. Helena Municipal Code.

I.    Section 109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official may order the necessary work be to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.

J.    Section 109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Code Official may temporarily close structures and close or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

K.    Section 109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Code Official may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

L.    Sections 109.5 and 109.6 are hereby deleted.

M.    Section 110.2 Notices and Orders. All notices and orders shall comply with the St. Helena Municipal Code Chapter 1.12.150.

N.    Section 110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official may cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be in lien upon such real estate.

O.    Section 111.2 is amended by adding the following sentence: Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Mayor or City Council from appointing the Mayor and City Council as the Board of Appeals.

P.    Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code.

Q.    Section 202 definition of CODE OFFICIAL. Where used in this code, the term Code Official shall refer to the Chief Building Official, and his or her designated agents or representatives.

R.    Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 6 inches tall. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.

S.    Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation on habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. (The exceptions in the code are not amended.)

T.    Section 308.2.2 Refrigerator. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.

U.    Section 308.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container and a recycling container. Every person maintaining or using any solid waste can or receptacle shall keep the same clean and sanitary.

V.    Section 308.3.1.1. Within all residential districts in the city, no person shall use, locate or maintain (store) any solid waste can, garbage container or waste receptacle within the public right of way other than on the day of removal service. Containers shall be stored out of public view on non-service dates whenever practical; or stored nearest the main structure.

W.    Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units or terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat in order to maintain a temperature of not less than 68ºF (18ºC) during the period the spaces are occupied. (The exceptions in the code are not amended.)

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part))

15.08.070 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    In addition to the enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, the chief building official shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter as provided in Section 15.04.030.

B.    The violations of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in this chapter are misdemeanors/infractions and are subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.12
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.12.010    California Building Code—Adopted.

15.12.020    California Building Code—Amendments.

15.12.030    Moved buildings.

15.12.040    Appendix J amended.

15.12.010 California Building Code—Adopted.
The 2016 California Building Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, and Appendix J, based on 2015 International Building Code, published by the International Code Council and the amendments set forth in Section 15.12.020 are adopted. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.16)

15.12.020 California Building Code—Amendments.
Based upon the findings set forth in Section 15.04.130, the following sections and/or subsections of the 2016 California Building Code are amended to read as follows:

A.    Chapter 5, General Buildings Heights and Areas, Section 501.2, Address Identification.

Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Numbers shall contrast with their background and shall not be less than 4" in height. House numbers shall not be obstructed by vegetation. Any building located more than 50 feet from the street shall have its address posted at the driveway entrance and shall be visible from both directions of travel along the road. In new construction, the address shall be posted at the beginning of construction and shall be maintained thereafter, and the address shall be visible and legible from the road on which the address is located.

Where multiple addresses are required at a single driveway, they shall be mounted on a single post, and additional signs shall be posted at locations where driveways divide.

Where a roadway provides access solely to a single commercial or industrial business, the address sign shall be placed at the nearest road intersection providing access to that site.

B.    Chapter 31, Special Construction, Section 3109.4.1, Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices, Barrier Height and Clearances.

The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.17)

15.12.030 Moved buildings.
Chapter 34A, Existing Structures, Section 3410A, Moved Structures, is amended as follows to include:

Buildings, structures and their building service equipment moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the technical codes for new building or structures and their building service equipment.

A.    Permits required. Before any building or structure is moved on or along any street within the city, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Official for such moving. The permit application shall describe the streets and route over which the building will travel, the location of final installation if within the city, and the hours during which building will be moved. The Building Official will collect a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for required investigations and inspections. This fee shall be separate from any construction permit related fees.

B.    Prior to issuance of permit, the applicant shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city engineer. The Building Official shall notify all affected city officials and, in the event that any such officials object to route or time of travel, changes shall be made to meet such objections.

C.    Bond Required. In addition to all other requirements of the building code relating to the moving of buildings and structures, no permit for such moving shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed with the Building Official a corporate surety bond in favor of the city or a cash deposit in lieu of such bond. The bond shall be conditioned that the applicant will strictly comply with all provisions of the Building Code relating to the moving of buildings and structures and that the applicant will pay for any and all damage which may result by reason of such moving to any fence, hedge, tree, pavement of streets or sidewalks, pipes, poles and wires, or to any public or private property, and to hold harmless the city against any costs or expense which may accrue in consequence of such moving. The bond shall be in such amount as determined by the Building Official and approved by the city attorney, but in no case less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). At the option of the applicant, a cash deposit in the same amount may be deposited with the city treasurer.

D.    Time limited during which building may be left standing on one city block. No person owning, or having charge of the removal of, any building being moved over any street shall permit such building to be, or stand, on any street within the limits of one block for a period of more than twenty-four hours.

E.    Moving buildings—Prevention of injury to street or property. No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building or structure over any street shall allow or cause injury to any fence, hedge, tree, pavement, sidewalk, gas pipe, water pipe, sewer pipe, electric wires or the poles supporting them, or any other public or private property by reason of such removal.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part))

15.12.040 Appendix J amended.
Appendix J is amended as follows:

A.    Where the term “building official” is used in this appendix, change to “City Engineer.”

B.    Section J103.1, Permits required.

Except as exempted in Section J103.2, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Building Official with approval from the City Engineer for minor grading activities which do not require a grading permit. A grading permit issued by the City Engineer is required for any one of the following:

1.    Grading of more than 50 cy of material (includes pools);

2.    Disturbance of an area of more than 10,000 sq ft;

3.    Cut or fill more than three feet;

4.    Alter or add any drainage facilities or courses.

C.    Section J103.2, Exemptions.

Except as stated in J103.1 above, a grading permit shall not be required for the following:

1.    Cemetery graves.

2.    Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

3.    Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.

4.    Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.

5.    Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.

D.    Section J106.1, Maximum Slope. Repeal exceptions.

E.    Section J108.3, Slope Protection. Change “approved by the building official” to “approved by the City Engineer.”

F.    Section J109.1, Drainage and Terracing, General.

Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided in accordance with requirements of this section and the latest state and local stormwater quality requirements and ordinances.

Repeal exceptions.

G.    Section J109.3, Interceptor drains.

Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of cut slopes receiving drainage from a tributary width greater than 40 feet (12,192 mm), measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of 1 foot (305 mm) and a minimum width of 3 feet (915 mm). The slope shall be approved by the City Engineer, but shall not be less than 50 horizontal to 1 vertical (2 percent). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the City Engineer.

H.    Section J109.4, Drainage across property lines.

Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that by volume and flow that existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices such as infiltrator and dissipater basins, riprap or cobble surrounds, and gravel or rock infiltration trenches/pits.

I.    Section J110.1, General.

The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion.

Repeal exceptions. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.16
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.16.010    California Mechanical Code adopted.

15.16.010 California Mechanical Code adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, incorporating the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted including all appendices, and without amendments. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 4 (part): prior code § 4.18)

Chapter 15.18
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.18.010    California Energy Code—Adopted.

15.18.010 California Energy Code—Adopted.
The 2016 Building Energy Efficiency Standards, comprising Title 24, Parts 1 and 6, of the California Code of Regulations, are mandatory statewide. Local government agencies may adopt and enforce energy efficiency standards for newly constructed buildings, additions, alterations, and repairs provided the California Energy Commission finds that the standards will require buildings to consume no more energy than permitted by Title 24, Part 6. Such local standards may include adopting the requirements of Title 24, Part 6 before their effective date, requiring additional energy conservation measures, or setting stricter energy budgets. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)))

Chapter 15.20
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.20.010    California Plumbing Code—Adopted.

15.20.020    California Plumbing Code—Amendments.

15.20.010 California Plumbing Code—Adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, incorporating the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with amendments set forth in Section 15.20.020 including Appendices (A), (B), (D), (G) and (L), is hereby adopted. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.19)

15.20.020 California Plumbing Code—Amendments.
Chapter 4, Plumbing Fixtures and Fixture Fittings, is amended to include Section 15.53.020(B), Section 4.303.1, Indoor Water Use, Twenty percent savings, as illustrated by Table 4.303.2, column 2. (Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.24
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.24.010    California Electrical Code—Adopted.

15.24.020    California Electrical Code—Amendments.

15.24.010 California Electrical Code—Adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, incorporating the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, and Annex H of the Electrical Code, with amendments set forth in Section 15.24.020, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.20)

15.24.020 California Electrical Code—Amendments.
A.    Article 230, Services, Section 230.70(A)(1), Readily Accessible Location, is amended to read as follows:

Electrical disconnecting equipment in structures served by a remote or detached electrical service shall be readily accessible to fire fighting personnel. The disconnecting equipment shall be installed on the exterior of the building and identified for fire fighting personnel.

B.    Article 334, Non-Metallic Sheathing Cable, Section 334.12, Uses Not Permitted, is amended to read as follows:

Type NM or NMC. Types NM and NMC cables shall not be used in the following:

1.    In any dwelling or structure exceeding three floors above grade. For the purpose of this article, the first floor of a building shall be that floor that has fifty percent (50%) or more of the exterior wall surface area level with or above finished grade. One additional level that is the first level and not designed for human habitation and used only for vehicle parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted.

2.    As service-entrance cable.

3.    In any nonresidential occupancy.

4.    In storage battery rooms.

5.    In hoistways.

6.    Embedded in poured concrete.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.21)

Chapter 15.26
EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
Sections:

15.26.010    Purpose.

15.26.020    Findings.

15.26.030    Definitions.

15.26.040    Applicability.

15.26.050    Solar energy system requirements.

15.26.060    Duties of the building department.

15.26.070    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.26.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. The chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.020 Findings.
The city council finds and determines as follows:

A.    The city of St. Helena seeks to implement AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) through the creation of an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

B.    The city of St. Helena wishes to advance the use of solar energy by all of its citizens, businesses and industries.

C.    The city of St. Helena seeks to meet the climate action goals set by the city and the state.

D.    Solar energy creates local jobs and economic opportunity.

E.    The city of St. Helena recognizes that rooftop solar energy provides reliable energy and pricing for its residents and businesses.

F.    It is in the interest of the health, welfare and safety of the people of the city of St. Helena to provide an expedited permitting process to assure the effective deployment of solar technology. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    A “solar energy system” means either of the following:

1.    Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2.    Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

B.    A “small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1.    A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

2.    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards.

3.    A solar energy system that is installed on a single-or duplex-family dwelling.

4.    A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.

C.    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.    Email;

2.    The Internet (if available);

3.    Facsimile.

D.    An “association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

E.    A “common interest development” means any of the following:

1.    A community apartment project.

2.    A condominium project.

3.    A planned development.

4.    A stock cooperative.

F.    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

G.    “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

H.    “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

1.    For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent (10%), as originally specified and proposed.

2.    For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.040 Applicability.
A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

B.    Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.050 Solar energy system requirements.
A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, city, and local fire department.

B.    Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.060 Duties of the building department.
A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

B.    Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by [email, the Internet (if available), or facsimile] shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

C.    An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D.    The city’s building department shall adopt a standard plan or plans and a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

E.    The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

F.    All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with California Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, and 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

15.26.070 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A.    The city’s building department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The building department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within [one to three] business days of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission.

B.    Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

C.    If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.

D.    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

E.    “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

F.    The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

G.    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

H.    Only one inspection shall be required for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review and the inspection shall be performed by the building department and/or the fire marshal.

I.    The inspection shall be scheduled and performed in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections if both the building department and fire marshal are to perform the inspection. To the maximum extent feasible, the inspection should be scheduled within two business days of a request and the applicant requesting such an inspection should be provided with a two-hour inspection window.

J.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-6 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.28
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.28.010    California Residential Code adopted.

15.28.020    California Residential Code adopted—Amendments.

    Prior legislation: Prior code § 4.22 and Ords. 03-1 and 07-2.

15.28.010 California Residential Code adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, incorporating the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted including all appendices, and with amendments set forth in Section 15.28.020. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

15.28.020 California Residential Code adopted—Amendments.
Section R313.1 is amended by adding: “and qualified additions and remodels as prescribed in the amended section 903.2 of the 2013 CFC” and by repealing the exception.

Section R313.2 is amended by adding: “and qualified additions and remodels as prescribed in the amended section 903.2 of the 2013 CFC” and by repealing the exception. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.32
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.32.010    California Existing Building Code—Adopted.

15.32.020    California Existing Building Code—Amendments.

15.32.010 California Existing Building Code—Adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Existing Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 10, incorporating the 2015 International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, with amendments set forth in Section 15.32.020 is adopted. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.23)

15.32.020 California Existing Building Code—Amendments.
Based upon the findings set forth in Section 15.04.130, Chapter A1, Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings, Section A106 Materials Requirements, A106.3.3.4, Number of tests, is amended to read as follows:

A.    The minimum number of tests per class for brick or hollow clay tile masonry walls shall be as follows:

1.    At each of both the first and top stories, not less than two tests per wall or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces.

2.    At each of all other stories, not less than one test per wall or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces.

3.    In any case, not less than one test per 1,500 square feet of wall surface and not less than a total of eight tests.

B.    The minimum number of tests for stone masonry walls shall be as follows:

1.    One test per wall per story, except that storefront walls not used to resist lateral forces, need not be tested.

2.    Not less than one test per 2,500 square feet (232.3 m2) of wall surface.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-1 § 1 (part): prior code § 4.24)

Chapter 15.36
CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.36.010    General findings.

15.36.020    Codes adopted.

15.36.030    Specific findings for code amendments.

15.36.040    Administration.

15.36.050    Fire service features.

15.36.060    Fire protection systems.

15.36.070    Establishment of limits.

15.36.080    Requirements for wildland-urban interface areas.

15.36.090    Fire flow requirements for building.

15.36.100    Fire apparatus access roads.

15.36.110    Modifications.

15.36.120    Appeals.

Prior legislation: Prior code § 5A.16.

15.36.010 General findings.
A.    The fire and hazardous materials section of the public health and safety element of the city general plan recommends that on-site fire mitigation should include use of fire resistant materials, sprinklers, and early warning systems; and provides that factors which contribute to the potential for fire are vegetation and distance from fire stations;

B.    Because response time of fire suppression units has a critical impact on the ability to protect life and property in case of fire or other emergencies, buildings must be provided with built-in fire protection systems to offset the negative impact of excessive response time;

C.    The residential growth management system section of the land use element of the city general plan prescribes that density and population shall not exceed that which can be served by adequate public facilities and service;

D.    The fire department has increasing incidence of simultaneous demands for service that completely deplete our resources; and provides that fire protection requirements for new construction and remodeled buildings shall be strengthened to reduce planned growth on fire department capabilities and to provide a reasonable degree of fire and life safety at minimum fire suppression cost; and

E.    The city council desires to enhance the adequate protection of buildings and structures by the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.10)

15.36.020 Codes adopted.
The 2016 California Fire Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, based on the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council in its entirety, including appendices: Chapter 4, Appendix B and Appendix BB (Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings), Appendix C and Appendix CC (Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution), Appendix D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), Appendix E (Hazard Categories), Appendix F (Hazard Ranking), Appendix G (Cryogenic Fluids—Weight and Volume Equivalents), Appendix H (Hazardous Materials Management Plans and Hazardous Inventory Statement), Appendix I (Fire Protection Systems Noncompliant Conditions), Appendix J (Building Signage), and Appendix K (Temporary Haunted Houses, Ghost Walks and Similar Amusement Uses), and referred to as the “International Fire Code” or “IFC,” is adopted as amended and made a part of this code by reference per findings as set forth in Section 15.36.030. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-2 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 7 (part): prior code § 5A.11)

15.36.030 Specific findings for code amendments.
Each amendment to the California Fire Code adopted by this chapter is reasonably necessary because of the following determinations due to local climatic, geological, or topographic conditions pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5:

A.    The city is characterized by a narrow valley floor surrounded and intermingled with steep hill terrain, containing areas which are very susceptible to wildland fires. Wildland fires are considered a significant threat in St. Helena. Native vegetation of brush, woodland, grassland and forest becomes extremely flammable during summer and remains so if drought conditions prevail during the winter months. Drought cycles appear in this area every seven through eleven (11) years.

B.    Earthquake is considered to be one of the most potentially destructive threats to life and property in the city. A moderate to severe seismic incident on any of the several fault zones in relatively close proximity to St. Helena is expected to cause extensive property damage, disruptions to communications systems, and damage to public utility systems.

C.    St. Helena is divided geographically into two parts by the north to south flow of the Napa River. Significant damaging flooding occurs in portions of the city approximately every five to ten (10) years. Warnings are usually given several hours to a few days before such floods. This natural barrier can serve as a severe impediment to public safety services because of the severity of slopes and the existence of natural barriers such as the Napa River, Sulphur Creek, and York Creek.

D.    Some areas of the forested hillside terrain that border the city have been designated as a woodlands and watershed area. These are areas that are local responsibility areas (LRA) for fire response and as such fall under the wildland-urban interface (WUI) guidelines set forth in Chapter 49 of the Fire Code and Chapter 7A of the Building Code. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.12)

15.36.040 Administration.
A.    Section 105.4.4.1, Phased Approval, is repealed in its entirety.

B.    Section 109.3, Violation penalties, California Fire Code 2016, Chapter 1, is amended to read as follows:

Persons who shall violate a provision of this fire code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this fire code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. In addition to potential civil and/or criminal penalties, any person, individual, group of individuals, firm, trust, corporation, partnership association, or business concern responsible for an unauthorized release of hazardous material, a malicious false alarm, excessive unintentional false alarms, or igniting and/or maintaining an illegal fire, shall be liable for reimbursing the City of St. Helena for all costs incurred resulting from the City’s emergency response and mitigation activities involving these incidents. Incurred costs may include such activities as firefighting, rescue, evacuation, hazardous material containment, control and/or disposal, incident investigation, report writing, administrative costs, and additional mitigation activities that may be contracted by the City.

C.    110.5 is added to Section 110 to read in full as follows:

Unsafe building. It shall be unlawful to leave or maintain any building in an unsafe condition or maintain any building in a manner that is a public nuisance, a threat to life, safety, or property, or a fire hazard. The Fire Code Official may order or cause the abatement of such nuisance, threat, or hazard as specified in Section 109 of the fire code.

D.    Section 111.4, Failure to comply, California Fire Code 2016, Chapter 1, is amended to read as follows:

Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

E.    Section 307.1 is amended to read as follows:

307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted for agricultural operations, approved in accordance with this section and a permit obtained from the Fire code official.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-2 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 7 (part); prior code § 5A.13)

15.36.050 Fire service features.
A.    Section 501, General, is amended to read as follows:

1.    Section 501.3 is amended to read as follows:

501.3 Construction documents. Construction documents for proposed fire apparatus access, security gates across fire apparatus access, location of fire lanes, construction documents, hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant systems and all fire protection system plans shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit.

B.    Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is amended to read as follows:

Driveways and access roads shall be as defined in Municipal Code Sec. 17.124.070, Standards for driveways and access drives.

C.    Section 503.4.1, Speed control devices, California Fire Code 2016, Chapter 5, is amended to read as follows:

Speed control methods or devices shall not be allowed on public or private roadways, driveways or fire apparatus access routes.

D.    Section 506.1, Where required, California Fire Code 2016, Chapter 5, is amended to read as follows:

Key boxes are required on all commercial buildings and multi-family residential housing units within the city limits. The key box shall be on an approved type and shall contain keys to gain necessary access and a building site plan as required by the Fire Code Official.

E.    Chapter 6, Building services and systems:

1.    Section 603.8 is amended to read as follows:

603.8 Incinerators. Commercial, industrial and residential type incinerators and chimneys are prohibited within the City of St. Helena.

2.    609.2 is amended to read as follows:

609.2 Where required. A Type l hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produces grease laden vapors. Cooking facilities in assembly occupancies and congregate residences shall be considered commercial operations.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.14)

15.36.060 Fire protection systems.
A.    Chapter 9, subsection 901.1 is hereby amended to read:

Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings, structures and qualified additions and remodels shall be provided in the locations described as follows.

903.2.1 Construction Documents. The Fire Code Official shall have the authority to require construction documents and calculations for all fire protection systems and to require permits be issued for the installation, rehabilitation or modification of any fire protection system. Construction documents for fire protection systems shall be submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.

B.    Chapter 9, subsection 903.2 is amended by repealing the entire subsection 903.2 (with the exception of subsections 903.2.12, 903.2.17 and Tables 903.2.11.6 and 903.2.5.2, which shall remain in effect), and replacing it with the following:

903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings shall be provided in the locations described in this section.

903.2.1 Required installations. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in all newly constructed buildings or structures, fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in new manufactured homes and multifamily manufactured homes with two dwelling units in accordance with title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

Exception:

1.    When approved by the Fire Code Official spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of no less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies.

2.    Automatic fire sprinkler protection for fixed guideway transit systems shall be as per Section 903.2.17.

3.    Detached Group U private garages and carports accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy and less than 1,000 square feet.

4.    Detached pool houses, workshops, barns and similar structures, built in conjunction with existing non-sprinklered single-family residences and provided the new structure is less than 1,000 square feet, is not intended for use as a dwelling unit and complies with the separation distances and exterior fire protection ratings of the Building Code.

5.    Detached non-combustible, limited combustible materials or fire retarded treated wood canopies less than 3,000 square feet in roof area used exclusively for vehicle washing facilities or vehicle fuel dispensing stations.

6.    Group B or M occupancies less than 500 square feet.

7.    Detached, unenclosed gazebos or shade structures less than 1,000 square feet.

8.    Detached restroom facilities associated with golf courses, parks and similar uses.

9.    Shipping containers used for storage purpose and located not closer than 5 feet to a building, property line or other container.

903.2.2 Additions. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout any existing commercial or residential building when the floor area of the addition (including mezzanines) within any three year period exceeds 50% of the existing floor area of the building (excluding attached garages or unconditioned spaces in the floor area calculation of the addition) or when an additional story is added.

903.2.3 Alterations or Repairs. Alterations or Repairs. For alterations or repairs to existing buildings involving demolition of more than 50% of the existing floor area or removal of 50% or more of the existing ceiling covering (i.e. sheetrock, lath and plaster, suspended ceiling etc.), the building shall meet the sprinkler requirements for a newly constructed building.

Exception: One time alterations made solely for the purpose of complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

903.2.4 Change of Occupancy. Any change of occupancy when the proposed new occupancy classification is more hazardous based on a fire and life safety evaluation by the Fire Code Official and Building Code Official, including conversion of buildings to single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, bed and breakfast inns, lodging houses or congregate residences or other similar uses an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout.

C.    Section 907.1. Section 907.1.6 is added to read as follows:

907.1.6 False Alarms. A false alarm shall mean the receipt by the fire department an audio or visual alarm or signal from an automatic fire alarm device set off by causes other than the occurrence of a fire. Alarm users are allowed three (3) false alarms in a 365 day period. A service charge of $100 shall be imposed for the fourth false alarm, a $250 service charge shall be imposed for the fifth false alarm and a service charge of $500 for each subsequent false alarm shall be assessed.

D.    Appendix C. Amend Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, Section C102, Location, by adding the following:

C102.2 Fire Department Connections

A Fire Hydrant shall be located within 50 feet of all Fire Department connections (FDC), or approved by the Fire Code Official.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.15)

15.36.070 Establishment of limits.
A.    Establishments of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside Aboveground Tanks Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 57 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted, are hereby established as follows: Storage of sixteen (16) gallons or more is prohibited in all areas unless a permit is issued by the fire code official.

B.    Establishment of Districts of Limits in Which Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 57 of the California Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Storage is prohibited in all areas of the city unless a permit is issued by the fire code official.

C.    Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 56 of the California Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Storage is prohibited in all areas of the city, unless a permit is issued by the fire code official.

D.    Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which the Storage of Compressed Gases Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 53 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of compressed gases is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Storage of sixteen (16) gallons or more is prohibited in all areas of the city unless a permit is issued by the fire code official.

E.    Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which the Storage of Stationary Tanks of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 58 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Storage is prohibited in all areas of the city unless a permit is issued by the fire code official.

F.    Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which the Storage of Hazardous Materials Is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Chapter 50 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of hazardous materials is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Storage is prohibited in all areas of the city unless a permit is issued by the fire code official. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)))

15.36.080 Requirements for wildland-urban interface areas.
Chapter 49, California Fire Code 2013, Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Areas, is amended by adding Section 4908 to read as follows:

Defensible Space for Structures and Roads

A.    General. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining buildings or structures in, upon or adjoining hazardous fire areas, and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to such buildings or structures, shall at all times:

1.    Maintain an effective fuel break by removing and clearing away flammable vegetation and combustible material from areas within 100 feet of buildings and structures;

Exception: Single specimen trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground covers, provided they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.

2.    Remove portions of trees which extend within 10 feet of the outlet of a chimney;

3.    Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood; and

4.    Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles or other dead vegetative growth.

B.    Roadways. The Fire Code Official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet on each side of portions of all roads, driveways and fire department access roads which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. The Fire Code Official is authorized to enter upon private property to do so.

Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover provided they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

C.    Corrective Actions. The Fire Code Official is authorized to give notice to the owner of the property upon which conditions regulated by this section exist to correct such conditions. If the owner fails to correct such conditions, the Fire Code Official is authorized to cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien upon the property where such condition exists.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.17)

15.36.090 Fire flow requirements for building.
A.    Section 507, Fire Protection Water Supplies.

507.1 Required Water Supply. An approved water supply capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection of portions of buildings that are hereafter constructed or moved onto or within the jurisdiction. Such water supply shall be connected to the Municipal Water Supply if available within 1,000 ft. of the subject property.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.18)

15.36.100 Fire apparatus access roads.
A.    Section D103.2, Grade, California Fire Code 2013, Appendix D, is amended to read as follows:

Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 16% in grade.

Exception: Lots of record established prior to January 1, 2014: the grade shall not exceed 20%. All grades exceeding 10% shall be AC pavement; all grades exceeding 16% shall be Portland cement scored concrete.

B.    Section D103, Figure D103.1, California Fire Code 2013, Appendix D, is amended to include the following drawings in the city of St. Helena street, storm drain and sidewalk standards:

Drawings: 1, 1.1R, 1.2R, 2, 2R, 3, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.

C.    Section D103.5, Fire Apparatus access road gates, California Fire Code 2016, Appendix B, is amended to read as follows:

Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with the following:

1.    The minimum gate width shall be 16 feet for residential or 20 feet for commercial occupancies.

2.    Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.

3.    Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one person.

4.    Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective.

5.    Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire personnel for emergency access. An approved key system will be installed approved by the Fire Code Official.

6.    Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools or when the key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location.

7.    All locking devices shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.

8.    Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

9.    Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with requirements of ASTM F 2200.

10.    Gates shall comply with Section 17.124.070 c. of the St. Helena Municipal Code. To avoid congestion at the entrance of a property from the street or access drive, no on-site parking space or gate shall be allowed within the initial thirty (30) feet of the edge of pavement of the access drive, drive aisle or property line, including residential driveways or location as determined by the Public Works Director in conjunction with the Fire Code Official.

D.    Section D107.1, One or two-family dwelling residential developments, California Fire Code 2016, Appendix B, is amended to read as follows:

Developments of one, two-family or multi family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds thirty (30) shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads, and shall meet the requirements of Section D104.3.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.19)

15.36.110 Modifications.
The city manager, the fire chief and the fire code official shall act as a committee and shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the California Fire Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the fire code; provided, that the spirit of the fire code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the committee thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.20)

15.36.120 Appeals.
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the board of appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 5A.21)

Chapter 15.40
RETROFITTING OF UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.40.010    Short title.

15.40.020    Purpose.

15.40.030    Scope.

15.40.040    Authority.

15.40.050    Definitions.

15.40.060    Future retrofitting legislation.

15.40.070    Change of occupancy.

15.40.080    Addition, alteration or repair.

15.40.090    Penalties for noncompliance.

15.40.100    Appeals process.

15.40.110    Recovery of penalties.

15.40.120    Remedies.

    Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 4B.6, 4B.15 and 4B.16.

15.40.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “unreinforced masonry building (URM) ordinance.” (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.1)

15.40.020 Purpose.
It is generally acknowledged that the city will experience earthquakes in the future due to its proximity to the Rodgers Creek, Hayward and San Andreas faults, and may reasonably be expected to experience moderate to severe ground shaking during a significant earthquake. Such ground shaking may result in serious injury or death or impaired economic value due to damage or collapse of buildings in St. Helena. Buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry have been widely recognized for experiencing life safety hazardous damage including partial or total collapse during moderate to strong earthquakes. The purpose of this chapter is to provide alternative construction regulations designed to reduce the risk of death or injury resulting from earthquake hazards in existing unreinforced masonry buildings in a timely and economically feasible manner while preserving the historic character of the community. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.2)

15.40.030 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter contain procedures for the systematic review and reconstruction of all existing unreinforced masonry buildings within the city to improve their safety during an earthquake. This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems unless the conditions or defects endanger the life, health, property or safety of the public or the building’s occupants. Access for the physically disabled shall be provided to the extent required by the latest edition of the California Building Code and/or the State Historical Building Code. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all buildings or portions of buildings constructed with unreinforced masonry walls with the following exceptions:

A.    A building which has been seismically retrofitted since 1980, which complies with the strengthening standards in effect at the time as determined by the building official;

B.    A detached group R division 3 occupancy or a detached group R division 1 occupancy having four living units or fewer;

C.    Accessory buildings serving group R division 3 occupancies or accessory buildings serving group R division 1 occupancies having four living units or fewer;

D.    Public schools;

E.    Hospitals; or

F.    State or federally owned buildings. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.3)

15.40.040 Authority.
A.    The building official or designee is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter.

B.    Unless otherwise noted, the provisions of the current code shall apply; however, this chapter shall not preclude the enforcement of any federal, state or other local codes, laws or ordinances.

C.    The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this chapter as he or she may deem necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this chapter. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.4)

15.40.050 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases, terms and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words, phrases, and terms that are used in this chapter, but not specifically defined, shall have the meanings set forth in the applicable local, state or federal code, if appropriate. Other such words, phrases and terms shall be accorded their ordinary meanings.

“Architect” means a person who is licensed to practice architecture in this state.

“Architectural and engineering fees” means all design and analysis costs, not repair costs.

“Building,” for the purpose of determining occupant load, means any contiguous or interconnected structure; for purposes of engineering evaluation, shall mean the entire structure or portion thereof which will respond to seismic forces as a unit.

“Current California Existing Building Code” or “current CEBC” means the seismic provision for unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings in the current edition of the International Existing Building Code as adopted and amended by the city.

“Current code” or “current CBC” means the current edition of the California State Building Code, as amended from time to time and as amended by the city.

“Engineer” means any professional, civil or structural engineer who is licensed to practice engineering in this state.

“Owner” means any individual or group of individuals or firm or any other entity holding legal or equitable title to the real property.

“Prevailing code” means the “regular building regulations” as that term is used in the California Health and Safety Code, which govern the design and construction of non-historical buildings within the city.

“Qualified historical building” means any building, structure or collection of structures deemed of importance to the history, architecture, or culture of an area by an appropriate local, state, or federal governmental jurisdiction. This shall include structures on existing or future national, state or local historical registers or official inventories of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, historic districts, or landmarks.

“Unreinforced masonry building” or “URM building” means any building or structure containing one or more walls constructed wholly or partly with unreinforced masonry walls.

“Unreinforced masonry wall” or “URM wall” means a masonry wall in which the area of reinforcing steel is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum steel ratios required by the current CEBC for reinforced masonry.

“Upgrading” means all work necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

“Valuation” means the total value of all construction work determined in accordance with prevailing code, except structural and fire upgrading work required by this chapter, for which a building permit is issued as well as finish work, roofing, mechanical systems, elevators, disabled access, and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 5 (part); prior code § 4B.5)

15.40.060 Future retrofitting legislation.
No URM building which has been seismically retrofitted to the standards required in this chapter shall, within a period of fifteen (15) years after completion of the work required for such retrofit, or such other period as the state may from time to time adopt, be identified as a “seismic hazard to life” pursuant to any other seismic mitigation building standard adopted by the city, unless: (A) such building no longer meets the structural upgrade standards under which it was retrofitted; or (B) the occupancy classification for such building is changed. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.7. Formerly 15.40.070)

15.40.070 Change of occupancy.
A URM building shall be retrofitted to the applicable standard upon a change of occupancy as defined in the current CBC, if the building official determines that the change will create an increased occupancy load or a hazardous condition. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.8. Formerly 15.40.080)

15.40.080 Addition, alteration or repair.
A.    Whenever addition, alteration or repair work to a URM building involves any one of the following conditions, the building shall be upgraded to comply with the applicable retrofit standards prior to the approval of the addition, alteration, or repair work:

1.    The total cost for all addition, alteration and repair work exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the total replacement cost of the existing building. The valuation of the work and the replacement cost of the existing building shall be determined by the building official.

2.    Dead and live vertical or horizontal loading is increased by five percent on the affected supporting elements of the roof or floor of a building.

3.    More than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area of the building is involved in substantial structural alteration as determined by the building official.

4.    The cumulative area of additions, excluding basement additions, exceeds thirty percent (30%) of the existing total floor area of the building excluding basement.

B.    Addition, alteration or repair work shall mean the cumulative addition, alteration or repair work performed on the building within any four-year period.

C.    When the owner believes the building official has made an error in his or her application of this section, the owner may appeal the determination to the building conservation appeals board in accordance with Section 15.40.100. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.9. Formerly 15.40.090)

15.40.090 Penalties for noncompliance.
A.    It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially hazardous URM building subject to this chapter to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. After written notification thereof from the city to the owner, each owner who fails to complete the building upgrades required by this chapter for such building shall, in addition to any other penalty or remedy which may be assessed pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law, be guilty of an infraction. Each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted shall be a separate offense. This penalty shall attach the day following the last day of the period during which the owner is to complete the upgrades. The maximum penalty under this subsection shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per building.

B.    In addition to the penalty authorized by subsection A of this section, the building official may take the following actions in the event of any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter within the specified time period:

1.    Notify all parties with a financial interest in the property (such as mortgage lenders, lienholders, insurance bearers) and the tenants that the building is a hazardous URM building and is in violation of this chapter;

2.    File a statement with the county recorder’s office describing the potential hazards of the building and the violations of this chapter. Upon correction of the violation of this chapter, the building official will file a release of any order of unreinforced masonry building hazard mitigation that may have been recorded;

3.    Post a sign on the building to designate it as a hazardous URM building. The signs shall be located at well-lighted locations, readily visible by the occupants and public when entering the building, and shall be protected from damage. Location, form and content of the sign are subject to the building official’s approval. The building owner shall be responsible for installing and maintaining the signs and immediately replacing them, at the owner’s expense, as necessary. When the owner corrects all violations of this chapter to the satisfaction of the building official, the posting of the building required by this section shall be removed. However, if the owner violates any aspect of this chapter after the posting has been removed, the building official will repost the building immediately;

4.    The city council may cause any building not abated within the time limits set forth herein to be vacated, strengthened, repaired, rehabilitated, remodeled, demolished or upgraded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and place a lien on the property for all costs incurred.

C.    The owner may appeal any action or penalty for noncompliance in accordance with Section 15.40.100. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 5 (part); prior code § 4B.10. Formerly 15.40.100)

15.40.100 Appeals process.
A.    Exemption from URM Program. If the owner believes that his or her building is not a potentially hazardous URM building or is otherwise exempted from the provisions of this chapter, the owner shall submit evidence, such as original drawings or test results, to substantiate the claim. The building official will review the evidence submitted by the owner and will remove the building from the city’s list of potentially hazardous URM buildings if the building official determines that the building is exempted or in compliance with this chapter. Any decision of the building official pursuant to this subsection may be appealed first to the building conservation appeals board and finally to the city council, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.

B.    Appeal of Addition, Alterations, or Repair. When the owner believes the building official made an error in his or her determination regarding additions, alterations or repairs, the owner may appeal the determination to the building conservation appeals board. Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after the date of the building official’s written decision.

1.    Such appeal shall be made in the form specified by this section and be filed with the building official. The appeal shall state specifically the alleged error or abuse of discretion by the building official. The appeal will be heard by the building conservation appeals board within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the appeal by the city. Not less than seven days prior to the hearing date, the building official shall give notice to the appellant of the date, time and place of the hearing. The board shall be authorized to continue the hearing from time to time.

In considering the appeal, the board shall determine whether, based upon the record, the building official erred or abused his or her discretion. Error or abuse of discretion is shown if it is established that the building official failed to follow the provisions of this chapter.

2.    The decision of the board shall be in writing and a copy of the board’s decision shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the appellant by the building official within seven days of the date of the board’s decision. The applicant may appeal the board’s decision to the city council in the form specified by this section. The appeal shall be made to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the board’s final action notice.

C.    Appeal of Noncompliance Penalties and Actions. Any decision by the building official to impose penalties or take actions in the event of any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be appealed by the owner or the owner’s agent to the city council. Any such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the building official’s mailing of notification. The appeal shall be made on a form approved by the building official and shall state specifically how the building official has either committed an error or has abused his or her discretion. In considering the appeal, the council shall determine whether, based upon the record, the building official erred or abused his or her discretion. The decision of the council shall be in writing and shall be final. Revocation of a certificate of occupancy, if appealed, will not become effective until the decision of the council is final and in writing.

D.    Written Appeal Required. The written appeal and filing fee shall be submitted to the city clerk. The written appeal shall contain the following:

1.    The names of the appellants;

2.    A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the land and/or building involved;

3.    A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellants;

4.    A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

5.    The submittal of any documents, sworn statements or other written material claimed to have value on the contentions made in support of the appeal;

6.    The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses;

7.    The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.11. Formerly 15.40.110)

15.40.110 Recovery of penalties.
A.    The penalties imposed on the building owner shall be assessed against the real property subject to this chapter and shall, in addition, be an obligation of the owner of the subject property. If the owner of a building is a group of individuals, firms, or other entities or any combination thereof, the obligation imposed by this section shall be joint and several. The building official shall give the owner of the building a written notice showing the amount of the penalty and requesting payment thereof. If the amount of such penalty is not paid to city within thirty (30) days after the date of such notice, the building official shall forward a report of the penalties to the city council for confirmation.

B.    The property owner shall be given at least fifteen (15) days’ written notice of the confirmation hearing before the city council. The amount of the penalties shall be confirmed by the city council, unless the city council finds, based upon evidence in the record, that the building official erred in imposing or in computing the amount of the penalty. If such error is found, the city council may modify the amount of the penalty, as warranted.

C.    Upon confirmation of the penalty, the city council shall direct the building official to record, in the office of the county recorder, a certificate substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIEN

Pursuant to Section 15.40.090, of the St. Helena Municipal Code, the penalty of $ _____ was assessed by the Building Official, and confirmed by the St. Helena City Council, against the described real property and such amount has not been paid, in full, and the City of St. Helena does hereby claim a special assessment lien upon the hereinafter described real property in said amount; the same shall be a lien upon the real property until such sum has been paid in full. The real property herein above mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of St. Helena, County of Napa, State of California and particularly described as follows, to wit:

(Insert description of property)

Dated __________

____________________

Building Official

Such lien attaches upon recordation of the notice of special assessment lien.

The description of the parcel in the notice of lien shall be that used for the same parcel as the county assessor’s map book for the current year. The county assessor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the affected parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures for foreclosure and sale, in case of delinquencies, as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.12. Formerly 15.40.120)

15.40.120 Remedies.
In addition to the penalties in Section 15.40.090, the following remedies are available to the city and may be imposed independently or in combination with each other at the sole discretion of the building official, unless otherwise noted herein:

A.    Maintenance of a URM building beyond the time specified in Section 15.40.060 for completion of upgrades to such building is declared a public nuisance.

B.    The city may seek injunctive relief on behalf of the public to enjoin a building owner’s violation of this chapter.

C.    The city may withhold the issuance of any building permit and/or may suspend the existing building permits on the subject building unless otherwise authorized by the building official for emergency repairs.

D.    The building official, after written notice to the owner, may revoke or suspend the occupancy permit for any structure for which the owner violates any of the provisions of this chapter. The notice of revocation or suspension shall provide the owner the right to provide the building official with evidence that the occupancy permit should not be revoked or suspended either because the structure is not subject to the provisions of this chapter or because the building official did not follow the provisions of this chapter.

E.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.

F.    These remedies are not exclusive and the city may utilize any other remedies available at law or equity. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 4B.13. Formerly 15.40.130)

Chapter 15.44
BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
Sections:

15.44.010    Plan generally—Odd and even numbers.

15.44.020    Method of assignment of numbers.

15.44.030    Use of numbers consecutively.

15.44.040    Record of numbers assigned.

15.44.050    Duty of property owners to provide and affix numbers.

15.44.060    Size of number—Where numbers are to be placed.

15.44.010 Plan generally—Odd and even numbers.
All buildings fronting on streets in the city shall be numbered in accordance with the following system:

A.    The base or initial point on all streets running in a northwesterly and southeasterly course shall be the southeastern boundary line of the city running from Napa River to Crane Avenue, and the line projected northeasterly and southwesterly, and all such streets which run in a northwesterly direction from such base or initial point, shall be numbered from such base or initial point, and all streets which run in a northwesterly direction, but do not run from such base or initial point, shall be theoretically projected southeasterly to such base or initial point and shall be numbered as if the same actually ran from such base, and in all such streets the odd numbers shall be placed on the southerly side of the street, and even numbers on the northerly side, opposite the next preceding odd numbers.

B.    The base or initial point on all streets running in a northeasterly and southwesterly course shall be a line drawn at right angles to the aforesaid southeasterly boundary line of the city and intersecting the last-mentioned line at a point where it intersects the southern bank of Napa River, and all streets running in a southwesterly direction shall be theoretically projected northeasterly to such base or initial point and shall be numbered as if the same actually ran from such base or initial point, and on all such streets, the odd numbers shall be placed on the westerly side of the street and the even numbers on the easterly side, opposite the next preceding odd number. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.36)

15.44.020 Method of assignment of numbers.
The lots shall be numbered starting from the southeasterly or northeasterly end of the block and the numbers shall be computed in the following manner: The number of lineal feet of property line in each block shall be divided by six and one number shall be appropriated to the space resulting from such division as the case may be. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.37)

15.44.030 Use of numbers consecutively.
Numbering of buildings shall be consecutively in the following manner:

Beginning the numbering for each street with the first block, at such base or initial point, allotting one hundred (100) numbers, or as many to each block as shall be required and using the numbers from one to one hundred (100), inclusive, in the first block, the numbers one hundred one (101) to two hundred (200), inclusive, in the next block, and so on consecutively from such base or initial point the whole length of the street. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.38)

15.44.040 Record of numbers assigned.
The superintendent of streets shall number the streets and shall keep complete records, plots and diagrams thereof, in his or her office, and shall inform, on request, the owners or occupants of each house to be numbered of the numbers to be placed on the house by the owner or occupant. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.39)

15.44.050 Duty of property owners to provide and affix numbers.
It shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying or controlling any building or store fronting on a public street or avenue in the city to number the same, or cause the same to be numbered correctly and in accordance with this chapter, and it shall be the duty of any person owning, occupying or controlling any building hereafter erected within the city to so number the same within one month after its completion or occupancy, and it is unlawful for such owner or occupant to fail, neglect or refuse to do so. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.40)

15.44.060 Size of number—Where numbers are to be placed.
The regulation number to be used in numbering buildings in the city shall be consistent with Section 15.12.020(A). Numbers shall be placed upon some conspicuous place on the front of such building. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 13.41)

Chapter 15.48
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
Sections:

15.48.010    Definitions.

15.48.020    State law as to trailer camps adopted.

15.48.030    Trailers to be kept in approved camps—Exceptions when temporary permits are issued.

15.48.040    Application for temporary permits.

15.48.050    Temporary permit fees.

15.48.060    When trailers to be parked in parking spaces.

15.48.070    Unlawful locations.

15.48.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Approved trailer camps or farm labor camps” means any places, areas or tracts offered to the public for accommodation of any trailer and approved by the city health inspector as conforming to state and county law.

“Trailer” means any unit designed to be used for living or sleeping purposes, or both, and which is or was at some time equipped with wheels or similar devices for the purpose of transporting such unit from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 16.1)

15.48.020 State law as to trailer camps adopted.
All of the provisions of the state law applicable to health, sanitation and safety of trailer camps or farm labor camps are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 16.2)

15.48.030 Trailers to be kept in approved camps—Exceptions when temporary permits are issued.
All trailers when occupied or used for living or sleeping purposes shall be kept within approved trailer camps or farm labor camps, except when a temporary permit is issued as provided for in Section 17.136.090(C). (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 16.3)

15.48.040 Application for temporary permits.
Application for a temporary permit shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours from the time such trailer is located upon the property. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 16.4)

15.48.050 Temporary permit fees.
Every person holding a temporary permit shall pay to the city building inspector the fee set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 15 (part): prior code § 16.5)

15.48.060 When trailers to be parked in parking spaces.
All trailers when parked for more than twenty-four (24) continuous hours shall be parked in a parking space. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): prior code § 16.6)

15.48.070 Unlawful locations.
No person shall establish, maintain or locate any trailer in the city, except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 15 (part): prior code § 16.7)

Chapter 15.52
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Sections:

15.52.010    Statutory authorization.

15.52.020    Findings of fact.

15.52.030    Statement of purpose.

15.52.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

15.52.050    Definitions.

15.52.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.52.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.52.080    Compliance.

15.52.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.52.100    Interpretation.

15.52.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.52.120    Development permit.

15.52.130    Designation of floodplain administrator.

15.52.140    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

15.52.150    Standards of construction.

15.52.160    Standards for utilities.

15.52.170    Standards for subdivisions.

15.52.180    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.52.190    Floodways.

15.52.200    Appeal board.

15.52.210    Variances.

Editor’s Note: The sections in this chapter have been renumbered from the designations given in Ord. 06-8 starting with Section 15.52.120.

15.52.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the state of California has, in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800, conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): Ord. 02-5 § 8: prior code § 5B.1)

15.52.020 Findings of fact.
A.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.    These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.2)

15.52.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.    Protect human life and health;

B.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;

C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.3)

15.52.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.    Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.    Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;

E.    Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas; and

F.    These regulations take precedence over any less restrictive conflicting local laws, ordinances and codes. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.4)

15.52.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be so interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

A Zone. See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Accessory structure, low cost and small” means a structure that is solely for the parking of not more than two cars, or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds).

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

“Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred (100) year flood”). “Base flood” is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level—on all sides.

Building. See “Structure.”

“Crawl space” is an enclosed area below the BFE. Crawl space construction is subject to specific materials requirements and other constraints as described in Section 15.52.150(C)(2).

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Development permit” means the document issued by the city to confirm approval of the development proposed by the submittals required under Section 15.52.120.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before May 27, 1980.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:

1.    A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

2.    The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

“Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the floodway.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source—see “Flood, flooding, or flood water.”

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.

“Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

“Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion-prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

“Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization,” as related to Section 15.52.210, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” is the city, empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Section 15.52.210 means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

1.    An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a.    The flood openings standard in Section 15.52.150(C)(4);

b.    The anchoring standards in Section 15.52.150(A);

c.    The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.52.150(B); and

d.    The standards for utilities in Section 15.52.160.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes “recreational vehicles,” park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

“Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed.

1.    The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry.

2.    The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence.

3.    Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

“Mean sea level (MSL)” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after May 27, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 27, 1980.

“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

One Hundred (100) Year Flood. See “Base flood.”

“Person” means an individual or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

“Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.

“Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Section 15.52.210, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.    Built on a single chassis;

2.    Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.    Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of shallow flooding.”

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank, or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means:

1.    Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; or

2.    Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as “repetitive loss.”

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds thirty percent (30%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.    Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.5)

15.52.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.6)

15.52.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS), City of St. Helena, California, Napa County” dated January 7, 1998, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated January 7, 1998, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall, 1480 Main Street, St. Helena. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.7)

15.52.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.8)

15.52.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.9)

15.52.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.    Liberally construed in favor of the city; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.10)

15.52.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.11)

15.52.120 Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.52.070. Applications for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:

A.    Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:

1.    Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;

2.    Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;

3.    Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;

4.    Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;

5.    Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.52.070 or 15.52.150(C);

6.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

7.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.52.150(C)(3) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.

B.    Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.52.150(C)(3).

C.    For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.52.150(C)(2) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.

D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development and evidence that any required state or federal permits for such alteration or relocation have been obtained.

E.    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.52.150. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.13)

15.52.130 Designation of floodplain administrator.
The city engineer is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.14)

15.52.140 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

A.    Permit Review.

1.    Review all development permit applications to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;

2.    All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3.    The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

4.    The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; and

5.    All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

B.    Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.

1.    Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “market value.”

2.    Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.

C.    Review Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.52.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.52.150 through 15.52.190. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations,” dated July 1995.

D.    Notification of Other Agencies.

1.    Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse.

a.    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to the alteration or relocation;

b.    Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

c.    Assure that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained.

2.    Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations.

a.    Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

b.    All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

c.    Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

3.    Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

E.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1.    Certification required by Section 15.52.150(C)(1) (lowest floor elevations);

2.    Certification required in Section 15.52.150(C)(3) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.    Certification required in Section 15.52.150(C)(4) (wet floodproofing standard);

4.    Certification required in Section 15.52.170 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

5.    The certification required in Section 15.52.190(A) (floodway encroachments); and

6.    Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

F.    Map Determination. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.52.200.

G.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.52.080.

H.    Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.

I.    Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.15)

15.52.150 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.    Anchoring.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

B.    Construction Materials and Methods.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements to structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:

a.    With flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;

b.    Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

c.    With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

d.    Within Zone AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

C.    Elevation and Floodproofing.

1.    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a.    In AE, AH and A1-A30 zones, elevated to eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation.

b.    In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

c.    Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor to be properly elevated. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2.    Crawl Space Construction. Below-grade crawl space construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be considered basements.

a.    The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawl space construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer;

b.    The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. For guidance on flood openings, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-93;

c.    Crawl space construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile or column foundations that withstand storm surge and wave forces are required in V zones;

d.    Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE;

e.    Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above BFE or designed so that flood waters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions; and

f.    Requirements for all below-grade crawl space construction, in addition to the above requirements, to include the following:

i.    The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D in Figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01;

ii.    The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall, must not exceed four feet (shown as L in Figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01) at any point;

iii.    There must be an adequate drainage system that removes flood waters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time after a flood event, not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; and

iv.    The velocity of flood waters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.

3.    For any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure, the entire structure shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a.    Be floodproofed so that below the level required under subsection (C)(1) of this section the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c.    Be certified by a registered civil engineer that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

4.    Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered civil engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.    Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters; or

b.    Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

5.    Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.52.180.

D.    Nonconversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the floodplain administrator shall:

1.    Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five feet or higher;

2.    Require that such applicants enter into a “nonconversion agreement for construction within flood hazard areas” or equivalent with the city. The agreement shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator with the Napa County recorder as a deed restriction. The nonconversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and city attorney; and

3.    Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least seventy-two (72) hours.

E.    The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas known to the community.

1.    Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion, and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

2.    If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

3.    Within Zone E on the flood insurance rate map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.16)

15.52.160 Standards for utilities.
A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

B.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.17)

15.52.170 Standards for subdivisions.
A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B.    All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C.    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E.    All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.18)

15.52.180 Standards for manufactured homes.
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:

A.    Be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor is at least eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation; and

B.    Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement and approved by the building official.

C.    All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:

1.    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or

2.    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3.    Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.52.120 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in this section. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.19)

15.52.190 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.52.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.    If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.52.140 through 15.52.180. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part))

15.52.200 Appeal board.
A.    The planning commission and, on appeal, the city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

B.    The city council shall hear and decide requests for variance in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

1.    In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

a.    Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

b.    Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

c.    Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

d.    Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

e.    Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

f.    Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

g.    Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

h.    Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

i.    Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

j.    Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

k.    Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

2.    Variances shall only be issued upon a:

a.    Showing of good and sufficient cause;

b.    Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and

c.    Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see “public safety and nuisance”*), cause “fraud and victimization”* of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

3.    Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections (B)(1) through (B)(2) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

4.    Upon consideration of the factors of subsection B of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.21)

* Editor’s Note: See Section 15.52.050 for definition of this term.

15.52.210 Variances.
A.    The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

B.    The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

C.    It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this section are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

D.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.52.150 through 15.52.190 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

E.    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 15.52.050) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

F.    Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

G.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary,” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

H.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a city official that:

1.    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and

2.    Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Napa County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

I.    The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-8 § 3 (part): prior code § 5B.22)

Chapter 15.53
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.53.010    California Green Building Standards Code—Adopted.

15.53.020    California Green Building Standards Code—Amendments.

15.53.030    California Green Building Standards Code—Voluntary measures made mandatory.

15.53.010 California Green Building Standards Code—Adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, with amendments set forth in Section 15.53.020, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

15.53.020 California Green Building Standards Code—Amendments.
A.    Section 101.3, Scope.

The provisions of this code shall apply to the planning, design, operation, construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure, or an addition of 400 sq. ft. or more, or a remodel encompassing a bathroom or kitchen in an existing structure, unless otherwise indicated in this code, throughout the State of California.

B.    Section 4.303.1, Indoor Water Use, Twenty percent savings.

2.    In additions or remodels of existing structures, all new indoor plumbing fixtures shall meet the 20% reduction in use illustrated by Table 4.303.2.

C.    Section 4.503, Fireplaces. Pursuant to Bay Area Air Quality Management District Regulation 8, Particulate Matter and Visible Emissions, Rule 3, Wood-Burning Devices, the city of St. Helena hereby enforces the following:

1.    Definitions:

“APCO”: The Air Pollution Control Officer of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District or designee thereof.

“Fireplaces”: Any installed masonry or factory-built wood-burning device designed to operate with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to 35-to-1m a burn rate over 11 pounds per hour, or a weight over 1760 pounds.

“Gas-fueled Heating Device”: Any device that utilizes natural gas as a fuel source supplied by a natural gas service utility, including, but not limited to, gas-fueled fireplaces, gas-fueled room heaters, gas-fueled inserts, or gas-fueled log sets.

“Masonry Heater”: Any site-built or site-assembled, solid-fueled heating device constructed mainly of masonry materials in which the heat from intermittent fires burned rapidly in its firebox is stored in its structural mass for slow release to the site. Such solid-fueled heating devices must meet the design and construction specifications set forth in ASTM E 1602-03, “Guide for Construction of Solid Fuel Burning Masonry Heaters.”

“Pellet-fueled Device”: Any solid-fueled burning device which is operated on pellet-fuel and is either U.S. EPA Phase II certified or exempted under U.S. EPA requirements set forth in Title 40 Code of Federal Regulation (CFR), Part 60, Subpart AAA. Pellet fuel may be composed of compressed wood, corn or other biomass.

“Wood-burning Device”: Any wood-burning stove or heater, pellet-fueled device, fireplace, or any indoor permanently installed device used to burn any solid fuel for space-heating or aesthetic purposes. This definition does not include wood-burning devices intended exclusively for cooking food, such as wood-fired ovens or barbecues.

2.    Criteria for Installation of Wood-burning Devices: No person shall install a new or used wood-burning device intended for use in the City of St. Helena unless it is one of the following:

1.    A U.S. EPA Phase II certified wood-burning device;

2.    A pellet-fueled device;

3.    A low mass fireplace, masonry heater or other wood-burning device of a make and model that meets EPA emission targets and has been approved in writing by the APCO.

This requirement does not apply if a wood-burning device is an installed fixture included in the sale or transfer of any real property. Any gas-fueled heating device or electric-powered heating device is allowed under this standard.

3.    Criteria for Wood-burning Devices in New Building Construction: No person or builder shall commence construction of a new building or structure permitted to contain or containing a wood-burning device, or install a new wood-burning device resulting from a remodel, or construct a free-standing outdoor fireplace that is not intended exclusively for cooking food, unless the device meets the requirements above. Any gas-fueled heating device or electric-powered heating device is allowed under this standard.

(Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

15.53.030 California Green Building Standards Code—Voluntary measures made mandatory.
A.    Section A4.403.2, Reduction in Cement Use. As allowed by the enforcing agency, cement used in foundation mix design shall be reduced to not less than a twenty percent (20%) reduction in cement use.

B.    Note: Products commonly used to replace cement in concrete mix designs include, but are not limited to:

1.    Fly ash.

2.    Slag.

3.    Silica fume.

4.    Rice hull ash.

C.    Section A4.404.3, Building Systems. All wood roof, wall and subfloor sheet goods shall be engineered, oriented strand board. Alternate equivalent materials may be allowed by authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.54
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.54.010    California Administrative Code adopted.

15.54.010 California Administrative Code adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Administrative Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 1, published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted including all appendices, and without amendments. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Chapter 15.55
CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED
Sections:

15.55.010    California Referenced Standards Code adopted.

15.55.010 California Referenced Standards Code adopted.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 12, published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted including all appendices, and without amendments. (Ord. 16-15 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 13-4 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 10-7 § 2 (part))

Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

16.04    General Provisions and Definitions

16.08    Subdivision Maps Generally

16.12    Conceptual Maps

16.16    Tentative Maps

16.20    Final Maps

16.24    Tentative Parcel and Parcel Maps

16.28    Dedications, Fees and Reservations

16.32    Design Standards and Improvements

Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.04.010    Citation and authority.

16.04.020    Purpose.

16.04.030    Consistency.

16.04.040    Application.

16.04.050    Advisory agency designation.

16.04.060    Property owner consent.

16.04.070    Waiver or modification of requirements.

16.04.080    Environmental review.

16.04.090    Fees and forms.

16.04.100    Notice of public hearings.

16.04.110    Extension to time limits.

16.04.120    Other discretionary approvals.

16.04.130    Definitions.

16.04.140    Compliance required.

16.04.150    Prohibition.

16.04.160    Remedies.

16.04.170    Certificate of compliance.

16.04.180    Notice of violation.

16.04.190    Violation—Penalty.

16.04.010 Citation and authority.
This title is adopted to supplement and implement the state Subdivision Map Act and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city. The provisions of this chapter which are mandated by the state Subdivision Map Act are subject to change without notice or action by the city in the event the State Legislature amends such Act. (Prior code § 25.1)

16.04.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all maps provided for by the state Subdivision Map Act and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this title are determined to be those reasonably necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare, to promote orderly growth, development, open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land, and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. (Prior code § 25.2)

16.04.030 Consistency.
A.    No land may be subdivided or developed for a purpose which is inconsistent with the city’s general plan, any applicable specific plan, the zoning ordinance, or other applicable provisions of this code.

B.    The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the state Subdivision Map Act and the requirements of this title, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and other public services that shall be provided by the subdivider.

C.    The city may not approve a subdivision of land unless the subdivider establishes that the subdivision and construction of improvements will be appropriately timed and phased such that the development will be supported by adequate facilities and services, and such that appropriate measures can be taken to mitigate adverse environmental impacts. Adequacy of facilities and services shall be determined in accord with: (1) the planned long-term build-out of the community as provided in capital improvements programs in which facilities are actually available or funded; and (2) the general plan elements in effect at the time of considering the application. (Prior code § 25.3)

16.04.040 Application.
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all subdivisions or parts thereof for the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to all other maps provided for by the state Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Prior code § 25.4)

16.04.050 Advisory agency designation.
The city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the state Subdivision Map Act, for subdivisions, and shall have all the powers and duties with respect to subdivision maps and the procedures relating thereto which are specified by state law or by this title. (Prior code § 25.5)

16.04.060 Property owner consent.
No final map or parcel map required by this title shall be filed with the city without the written consent of all parties having any record title interest in the real property proposed to be subdivided. (Prior code § 25.6)

16.04.070 Waiver or modification of requirements.
A.    The city council may waive or modify any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this title. Application for any such waivers or modifications shall be made in writing by the subdivider, stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the subdivider. Such application shall be filed with the tentative or tentative parcel map application. In order for the property referred to in the application to come within the provisions of this section, the city council shall find that the granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated, and that:

1.    There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property;

2.    The waiver or modification will improve the overall subdivision design; or

3.    The property is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to comply fully.

B.    In approving waivers or modifications, lots which are in conflict with the zoning ordinance shall not be created.

C.    The city council or planning commission shall specifically and fully set forth the modification and the conditions designated.

D.    In all cases in which such modifications are authorized, the city council shall require such evidence as it deems necessary that the conditions required in connection with such modifications are being complied with. (Prior code § 25.7)

16.04.080 Environmental review.
Subdivisions are projects subject to environmental review in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, state guidelines, this code and the implementing rules and procedures adopted by the city council. (Prior code § 25.8)

16.04.090 Fees and forms.
A.    No application, map, appeal or other requests for city action shall be considered filed pursuant to this title without payment of the established fee or a deposit estimated to cover all of city’s costs as based upon the rates set by resolution of the city council, whichever is applicable, unless the fees and/or deposits have been waived by action of the city council or planning commission; the applicant is a public entity exempted from payment of such fees; or the appellant is the planning director or a member of the city council or planning commission.

B.    The planning director may prescribe various application and appeal forms and if made available to the public, all applications and appeals shall be made on such forms. (Prior code § 25.9)

16.04.100 Notice of public hearings.
Whenever a public hearing is required by this title, notice of such public hearing shall be given by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.3. The planning director may give such additional notice as he or she deems advisable. Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in this title. (Prior code § 25.10)

16.04.110 Extension to time limits.
Except as may be limited by state law, any time limits specified by law may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city. (Prior code § 25.11)

16.04.120 Other discretionary approvals.
All applicants for tentative maps and tentative parcel maps shall concurrently submit applications for all other discretionary approvals, including but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances, rezonings, and general plan amendments. (Prior code § 25.12)

16.04.130 Definitions.
Definitions hereinafter set forth shall be supplementary to the definitions contained in the state Subdivision Map Act. For the purposes of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act, the following words and phrases shall be construed as defined in this section.

“Conceptual map” is a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision of twenty (20) or more lots, filed with the planning department prior to the preparation and filing of an application for tentative map approval. Such map may but need not be based upon an accurate and detailed field survey of the property.

“Day” is the period of time between any midnight and midnight following. The time in which any act provided by this title is to be performed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. If city offices are closed for the whole of any day, that day shall be considered a holiday. When this title prescribes filing deadlines, all acts necessary to complete filing must be completed no later than five p.m. of the last day or such earlier time as city offices may officially close for the day.

“Design” means:

1.    Street alignments, grades, and widths;

2.    Drainage, water, sewer and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades;

3.    Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

4.    Fire roads and fire breaks;

5.    Lot size and configuration;

6.    Vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic access;

7.    Grading;

8.    Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and

9.    Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

“Final map” is a map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels for which a tentative and final map are required by the state Subdivision Map Act or this title and prepared in accordance with this title and the state Subdivision Map Act.

“Improvement” means streets, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, utilities, and landscaping to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and for acceptance of the final map thereof. “Improvement” also means other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by or by a combination of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity approved by the city, is necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications, where applicable.

“Lot” is a parcel of land, or a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment unit which has been created under the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act or any prior law regulating the division of land or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto or was created prior to the time any local or state law regulated such division.

“Lot line adjustment” is a reorientation of an existing lot line between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created.

“Parcel map” is a map showing a subdivision of four or less parcels as required by this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act and prepared in accordance with this title and the state Subdivision Map Act.

“Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a subdivision for oneself or for others.

“Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. “Subdivision” does not include those projects excluded by Government Code Sections 66426.5 and 66412-66412.7.

“Tentative map” is a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision by a final map, and the existing conditions in and around it.

“Tentative parcel map” is a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision by a parcel map, and the existing conditions in and around it.

“Vesting tentative map” is a tentative or tentative parcel map that has printed conspicuously on its face at time of submittal the words “Vesting Tentative Map” or “Vesting Tentative Parcel Map.” (Ord. 02-1 §§ 1, 2; prior code §§ 25.17—25.30)

16.04.140 Compliance required.
Compliance with the appropriate provisions of this title is a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit, zoning permit, use permit, variance permit, or any other land use approval by any person authorized to issue such permits or authorizations for the city. Any such permit or authorization issued without such prior compliance shall render the permit or authorization void. (Prior code § 25.160)

16.04.150 Prohibition.
A.    No person shall sell, lease, finance, convey, transfer or gift any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, financing, conveyance, transfer or gift thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title, or the state Subdivision Map Act, until such map, in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the county recorder for record. However, nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, finance or otherwise transfer or convey real property or to construct improvements thereon where the offer or construction is expressly conditioned upon the filing of a final or parcel map, as required by this title.

B.    Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record with the county recorder.

C.    This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision sold, leased, conveyed or transferred in compliance with or exempt from all laws and ordinances regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. (Prior code § 25.161)

16.04.160 Remedies.
A.    A violation of this title is a public nuisance. In addition to any penalties provided in this code, such nuisance may be abated by the city and the city may also employ any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which it is entitled including, without limitation, those remedies set forth in the state Subdivision Map Act.

B.    The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act or this title if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

C.    If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.04.170, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Prior code § 25.162)

16.04.170 Certificate of compliance.
A.    Any owner of real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property, may request in writing, that the planning director make a determination whether such real property does or does not comply with the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The property owner or vendee shall be entitled to present any facts or documents to the planning director. If a determination of compliance is made the planning director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder.

B.    If the planning director determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this title or state Subdivision Map Act, or wishes to refer the decision to the planning commission, the planning director shall set the issue for hearing before the planning commission.

1.    If a determination of compliance is made by the planning commission, the planning director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder.

2.    If the planning commission determines that such real property does not comply with this title or the state Subdivision Map Act, the planning commission shall issue a conditional certificate of compliance. The planning commission may, as a condition to granting a conditional certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with Section 16.04.160(C). Upon the planning commission making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the planning director shall issue a conditional certificate of compliance which shall be filed with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that fulfillment and implementation of the conditions set forth in the certificate shall be required prior to the subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant or approval for the development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city.

C.    A final map or parcel map filed for record shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the lots created therein. (Ord. 02-1 § 16: prior code § 25.163)

16.04.180 Notice of violation.
If the planning department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act or this title, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6 (a) and (b) of the state Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the planning director and city attorney why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than sixty (60) days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, staff determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, staff determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall record the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Prior code § 25.164)

16.04.190 Violation—Penalty.
A violation of this title by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or by both that fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 25.165)

Chapter 16.08
SUBDIVISION MAPS GENERALLY
Sections:

16.08.010    Division of land—Five or more parcels.

16.08.020    Division of land—Four or less parcels.

16.08.030    Conceptual map.

16.08.040    Designated remainder.

16.08.050    Vesting tentative and vesting tentative parcel map.

16.08.060    Parcel map waiver.

16.08.070    Lot line adjustment map.

16.08.080    Correction and modification of a recorded, subdivision map.

16.08.090    Reversion to acreage.

16.08.100    Resubdivision without reversion to acreage.

16.08.110    Voluntary merger.

16.08.010 Division of land—Five or more parcels.
A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the planning director that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where any one of the following occurs:

A.    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the city council;

B.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway;

C.    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city council as to street alignments and widths;

D.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or is not less than one-quarter of a quarter section; or

E.    The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision pursuant to Government Code section 66418.2.

F.    A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections A through E of this section, unless waived by the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-1 § 3: prior code § 25.35)

16.08.020 Division of land—Four or less parcels.
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or less parcels, except that maps shall not be required for:

A.    Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days’ notice in writing;

B.    Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made by the planning director in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map;

C.    Parcel maps waived by the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.060. (Prior code § 25.36)

16.08.030 Conceptual map.
A conceptual map, in addition to a tentative and final map, shall be required for all subdivisions creating twenty (20) or more lots, or in the case of condominium and conversion projects twenty (20) or more units, except for those subdivisions described in Section 16.08.010. (Prior code § 25.37)

16.08.040 Designated remainder.
A map is not required for the sale of the entirety of a designated remainder; however, a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be required. (Prior code § 25.38)

16.08.050 Vesting tentative and vesting tentative parcel map.
A.    Except as may be specifically set forth in this title, vesting tentative maps and vesting tentative parcel maps shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and regulations governing non-vesting tentative maps and tentative parcel maps.

B.    Approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code. Such rights shall last for one year beyond the recording of the final or parcel map. (Prior code § 25.39)

16.08.060 Parcel map waiver.
A.    The planning commission may recommend to the city council a waiver of the requirement for a parcel map, provided the commission finds that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this title, this code, the general plan and the state Subdivision Map Act. The city council may reject the recommendation of the planning commission only if the city council cannot make the foregoing findings.

B.    When the requirement of a parcel map is waived but dedication for the purposes of street widening is necessary, such dedication shall be made by a separate instrument which shall be recorded.

C.    Waiver may be conditioned to provide for, among other things, payment by the subdivider of park land dedication, drainage, traffic and other fees permitted by law.

D.    A tentative parcel map and deeds shall be approved and dedications made before a parcel map may be waived. (Prior code § 25.40)

16.08.070 Lot line adjustment map.
A.    A lot line adjustment map may be submitted and approved for a boundary adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, which does not create a greater number of lots than originally existed if each of the proposed lots meets all the requirements of local building and zoning ordinances, this code, and the general plan.

B.    Applicants for a lot line adjustment approval shall submit to the planning department a completed application form signed by all parties having a record title interest in the involved property along with the following:

1.    Copies of the recorded document that established each involved parcel as a legal parcel. For purposes of this subdivision parcels are separated for assessment purposes are not legal parcels for purposes of processing a lot line adjustment;

2.    Two copies of a preliminary title report concerning the property, not more than thirty (30) days old;

3.    Seven copies of a tentative lot line adjustment map accurately drawn to scale.

Measurements shall be identified by feet, square feet or acres to the nearest tenth. The map shall be eight and one-half by eleven inches in size and shall specifically show the following:

a.    All exterior and interior lines shall be shown on the map and shall be identified by course and bearing description, based on survey data, calculated data, or information of record,

b.    Proposed new lines and lines to be eliminated shall be so identified in written notation or by legend. Lines to be eliminated shall be dashed or otherwise drawn so as to be clearly distinguished from the subordinate to remaining new lines,

c.    All existing structures shall be accurately located on the original parcels together with their dimensions, the distance between structures and the number of stories and height of each structure,

d.    The distance from the existing structures to the boundary lines of the new parcel on which the structures are located,

e.    The distance from existing wells, septic tank and leach fields to existing and proposed property lines,

f.    The locations, purpose and width of all existing and proposed easements, streets and appurtenant utilities,

g.    The approximate location of all watercourses and existing drainage structures,

h.    A reference to prior parcel maps or prior lot line adjustments on the subject property,

i.    A copy of an existing Williamson Act agreements affecting the parcels to be adjusted,

j.    The assessor parcel numbers of all presently existing lots involved in the application;

4.    The required fees and deposits.

C.    The documents submitted shall be reviewed by the planning director and public works director who shall approve the lot line adjustment if they find each condition set forth in subsection A of this section is met. The directors may impose conditions or exactions on their approval to conform to local zoning and building requirements or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. The directors’ decision shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission as provided in subsection D of this section.

D.    If a lot line adjustment is approved or conditionally approved, the directors shall make a written report thereof to the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the planning commission decides, by majority vote, to review the lot line adjustment and conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.04.100. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of the request for review. The planning commission may add, modify or delete conditions if the planning commission determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the lot line adjustment conforms to the state Subdivision Map Act and this code. Within fourteen (14) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision. If the planning commission does not act within with time limits set forth in this section, the lot line adjustment shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the directors insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code and the general plan.

E.    If the planning commission does not decide to review the lot line adjustment and conduct a public hearing pursuant to subsection D of this section, any decision taken under subsection C of this section shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. In addition, the planning director shall provide individual mailed notice of any such decision to owners of property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the subject properties. Any interested party may appeal such decision to the planning commission by filing with the planning department a written statement setting forth the grounds of appeal within ten (10) days of the date of publication of such decision. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and act on the appeal in accordance with subsection D of this section.

F.    Appeals of planning commission action with respect to lot line adjustments shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.08.180. On appeal, the city council shall, by resolution, approve the lot line adjustment if it finds that each condition set forth in subsection A of this section is met. The city council may add, delete or modify conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the lot line adjustment conforms to the state Subdivision Map Act and this code.

G.    Following approval of the lot line adjustment and after satisfying all conditions of approval, the applicant shall submit to the planning department for review and approval revised deeds for transfer of the property and thereafter shall record the documents and submit copies of the recorded documents to the planning department. No record of survey shall be required unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. In lieu of satisfying development conditions, the applicant may post a bond or other acceptable security satisfactory to the city in form and amount to secure applicant’s agreement to satisfy development conditions.

H.    A lot line adjustment approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval and if the revised lots are not a matter of record within that one-year period, the approval shall expire. (Ord. 02-1 § 4: prior code § 25.41)

16.08.080 Correction and modification of a recorded, subdivision map.
A.    A recorded final or parcel map may be amended to correct technical errors or omissions as set forth in Government Code Section 66469. The public works director shall have the responsibility to examine the amending map or certificate of correction and make the required certification.

B.    Upon application in writing, minor modifications regarding notes, conditions, etc., on a recorded final or parcel map may be made in accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section 66472.1 in the same manner and by the same body as required for the original subdivision approval, if the following findings are made:

1.    That there are changes in circumstances or the availability of new information which make any or all of the conditions of such map no longer appropriate or necessary;

2.    That the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property;

3.    That the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and

4.    That the map as modified conforms to all the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and local implementing ordinances.

C.    An approved modification shall be reflected by a certificate of correction or amending map as approved by the public works director. (Prior code § 25.152)

16.08.090 Reversion to acreage.
Subdivided land may be reverted to acreage in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Sections 66499.11 et seq. In addition, a parcel map may be filed pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.20 1/4 to revert to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership. The city council may require as conditions of the reversions:

A.    The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements;

B.    The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act or this title;

C.    Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act or this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Prior code § 25.153)

16.08.100 Resubdivision without reversion to acreage.
Previously subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.20 1/2 through compliance with all of the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land. The filing of the final map or parcel map with the office of the county recorder shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of such parcel, and shall constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. (Prior code § 25.154)

16.08.110 Voluntary merger.
Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the planner director may approve the merger of the property without reverting to acreage. Any such request shall be in writing signed by all owners and accompanied by an executed assessor’s combining agreement and such other data, documents or maps as may be required by the planning director to illustrate or legally describe the proposed configuration, dedications, etc. In approving the combination of parcels, the planning director may impose reasonable conditions. The planning director’s decision shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission. The procedure for approval, appeals, and notice of lot line adjustments, set forth in Section 16.08.070(D), (E) and (F), shall be followed for voluntary mergers. Upon approval, the planning director shall file a notice of merger with the county recorder. (Prior code § 25.155)

Chapter 16.12
CONCEPTUAL MAPS
Sections:

16.12.010    Intent of procedure.

16.12.020    Requirement.

16.12.030    Form.

16.12.040    Filing.

16.12.050    Review.

16.12.010 Intent of procedure.
The intent of the city in requiring conceptual maps for certain subdivisions is to facilitate and expedite the filing and approval of tentative subdivision maps required by this title, in an effort to save time and money for the subdivider by providing a mechanism for early design direction and advice to an applicant. (Prior code § 25.46)

16.12.020 Requirement.
A conceptual map shall be required for all subdivisions creating twenty (20) or more lots, or in the case of condominium or conversion projects, twenty or more units, except as provided in Section 16.08.010. Subdividers for subdivisions of less than twenty (20) lots or units may utilize this procedure at their option. (Prior code § 25.47)

16.12.030 Form.
Conceptual maps shall be drawn to a size of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to one inch. If the subdivision includes more than one sheet, the overall design of the subdivision shall be shown on a single twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheet on a smaller scale. Conceptual maps shall contain the following information:

A.    Names and addresses of record owner, subdivider and individual or firm preparing the drawing;

B.    Location, names and widths of adjoining streets;

C.    Location, names and widths of all proposed streets and an indication as to which streets will be dedicated and which ones will be privately maintained;

D.    Proposed lot layout, total number of lots, numbered lots, common and open spaces, and total area of the parcel;

E.    Proposed uses of all land;

F.    Approximate contour lines. U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps may be used when available;

G.    Scale, north arrow and date;

H.    Perimeter boundary width bearings and distances from record information;

I.    An area-wide drawing at a scale acceptable to the public works department showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area, including the approximate contour lines of developable parcels;

J.    Existing easements, structures which will remain on the property and terrain features such as significant trees, watercourses, and other significant physical features;

K.    A statement indicating how water (domestic and fire protection), sewer services and storm drains will be provided, and the type and extent of grading;

L.    Where the area proposed to be subdivided comprises only a portion of the area under the same ownership, the conceptual map shall include additional areas, or all area, under the same ownership and a reasonable development scenario for such additional areas;

M.    If adjacent properties are developable, an area-wide plan showing reasonable street locations and interconnections with those properties;

N.    Other information necessary to complete conceptual review. (Prior code § 25.48)

16.12.040 Filing.
For each subdivision for which a conceptual map is required, the subdivider shall transmit a letter to the planning department accompanied by twenty (20) prints of the conceptual map. Supplemental information may be required to complete staff review. Receipt of the letter, prints of the conceptual map by the planning department, as well as any required supplemental information, and payment of any and all applicable fees as established by resolution of the city council, shall constitute filing for purposes of this section. (Prior code § 25.49)

16.12.050 Review.
The planning department shall transmit copies of the conceptual map to the public works department and other affected departments for review and comment. The planning department shall transmit all comments in writing to the applicant. Review shall include an evaluation of the consistency of the conceptual map with applicable state and local requirements and should be completed within thirty days. Any and all such comments are intended to provide guidance to the subdivider in order to facilitate the filing of a tentative map. The comments shall not be construed as approval of any features set forth on the conceptual map, including, but not limited to, density, lot layout, street layout and width, and open space. The filing of a conceptual map is not a project for the purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Prior code § 25.50)

Chapter 16.16
TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.16.010    General.

16.16.020    Form and contents.

16.16.030    Vesting tentative map.

16.16.040    Submission and filing of tentative map.

16.16.050    Transmittal and review.

16.16.060    Planning commission action.

16.16.070    City council action.

16.16.080    Findings.

16.16.090    Extension of time limits.

16.16.100    Expiration.

16.16.110    Extensions.

16.16.120    Vesting tentative map—Additional time limits.

16.16.130    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.16.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps for five or more parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 25.55)

16.16.020 Form and contents.
A.    Tentative subdivision maps shall be drawn to a size of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to one inch.

B.    Tentative maps shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor as authorized under his or her enabling acts and shall contain the following information:

1.    A site sketch indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or region;

2.    The tract name, date, north point, scale and sufficient boundaries to define the proposed tract;

3.    Names and addresses of record owner, subdivider, engineer or surveyor;

4.    Location, names, present width and grades of adjacent or abutting streets;

5.    Existing topography and proposed changes, including trees, rock formations and other unusual features of the site, and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundary. Individual trees over six inches in diameter, measured four feet six inches above the soil line or natural grade, upon the property proposed for division shall be shown by size and species. Any trees proposed for removal shall also be indicated. Contour lines shall have the following intervals:

a.    One-foot contour interval for ground slope between level and five percent,

b.    Two-foot contour interval for ground slope between five percent and ten percent (10%),

c.    Five-foot contour interval for ground slope greater than ten percent (10%);

6.    Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation of storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses, including tide waters;

7.    Approximate width and location of all existing easements;

8.    Approximate dimensions of all lots, radii of all curves and central angles;

9.    Location of all existing structures identified by type and indicating which are proposed to be removed and which will remain;

10.    Location of building setback line for each stream or river on the site, if applicable;

11.    Location and size of existing sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, wells, and storm drains;

12.    Location of existing overhead utility lines and poles on site and on peripheral streets;

13.    A vesting tentative map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words, “Vesting Tentative Map.”

C.    The following proposed design elements and improvements shall be shown on the tentative map or described on an attached written statement:

1.    Location, names, width, center line radii, pavement and approximate grades of all streets and rights-of-way in the proposed subdivision, including identification of which streets are proposed to be offered for dedication and which are proposed to be privately maintained. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown;

2.    Location, width, and purpose of all proposed easements, clearly indicating whether public or private;

3.    The proposed use of each lot, lot layout and dimensions and area of each lot. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and number of each lot. In hillside areas, potential building sites shall be indicated;

4.    Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for public or private use;

5.    Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use;

6.    Proposed common or open space areas;

7.    The location and size of proposed fire hydrants and fire protection systems, sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. Slopes and elevations of proposed sewers and storm drains shall be indicated;

8.    A conceptual plan for erosion control and fencing;

9.    Identification of proposed drainage and/or flood control.

D.    The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports:

1.    A completed application form;

2.    Name(s) of geologists, soils engineers and other professionals whose services were required in preparation of the tentative map;

3.    If the subdivider plans to develop or record the subdivision in phases, sufficient information about the proposed phases and their proposed sequence so as to allow the city to require construction of improvements in such an order as to ensure logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision;

4.    If the proposal is for the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the report prescribed by Government Code Section 66427.4 on the impact of the conversion upon displaced residents of the park;

5.    A description of prior known development activity on the site such as removal of vegetation, grading, etc.;

6.    Identification and justification for requested exemptions to the requirements of this title, this code, or city standards;

7.    Letters of intent from adjacent property owners whose property is proposed for improvements as part of this subdivision;

8.    A cost estimate for all off-site improvements;

9.    A preliminary title report not more than six months old showing the legal owner(s) and any easements or encumbrances at the time of filing the tentative map;

10.    Unless a waiver is first obtained from the planning director, a plan for erosion control, fire hazard reduction, restoration/management for marsh/wetland habitats, revegetation for wildlife habitats and plant communities, riparian habitat management, and agriculture buffer;

11.    Unless the public works director determines that due to the city’s knowledge as to the soils condition of the site no analysis is needed, a soils and/or geotechnical report in accordance with Section 16.32.220 of this code and the state Subdivision Map Act. Upon application for a building permit, a soils investigation and/or geotechnical report may also be required by the chief building official for development in an area with known or suspected seismic or other earth-related hazards;

12.    For properties in the flood hazard area, a detailed development plan and floodway development analysis showing all elements of subsection B of this section;

13.    For residential subdivisions in the flood evacuation area, a flood evacuation plan;

14.    A copy of proposed deed restrictions;

15.    A written commitment that the subdivider will defend, indemnify and hold city, its agents, officers, and employees harmless from any claim, action or proceeding to attach, set aside, void or annul an approval of city concerning the subdivision so long as the city promptly notifies the subdivider of any such claim, action or proceedings and the city cooperate fully in the defense;

16.    Designation as a remainder of any portion of the land which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing;

17.    A report identifying which, if any, utility poles will be removed and the line segments undergrounded including a preliminary cost estimate;

18.    A statement of the time when improvements are proposed to be completed;

19.    Information as required by the planning director to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act;

20.    Information as required by the planning director to ensure a sufficient water supply for subdivisions as required pursuant to the requirements of Government Code 66473.7;

21.    Other data or information necessary to complete processing of the map and environmental documents.

E.    Upon the written request of the subdivider, the planning director in consultation with the public works director may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the director determines that the type of subdivision does not justify compliance with these requirements, or if the planning director determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. The planning director may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the state Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 02-1 § 5; Ord. 01-6 § 4; prior code § 25.56)

16.16.030 Vesting tentative map.
In addition to the requirements set forth above for a tentative map, a vesting tentative map shall be accompanied by the following, unless waived by the planning director pursuant to Section 16.16.020(E):

A.    Detailed grading plan;

B.    Detailed improvement plans for all streets including curb, gutter and sidewalks, storm drains, sewer and water system and connections and other improvements;

C.    Description of housing type(s) and plans for the structures, including location, size, height, architectural style, materials, elevations, landscaping, fencing and irrigation;

D.    Traffic study.

(Prior code § 25.57)

16.16.040 Submission and filing of tentative map.
A.    No tentative map shall be accepted for processing until the subdivider has completed his or her responsibilities under the conceptual map process, if applicable. No tentative map shall be accepted for processing which is inconsistent with the general and applicable specific plans and zoning unless the subdivider concurrently files the necessary applications to ensure the required consistency.

B.    The subdivider shall, at the time of making application for approval of the tentative map, submit to the planning director twenty (20) prints of the tentative map and such other information which may be required by this title.

C.    The subdivider shall, at the time of making application for approval of a tentative map, pay a deposit on account of the processing fees in an amount established by resolution of the city council. No map will be filed without the required deposit. Thereafter, no action on the map will be taken by the planning commission or the city council unless all accrued fees have been paid. After filing of the final map, and completion and acceptance of all required improvements, any unexpended fees will be returned to the subdivider.

D.    Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for a subdivision, the planning director shall notify the subdivider in writing as to whether such application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the planning director shall inform the subdivider of additional information required or the procedure by which such application can be made complete. Upon receipt of such additional materials a new thirty (30) day period shall begin during which the planning director shall determine the completeness of the application. In the event the planning director notifies the subdivider in writing that the application is still incomplete, the subdivider may, within ten (10) days of the director’s determination, appeal the determination to the planning commission.

E.    Only an application for a subdivision which has been determined or deemed to be complete shall be filed and processed pursuant to the state Subdivision Map Act and this title.

F.    The filing of the application for a tentative map shall not preclude the securing of additional information from the subdivider necessary for the proper consideration of the tentative map nor does it insure that the map complies with the law and with this title. (Prior code § 25.58)

16.16.050 Transmittal and review.
A.    The planning director shall transmit copies of the tentative map to the public works director and affected city departments and public agencies for review.

B.    Within ten (10) days of the filing of a tentative map, the planning director shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the St. Helena Unified School District. Such notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information which would be relevant to the school district. The school board may review the notice and may send a written report thereon to the planning commission and city council. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the school district and shall make such recommendations as the board deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within twenty (20) working days of the date on which notice was mailed to the school district for comment, such failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. (Prior code § 25.59)

16.16.060 Planning commission action.
A.    After a noticed public hearing on the map held within applicable time limits, the planning commission shall adopt findings and recommendations for approval, conditional approval or denial of the map for the city council. At least three days prior to the public hearing, a copy of any staff report on the tentative map shall be delivered to the subdivider. The planning commission, in setting conditions of approval, may not modify or delete any conditions of approval recommended by the public works department.

B.    The planning commission shall make its recommendation in a written report to the city council within fifty days after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. The city shall comply with the time periods referred to in Section 21151.5 of the Public Resources Code. (Prior code § 25.60)

16.16.070 City council action.
A.    The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing to consider the tentative map and the report and recommendations of the planning commission. At the next regular city council meeting following the filing of the planning commission’s report with it, the city council shall fix the hearing date at which the tentative map will be considered by it, which date shall be within thirty (30) days thereafter. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within such thirty (30) day period.

B.    The city council shall make findings and approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map. The city council may impose reasonable conditions for approval of the tentative map and may in its discretion, deny approval of the map if such conditions cannot be met. As a condition of the approval, the city council may require that the payment by a subdivider of development fees required to be paid at some later date, e.g., at issuance of a building permit, be made at the rate in effect at the time of payment.

C.    If during city council review, the city council determines that the design of the subdivision has been substantially changed since review by the planning commission, the city council may refer the revised subdivision to the planning commission for its review and recommendations. In such case, the city council may continue the matter, deny the subdivision without prejudice or allow the subdivider to withdraw the original application and resubmit the revised design.

D.    Copies of the approved tentative map shall remain on file in the planning director’s office. (Prior code § 25.61)

16.16.080 Findings.
A.    In recommending approval or conditional approval or in approving or conditionally approving a tentative map, the planning commission and city council shall find:

1.    That the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and other applicable provisions of this code; and

2.    Except for condominium conversion projects where no new structures are added, that the design of the proposed subdivision provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, as described in the state Subdivision Map Act and any guidelines promulgated by the city council.

B.    In recommending disapproval or in disapproving, or in recommending approval or in approving at a lower density a housing development which is in compliance with the applicable plans, zoning and development policies in effect at the time the project’s application was determined to be complete, the planning commission and city council shall make written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that both of the following conditions exist:

1.    The housing development project would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety unless the project is disapproved or approved upon the condition that the project be developed at a lower density.

2.    There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact identified other than disapproval of the housing development project or approval upon condition that the project be developed at a lower density.

C.    In recommending approval or conditional approval or in approving or conditionally approving a tentative map for the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.4, the planning commission and city council shall be required to:

1.    Take steps to mitigate any significant adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of displaced mobilehome park residents to find adequate space in a mobilehome park by zoning for additional replacement housing;

2.    Find that there already exists land zoned for replacement housing or adequate space in other mobilehome parks for those residents who will be displaced;

3.    Require the subdivider to take steps to mitigate any significant adverse impacts of the conversion on the ability of the displaced mobilehome park residents to find adequate space in a mobilehome park; or

4.    Make a finding, based upon substantial evidence, that mitigation pursuant to subdivisions (1) and (3) of this subsection is not feasible. As used herein, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

D.    The planning commission may recommend denial and the city council may deny approval of the tentative map on any grounds provided by the law including, without limitation, a finding that the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system would result in, or add to, violation of existing requirements prescribed by a state regional water quality control board. A tentative map shall be denied if any of the following findings are made:

1.    That the proposed map is not consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plans, or other applicable provisions of this code;

2.    That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plans, or other applicable provisions of this code;

3.    That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

4.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

5.    That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made pursuant to Section 21081(a)(3) of CEQA that specific economic, social or other consideration make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

6.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

7.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or easements established by court judgment, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that those will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is granted to the planning commission to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

8.    That all requirements of the California Environment Quality Act and the rules and procedures adopted by the city council pursuant thereto have not been met;

9.    That the applicant has failed to submit complete or adequate information;

10.    Subject to Section 66474.4 of the state Subdivision Map Act, that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (commencing with Section 51200 of the Government Code) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use.

E.    Pursuant to the requirements of Government Code 66473.7, the city council and the planning commission shall include as a condition in any tentative map of a qualified subdivision, a requirement that a sufficient water supply shall be available. (Ord. 02-1 § 6: prior code § 25.62)

16.16.090 Extension of time limits.
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and planning commission or city council. A waiver of applicable time limits may be required of the subdivider to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or environmental review on the same project. (Prior code § 25.63)

16.16.100 Expiration.
A.    An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval unless an extension is approved as provided in Section 16.16.110. However, if a subdivider who is filing multiple final maps is made subject to a requirement to construct, improve or finance the construction or improvement of certain public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, as set forth in Government Code Section 66452.6, or if the tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Government Code Section 65864 et seq., then the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Section 66452.6(a) of the state Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in Section 16.16.110.

B.    The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect as provided in Section 66452.6 of the state Subdivision Map Act.

C.    The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the planning commission, as provided in Section 66452.6 of the state Subdivision Map Act.

D.    The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings, and no final map on all or any portion of the real property included within an expired tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. (Prior code § 25.64)

16.16.110 Extensions.
A.    Upon application of the subdivider filed at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration of the tentative map, the time at which such map expires may be extended by the city council for one year, and on further application twenty (20) days before the expiration of the one year extension, the subdivider may request a second one-year extension, and on further application twenty (20) days before the expiration of the second one-year extension may request a third one-year extension. No extension shall be permitted beyond the third one-year extension.

B.    Once an application for extension is timely filed, the map shall be automatically extended as provided in Section 66452.6(e) of the state Subdivision Map Act.

C.    An extension of time may be granted if the city council finds the subdivision, at the time the application for the extension of time is heard, conforms to the then-existing general plan, is consistent with the zoning of the parcels and conforms to the improvement standards that are being imposed upon similar new subdivisions. The city council may condition its approval by subjecting the subdivider to any increase in applicable development fees or to new development fees which have occurred since the approval of the map. (Prior code § 25.65)

16.16.120 Vesting tentative map—Additional time limits.
Approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in accordance with Section 66498.1 of the state Subdivision Map Act. Such rights shall expire one year following the recordation of the final map. Where multiple final maps are recorded on various designated approved phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the time limit set forth herein shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. In accordance with Section 66452.13 of the state Subdivision Map Act, a subdivider may apply for a one-year extension of the initial one-year time period, at least twenty (20) days before the map expires. (Ord. 02-1 § 7: prior code § 25.66)

16.16.130 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
A.    Minor amendments to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, including the conditions of approval, may be approved by the planning director and public works director, provided they find that:

1.    No lots, units or building sites are added;

2.    The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original approval;

3.    There are no resulting violations of the code or state law;

4.    There will be no new significant adverse environmental effects;

5.    Each of the property owners has agreed to the amendments;

B.    Approved amendments shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the planning director.

C.    Amendments which in the opinion of the planning director and public works director are not minor shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map.

D.    Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Prior code § 25.67)

Chapter 16.20
FINAL MAPS
Sections:

16.20.010    General.

16.20.020    Phasing.

16.20.030    Survey required.

16.20.040    Form.

16.20.050    Preliminary submittal for city approval.

16.20.060    Review by public works director.

16.20.070    Approval by public works director.

16.20.080    Approval by city council.

16.20.090    Filing with the county recorder.

16.20.010 General.
The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (Prior code § 25.72)

16.20.020 Phasing.
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the planning director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map in accordance with Section 16.16.020(D)(3). In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. The city council shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After filing of the tentative map application, the planning director, the public works director and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Prior code § 25.73)

16.20.030 Survey required.
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.

At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. (Prior code § 25.74)

16.20.040 Form.
A.    Final maps shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be stamped or printed on the map with opaque ink if the ink surface is coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. The size of the sheets shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches, leaving a margin of one inch on all sides.

B.    The title sheet shall contain the title consisting of the subdivision number and the name of the tract and such name shall not be the same as the name of any existing city, town, tract or subdivision of land into lots, of which a map or plot has been previously recorded, or so nearly the same as to mislead the public or cause confusion as to the identity thereof, and a subtitle or general description of all the property being subdivided by reference to maps which have been previously recorded. In case the property included with the subdivision lies wholly within the corporate limits of the city, the following words shall appear before the title: “In the City of St. Helena”; if partly within the city limits, the following words shall be used: “Lying within and adjoining the City of St. Helena.” Reference to tracts and subdivisions in the description must be worded identically with original records and reference to book and page of record must be complete. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear the number, name, scale, north point, legend, sheet number and number of sheets comprising the map. Below the title shall be clearly noted the basis of bearing for the survey.

C.    When the final map consists of more than two sheets, a key map showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on the first map sheet.

D.    The scale of the final map shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise approved by the public works director.

E.    The map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidences were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block numbers, tract name and place of records, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation.

F.    Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be given as to net dimensions to the boundaries of adjoining streets and shall be shown in feet and hundreds of feet. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show net acreage to nearest hundredths. Bearings and distances of straight lines and such radii and arc lengths for all curves as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves shall be shown.

G.    The boundary of the tract shall be designated by a colored border applied to the tracing. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data.

H.    In any subdivision, all lots shall be numbered consecutively with no omission or duplications throughout the entire subdivision and for future units of any subdivision which has the same tract name but is designated by different units. No block division or numbering is required, but if desired by the subdivider, then each block shall be numbered consecutively. Circles or other geometric figures shall not be drawn around numbers. Each lot must be shown entirely on one sheet.

I.    The map shall show the center and side lines of all streets, the total width of all streets, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedications and the widths each side of the center line, also the width of railroad rights-of-way appearing on the map.

J.    The map shall show the center and/or side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. The easements must be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, its recorded reference given. If any easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easement for storm drains, sewers and other purposes shall be denoted by dotted lines. Distances and bearing on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement must be arrowed or so shown that the map will indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines. The width of the easement and lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly set out in the owner’s certificate of dedication. All notes or figures pertaining to easements shall be considerably smaller and lighter than those relating to the subdivision itself.

K.    The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes and all parcels offered for dedication for any purposes, with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Any or all of the parcels of land intended for any public use, except those parcels, other than streets, intended for exclusive use of the lot owners, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants, in the subdivision shall be offered for dedication for public use. Parcels offered for dedication but not accepted shall be clearly designated as such on the map.

L.    The following certificate and acknowledgments and all others now or hereafter required by law shall appear on the final map, such certificates may be combined where appropriate:

1.    A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the subdivided real properties consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map; provided, however, that the signatures of parties owning the following types of interest may be omitted if their names and nature of their interests are endorsed on the map:

a.    Rights-of-way, easements or other interests, none of which can ripen into a fee, except those owned by a public entity or public utility, in accordance with Section 66936 of the state Subdivision Map Act,

b.    Rights-of-way, easements or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse or laches appear to be no longer of practical use or value and which signature it is impractical to obtain. In this case a reasonable statement of the circumstances preventing the procurement of the signatures shall be endorsed on the map,

c.    Interests in or rights to minerals, including but not limited to oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, if (i) the ownership of such interests or rights does not include a right of entry on the surface of the land; or (ii) the use of the land or the surface thereof in connection with the ownership of such interests or rights is prohibited by zoning or other governmental regulations;

2.    A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, offering for public use those certain parcels of land which the parties desire to dedicate;

3.    A certificate by the civil engineer or the licensed surveyor must be attested unless accompanied by his or her seal;

4.    A certificate for execution by the city engineer;

5.    A certificate for execution by the office of the county recorder;

6.    A certificate for execution by the secretary of the planning commission;

7.    Certificates for execution by the city clerk and county auditors stating that according to the records of the respective offices, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid states, county, municipal or local taxes, or special assessments not yet payable;

8.    A certificate attesting that a tax bond, cash or other securities guaranteed in payment have been filed with the county clerk to cover taxes and assessments against the property which are a lien but are not yet payable;

9.    A certificate for execution by the mayor and the city clerk approving the final map as submitted and accepting, or accepting subject to improvement or rejecting any or all offers of dedication.

M.    Any map including territory originally patented by the United States or the state of California, under patent reserving interest to either or both of these entities, may be recorded under the provisions of this title without the consent of the United States or the state of California thereto or to dedications made thereon.

N.    Additional maps and information may be required to be recorded simultaneously with the final map. At the option of the public works director, the additional information may be on a separate document or additional map sheet. Such information may include, but is not limited to, highway, street and building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping and archeological sites. (Prior code § 25.75)

16.20.050 Preliminary submittal for city approval.
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the public works director for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the public works director and, where applicable, the city attorney:

A.    Title Report. A title report issued by a reputable title insurance company showing the names of all persons having any right, title or interest in the lands proposed to be subdivided at the time of submittal of the final map and whose consent is necessary to convey clear title to the lands;

B.    Fees. All required processing fees and inspection fees;

C.    Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Section 16.32.240;

D.    Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with Section 16.32.220 Chapter 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building (adopted by reference by Section 15.12.010 of this code);

E.    Tax Certificate. A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county;

F.    Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Notarized deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

G.    Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines;

H.    Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all stormdrains and flood flow;

I.    Governing Documents. The submittal of the final map for a common interest development within the meaning of Sections 1350 et seq. of the California Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code. The submittal of the final map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

J.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary;

K.    Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving or other improvements required pursuant to Chapter 16.32 have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.32.250 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.28.090;

L.    Liability Agreement and Insurance. A hold-harmless agreement obligating the subdivider to hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider’s subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. A certificate of insurance reporting to the city the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider’s own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his or her subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional insured. The agreement and certificate required by this subsection shall be subject to prior review and approval by the public works director and city attorney;

M.    Any additional data, reports, or information as required by the public works director or city attorney. (Ord. 02-1 § 8; prior code § 25.76)

16.20.060 Review by public works director.
The public works director shall review the preliminary final map and any other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the public works director. (Prior code § 25.77)

16.20.070 Approval by public works director.
The subdivider shall submit to the public works director the original tracing of the map and any duplicates per county requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blueline duplicate. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the public works director shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the city clerk. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk receives the map. (Prior code § 25.78)

16.20.080 Approval by city council.
A.    The city council shall consider the final map for approval at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map. Before approving the final map, the city council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.32.290.

B.    The city council shall approve the final map if the city council finds that the map meets all the requirements and conditions imposed by the state Subdivision Map Act and by this code, which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of the approval of the tentative map. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make its recommended improvement correction, instruct the public works director to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

C.    If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the city clerk to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. At the time the city council approves the final map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement or reject any offer of dedication. The city clerk shall certify on the final map the action by the city council. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easement, rights-of-way for local transit facilities or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, be resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities or storm drainage easements which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

D.    The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In such a case, the city shall follow the procedure according to Section 16.32.200. (Ord. 02-1 § 9: prior code § 25.79)

16.20.090 Filing with the county recorder.
Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the state Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Prior code § 25.80)

Chapter 16.24
TENTATIVE PARCEL AND PARCEL MAPS
Sections:

16.24.010    General.

16.24.020    Form and contents of tentative parcel map, accompanying data and reports.

16.24.030    Staff review.

16.24.040    Action by planning commission.

16.24.050    City council review.

16.24.060    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.24.070    Expiration and extensions.

16.24.080    Vesting tentative parcel map—Additional time limit.

16.24.090    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel maps.

16.24.100    Parcel maps.

16.24.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal and approval of applications for tentative parcel maps and parcel maps for four or less parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 25.85)

16.24.020 Form and contents of tentative parcel map, accompanying data and reports.
The tentative parcel map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the public works director and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor as authorized under his or her enabling acts. The form, contents, accompanying data and reports shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of Section 16.16.020, unless waived pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 16.16.020(E). (Prior code § 25.86)

16.24.030 Staff review.
The tentative parcel map application shall be filed with the planning department for review and transmittal in accordance with the provisions of Sections 16.16.040 and 16.16.050. (Prior code § 25.87)

16.24.040 Action by planning commission.
A.    Upon receipt of a tentative parcel map application that is determined by the planning director to be complete, the planning department shall prepare a report and set the matter for a public hearing before the planning commission.

B.    The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative parcel map in accordance with the provisions and findings set forth in Section 16.16.080. The planning commission shall take action within fifty (50) days after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. The city shall comply with the time period referred to in Section 21151.5 of the Public Resources Code. (Prior code § 25.88)

16.24.050 City council review.
If a tentative parcel map is approved or conditionally approved, the city planner shall forthwith make a written report thereof to the city council. Any member of the city council shall have the right to call up the tentative parcel map for city council review at a city council meeting or by a request to the planning director, either of which must be within ten (10) days of the final action by the planning commission. If the city council, by a majority vote, decides to review the map, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.04.100. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the city council decides to review the map. The city council may add, modify, or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the tentative parcel map conforms to the state Subdivision Map Act and this code. The city council may deny the tentative parcel map on any of the grounds contained in Section 16.16.080(D). Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. (Prior code § 25.89)

16.24.060 Appeals of planning commission action.
The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by a planning commission action with respect to the tentative parcel map may, within fourteen (14) days after the decision, file an appeal in writing with the planning director. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the subdivider consents to a continuance. The appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given according to Section 16.04.100. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The city council may add, modify, or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the tentative parcel map conforms to the state Subdivision Map Act and this code. The city council may deny the tentative parcel map on any of the grounds contained in Section 16.16.080(D). Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. (Ord. 16-7 § 2: prior code § 25.90)

16.24.070 Expiration and extensions.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from its approval by the planning commission or city council, whichever occurs last, unless the expiration date is extended in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.100. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.110, except that the planning commission shall be responsible for the review of the request. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request for an extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal the action of the planning commission to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.24.060. (Prior code § 25.91)

16.24.080 Vesting tentative parcel map—Additional time limit.
Approval of a vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in accordance with section 66498.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act. Such rights shall expire one year following the recordation of the parcel map. (Ord. 02-1 § 10: prior code § 25.92)

16.24.090 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel maps.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map or conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with Section 16.16.130, except that amendments which in the opinion of the planning director and public works director are not minor shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative parcel map. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative parcel map. (Prior code § 25.93)

16.24.100 Parcel maps.
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and this section.

A.    Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in accordance with Section 16.20.030.

B.    Form and Contents. The form and contents of the parcel map shall conform to the final map form and contents requirements of Section 16.20.040.

C.    Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer, accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by Section 16.20.050. The city engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. The city engineer may waive any of the requirements of Section 16.20.050 upon finding that the location or nature of the proposed subdivision does not justify compliance.

D.    Review and Approval by Planning Commission. The subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the parcel map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the planning department, which shall agendize the parcel map for the next succeeding regular planning commission meeting. The planning commission shall review and approve the parcel map and any subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with Section 16.20.080 and shall have all of the powers and duties of the city council as set forth in that section.

E.    City Council Review. If a parcel map is approved by the planning commission, the city planner shall make a written report thereof to the city council. Any member of the city council shall have the right to call up the parcel map and any subsection improvement agreement for city council review at a city council meeting or by a request to the planning director, either of which must be within fourteen (14) days of the final action by the planning commission. If the city council, by a majority vote, decides to review the map it may do so at the same meeting or within thirty (30) days after the city council decides to review the map. The city council shall affirm the planning commission’s approval of the parcel map and any subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with Section 16.20.080.

F.    Appeals of Planning Commission Action. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by a planning commission action with respect to the parcel map must file an appeal in writing with the planning director within fourteen (14) days of the decision. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the subdivider consents to a continuance and shall affirm the planning commission’s approval of the parcel map and any subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with Section 16.20.080.

G.    Recordation. Upon approval of the construction drawings and the parcel map and receipt of the subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the State Subdivision Map Act, transmit the approved parcel map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Ord. 16-7 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 02-1 § 11: prior code § 25.94)

Chapter 16.28
DEDICATIONS, FEES AND RESERVATIONS
Sections:

16.28.010    Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way and transit facilities.

16.28.020    Waiver of direct street access.

16.28.030    Dedications.

16.28.040    Parkland dedication and fees.

16.28.050    School site dedication.

16.28.060    Dedication of solar easements.

16.28.070    Dedication of access to public resources.

16.28.080    Reservations.

16.28.090    Bridge crossing and major thoroughfares fees.

16.28.100    Storm drainage and sanitary sewer fees.

16.28.110    Supplemental improvement capacity.

16.28.120    Interim classroom facilities.

16.28.010 Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way and transit facilities.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of the following:

A.    All land within the subdivision that is needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutter’s rights, drainage, water, sewer, public greenways, open space, scenic easements, public utility easements and other public easements;

B.    All land within the subdivision that is needed for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items which directly benefit the resident of a subdivision;

C.    When implementation of the general plan would require the development of a bikeway, equestrian, hiking or other recreational or transportational trails and paths in the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate such land as is necessary and feasible to provide for such trails and paths. (Ord. 02-1 § 12: prior code § 25.99)

16.28.020 Waiver of direct street access.
The city may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any property within the subdivision and abutting thereon. (Prior code § 25.100)

16.28.030 Dedications.
All dedications of property to the city for philanthropic purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, in the city’s discretion, a grant of an easement may be taken. All easements must be of sufficient width so as to allow proper maintenance and protection of the facility. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city, in its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The city may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication of fee title. All dedications shall be made at the time of filing the final or parcel map. (Prior code § 25.101)

16.28.040 Parkland dedication and fees.
A.    Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the park and recreation policies and standards adopted by the city council, which are an element of the St. Helena general plan, adopted by the city on April 23, 1991.

B.    Requirements. At the time of approval of the tentative map, or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to subsection D of this section the land required for dedication or amount of in lieu fee payment. As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

C.    General Standards. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that three acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within this city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes.

D.    Formula for Dedication of Land. Where a park or recreation facility has been designated in the St. Helena master park and recreation plan, or is required in accordance with the parks and recreation subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision.

The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows:

Average No. of Persons/Unit x

3 acres

= minimum acreage dedication

1,000 pop.

(Example for single-family dwelling unit (DU):

2.54 x

3 acres

= .0076 acres/(DU)

1,000

The following table of population density has been established pursuant to Section 66777(a)(2) of the Government Code:

Park Land Dedication Formula Table

Types of Dwellings

Average Density D/U*

Average/DU (3.00 ac.std.)

Single-family detached

2.54

.0076

Single-family attached (condominium)

2.19

.0066

Duplex

1.92

.0058

Apartments -

 

 

3 or 4 units/bldg.

2.02

.006

Apartments — 5 or more units/bldg.

1.79

.0054

Mobilehomes

1.75

.0053

*    From 1990 Federal Census.

Dedication of the land shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in subsection K of this section.

For the purposes of this subsection, the number of new dwelling units shall be based upon the number of new parcels indicated on the map when in an area zoned for one dwelling unit per parcel. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for more than one dwelling unit or parcel, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum allowed under that zone. In the case of a condominium project, the number of new dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units. The term “new dwelling unit” does not include dwelling unit lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is filed.

The subdivider shall, without credit:

1.    Provide full street improvements and utility connections, including but not limited to curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic-control devices, street trees and sidewalks to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section;

2.    Provide for fencing along the property line of that portion of the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land;

3.    Provide improved drainage through the site; and

4.    Provide other minimal improvements which the city council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational purposes, including but not limited to removal of debris, clearing of the site, and temporary hydroseeding.

The location, size and configuration of the land to be dedicated and the improvements to be made pursuant to this section shall be approved by the parks and recreation commission and the city council.

E.    Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.

1.    General Formula. If there is no park or recreation facility designated in the St. Helena master park and recreation plan or required in accordance with the parks and recreation element of the St. Helena general plan, to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee. The fee shall be equal to the value of that land, plus twenty percent (20%) toward costs of improvements, prescribed for dedication in subsection D of this section. The value of the land shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G of this section. Such fee shall be used for a local park which bears a reasonable relationship to serve present and future residents of the area being subdivided. For the purposes of this section, “improvements” are defined as those improvements which would have been required if land had been dedicated using the provisions of subsection D of this section.

2.    Fees in Lieu of Land—Fifty (50) Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains fifty (50) parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value, plus twenty (20) percent toward costs of improvements, of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection D of this section, and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G of this section. However, when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50). Further, nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes such dedication voluntarily and the land is acceptable to the city council.

3.    Use of Money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring necessary land and developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision.

F.    Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. In subdivisions of more than fifty (50) parcels, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following formula:

1.    When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed on the St. Helena master park and recreation plan or is required in accordance with the parks and recreation element of the St. Helena general plan, as the site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection G of this section shall be paid for the value of any additional land, plus twenty percent (20%) toward costs of improvements, that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection D of this section.

2.    When a major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection G of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land, plus twenty percent (20%) toward costs of off-site improvements, which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection D of this section. Such fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreation facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreation facilities in the area serving the subdivision.

G.    Amount of Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication. When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication pursuant to subsection D of this section, plus twenty (20) percent toward costs of improvements, such as extension of utility lines. The fee shall be determined by the following formula:

DUs

x

Pop
DU

 

3 acres
1,000 people

x

FMV Buildable Acre

x

 

=

subtotal in lieu fee

x

6/5 = in lieu fee

Where

DUs = Number of dwelling units as defined in subsection D of this section

Pop = Population per dwelling unit as defined in

DU = subsection D of this section

FMV = Fair market value, as determined by subsection H of this section

Buildable Acre = A typical acre of the subdivision, with a slope less than ten percent (10%), located in other than an area in which building is excluded because of flooding, easements or other restrictions

Fees to be collected pursuant to this section shall be approved by the parks and recreation commission and the city council.

H.    Determination of Fair Market Value. The fair market value shall be determined by the city with a written appraisal report prepared and signed by an appraiser acceptable to the city. The appraisal shall be made immediately prior to the filing of the final map. The appraisal costs shall be paid by the subdivider. The subdivider shall notify the city of the expected filing date at least six weeks prior to filing of the final map. If more than one year elapses prior to the filing of the final map, the city will prepare a new appraisal and will bill the subdivider for the cost of the reappraisal. For the purpose of this subsection, the determination of the fair market value of a buildable acre, as defined in subsection G of this section, shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:

1.    Approval of and conditions of the tentative subdivision map;

2.    The general plan;

3.    Zoning;

4.    Property location;

5.    Off-site improvements facilitating use of the property;

6.    Site characteristics of the property.

I.    Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

1.    The natural features, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

2.    The size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

3.    The feasibility of dedication;

4.    The compatibility of dedication with the St. Helena master park and recreation plan; and

5.    The location of existing and proposed park sites and trailways.

The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

J.    Credit for Private Open Space. No credit shall be given for private open space or recreational facilities in the subdivision except as hereinafter provided. Where private open space usable for active recreational purposes is provided in a proposed planned development, real estate development, stock cooperative or community apartment project, as defined in Sections 11003, 11003.2, 11003.4 and 11004, respectively, of the Business and Professions Code, or condominiums, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent (50%), may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met:

1.    Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open spaces required by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space;

2.    Private park and recreation facilities shall be owned by a homeowners’ association composed of all property owners in the subdivision and being an incorporated nonprofit organization capable of dissolution only by a one hundred percent (100%) affirmative vote of the membership, operated under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner in the neighborhood is automatically a member, and each lot is subject to a charge for a proportionate share of expenses for maintaining the facilities, or subject to a covenant running with the land requiring continued operation by the developer or owner;

3.    Use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreation purposes by a recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor;

4.    The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, including recreational community gardening, children’s play apparatus areas, picnic areas, hiking, jogging and bicycle trails and paths, or landscaped exercise areas, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location;

5.    Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreation element of the general plan; and

6.    The open space for which credit is given is generally a minimum of three acres and provides all the local park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreation improvements that will meet the specific recreation needs of future residents of the area:

a.    Recreational open spaces, which are generally defined as park areas for active recreation pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball and football, and have at least one acre of maintained turf with less than five percent slope,

b.    Court areas, which are generally defined as tennis courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts or similar areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games,

c.    Recreational swimming areas, which are defined generally as fenced areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving, spas or all three. They must also include decks, lawn area, bathhouses or other facilities developed and used exclusively for swimming and diving and typically consisting of no less than fifteen (15) square feet of water surface area for each three percent of the population of the subdivision, with a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of water surface area per pool, together with an adjacent deck and/or lawn area twice that of the pool,

d.    Recreation buildings and facilities and designed and primarily used for the recreational needs of residents of the development,

e.    Children’s play facilities such as slides, swings, climbing structures and sandboxes.

The determination of the city council as to whether credit shall be given and the amount of credit shall be final and conclusive.

K.    Procedure. At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine, pursuant to subsection D of this section, the land required for dedication. If the city council requires in-lieu fee payment by the subdivider, the amount of the in-lieu fee will be based upon the land required for dedication as determined by subsection D of this section.

At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land or pay the fees as required by the city council as established at the time of tentative map or parcel map approval. In-lieu fees shall be based on current land values at the time of final map approval with the formula set forth in subsection G of this section. The city council shall set the in-lieu fee based on the fair market value of the land as determined using the process set forth in subsection H of this section.

The subdivider shall pay one-half of the fees prior to recordation of the final map and the remaining one-half shall be paid on a lot-by-lot basis and prior to the issuance of any building permit for any building or structure to be located upon any one of the lots in the subdivision, until all required fees have been paid.

Open space covenants for private park or recreation facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map or parcel map.

L.    Disposition of Fees. Fees determined pursuant to subsection G of this section shall be deposited into the subdivision park fund, or its successor. Money in that fund shall be expended solely for acquisition, development or rehabilitation of park land or improvements related thereto.

1.    Collected fees shall be appropriated by the city to serve residents of the subdivision in a budgetary year within five years upon receipt of payment or within five years after the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later.

2.    If such fees are not so committed, these fees, less an administrative charge, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision.

3.    The city treasurer shall report to the city council at least annually on income, expenditures and status of the subdivision park fund.

M.    Exemptions. Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this section; provided, however, that a condition shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit.

The provisions of this section do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions; nor do they apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old from the date of certificate of occupancy when no new dwelling units are added.

The city council may, upon receipt of a written request, waive the requirements of this section for those dwelling units which are to be built as affordable units as defined by the city’s growth management plan.

N.    Subdivider-Provided Park and Recreation Improvements. The value of park and recreation improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land shall be credited against the fees or dedication of land required by this section. The city council reserves the right to approve such improvements prior to agreeing to accept the dedication of land and to require in-lieu fee payments should the land and improvements be unacceptable.

O.    Access. All land offered for dedication to local park or recreational purposes shall have access to at least one existing or proposed public street. This requirement may be waived by the city council if the city council determines that public street access is unnecessary for the maintenance of the park area or use thereof by residents.

P.    Sale of Dedicated Land. If during the ensuing time between dedication of land for park purposes and commencement of first-stage development, circumstances arise which indicate that another site would be more suitable for local park or recreational purposes serving the subdivision and the neighborhood (such as receipt of a gift of additional park land or a change in school location), the land may be sold upon the approval of the city council. The resultant funds shall be used for purchase of a more suitable site. If the city determines to dispose of the property, the subdivider or the subdivider’s successor shall have a right of first refusal to purchase the property at fair market value.

Q.    Development Agreement. Except as expressly prohibited by Section 66477 of the California Government Code, the terms and procedures of this section may be waived or modified by development agreement adopted pursuant to Section 65864 et seq., of the California Government Code. (Ord. 02-1 § 13; prior code § 25.102)

16.28.050 School site dedication.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within the St. Helena Unified School District shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the planning commission or city council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of construction thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.

B.    The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map or tentative parcel map. If, within thirty (30) days after the requirement of the dedication is imposed by the city, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with or up to sixty (60) days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

C.    The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1.    The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2.    The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3.    Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

D.    The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten (10) years prior to the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map. (Prior code § 25.103)

16.28.060 Dedication of solar easements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 66475.3 of the State Subdivision Map Act, a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision of any solar energy system, as defined in Section 801.5 of the California Civil Code. In establishing such easements, consideration shall be given to feasibility, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time such tentative map or tentative parcel map is filed.

At the time of tentative map or tentative parcel map approval, the planning commission or city council, as the case may be, shall specify the following:

A.    The standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of such easements;

B.    Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects which would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement;

C.    The terms of conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or terminated.

The foregoing provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building where no new structures are added. (Prior code § 25.104)

16.28.070 Dedication of access to public resources.
A subdivider shall be required to dedicate easements to provide public access to or along the shore lines of public natural resources, including a public waterway, river or stream, lake or reservoir, and coastline or shoreline in accordance with the criteria set forth in Government Code Sections 66478.4—66478.14. (Prior code § 25.105)

16.28.080 Reservations.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, the planning commission or city council may require the subdivider to reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B.    Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown on any applicable specific plan or the general plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the principles and standards contained in the plans or implementing laws. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the plans and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.    The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.

E.    If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (Prior code § 25.106)

16.28.090 Bridge crossing and major thoroughfares fees.
A.    The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a parcel or final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the state Subdivision Map Act.

B.    Whenever the following words are used in this section, they shall have the following meaning:

1.    “Construction” means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction.

2.    “Major thoroughfare” means a roadway as shown on the circulation element of the general plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a circulation network for the city.

C.    Whenever this section refers to the circulation element of the general plan or to the transportation or flood control provisions thereof, it shall mean the circulation element of the general plan and the transportation and flood control provisions thereof heretofore adopted by the city pursuant to Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the state Government Code, together with any additions or amendments thereto adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

D.    Prior to filing a parcel or final map which includes land within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned to the property pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares.

E.    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, unless such fees have been paid pursuant to subsection D of this section.

F.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections D and E of this section:

1.    Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.

2.    Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit.

G.    Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public hearing shall be held by the city council, at which time the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment, and the fee to be collected, shall be established. The notice of such hearing shall contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and the method of fee apportionment.

H.    At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner of property to be benefited by the improvement may file a written protest against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be benefited by the improvements or against both of them. Such protest must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify the same and if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protest shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protest or objections shall be considered. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owner’s making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing.

I.    If there is written protest filed with the city clerk by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvements under the provision of this section. If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the city council may commence new proceedings not including any part of the improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of a portion of the improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition.

J.    If the city council finds that a majority protest has not been made, they shall make the determinations required by subsection G of this section and decide whether or not to confirm the area of benefit. The city council shall announce its decision by resolution, which shall be recorded with the office of the county recorder. There is established fees for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing the bridge or thoroughfare as described in such resolution as the city council may adopt pursuant to this section. The fees and the area of benefit to which such fees are apportioned shall be established as set forth in the resolution. Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as condition of approval of a parcel or final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof.

K.    Notwithstanding the provision of subsection J of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required for:

1.    The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, the total value, as determined by the planning director, of all such alteration, enlargement or construction completed within any one-year period does not exceed one-half of the current market value, as determined by the planning director, of all existing building on such lot or parcel of land, and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the Uniform Building Code;

2.    The following accessory buildings and structures: private garages, children’s playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings.

L.    Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a parcel or final map or a building permit, the planning commission, in the case of subdivision of four or less parcels, or the city council, in the case of subdivision of five or more parcels, may accept consideration in lieu of fees required pursuant to this section, provided:

1.    The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, finds upon recommendation of the public works director the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and

2.    The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council or planning commission, as the case may be. (Prior code § 25.107)

16.28.100 Storm drainage and sanitary sewer fees.
The city council may impose fees authorized by Sections 66483 et seq. of the state Subdivision Map Act by adopting an ordinance in conformance with the requirements set forth therein. (Prior code § 25.108)

16.28.110 Supplemental improvement capacity.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the city shall, subject to the provisions of Sections 66486 and 66487 of the state Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements.

B.    The city council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1.    The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use;

2.    The contribution to the subdivider of that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse the city for such costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider;

3.    The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited.

C.    No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by the city council pursuant to Section 16.04.100 and the city council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

D.    In addition to the notice required by Section 16.04.100, written notice of the hearing shall be given to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date established for the hearing. (Prior code § 25.109)

16.28.120 Interim classroom facilities.
The city may require a subdivider to dedicate land or pay fees instead, or a combination of both, for interim classroom and related facilities for elementary or high schools to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development, in conformance with Government Code Sections 65970 through 65980. (Prior code § 25.110)

Chapter 16.32
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.32.010    Amount of security.

16.32.020    Release of security.

16.32.030    Bonds for repair or reconstruction of defective work.

16.32.040    General requirements.

16.32.050    Lot design.

16.32.060    Circulation and traffic.

16.32.070    Drainage.

16.32.080    Grading.

16.32.090    Landscaping.

16.32.100    Energy conservation.

16.32.110    Fire protection.

16.32.120    Underground utilities.

16.32.130    Scenic areas.

16.32.140    Resource areas.

16.32.150    City water supply.

16.32.160    Sewage disposal.

16.32.170    Minimum subdivision elevation.

16.32.180    Fencing.

16.32.190    Monuments.

16.32.200    Off-site improvements.

16.32.210    Public service facilities.

16.32.220    Soils investigation and geotechnical report requirements.

16.32.230    Construction of improvements—Compliance required.

16.32.240    Improvement drawings and plans.

16.32.250    Revisions to approved plans.

16.32.260    Inspections required.

16.32.270    Deficiency list.

16.32.280    Acceptance of improvements.

16.32.290    Improvement agreements.

16.32.300    Time of completion.

16.32.310    Deferred improvement agreements.

16.32.320    Improvement security.

16.32.010 Amount of security.
Whenever security is required by law, ordinance, rule, regulation, contract or otherwise for construction of public improvements to be dedicated to the city, the improvement security shall be in the amounts and for the following purposes:

A.    An amount determined by the city council, not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the improvement, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the required improvements; and

B.    An additional amount determined by the city council, not less than fifty percent (50%) of the total estimated cost of the improvement securing payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors and the persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for the improvement. (Prior code § 2.80)

16.32.020 Release of security.
A.    Improvement security given for faithful performance may, in the city’s discretion, be released upon final completion and acceptance of the work and no partial releases shall be given.

B.    Improvement security securing payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials may, in the city’s discretion, six months after the completion and acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if there are no actions filed, the improvement security may, in the city’s discretion, be released in full. (Prior code § 2.81)

16.32.030 Bonds for repair or reconstruction of defective work.
Whenever security is required by law, ordinance, rule, regulation, contract or otherwise for repair or reconstruction of defective work on public improvements after completion and acceptance, the improvement security shall be in the amount and for the following purposes: an amount determined by the city council, not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total estimated cost of the improvement, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such repair or reconstruction of defective work. (Prior code § 2.82)

16.32.040 General requirements.
A.    The design and improvement of each subdivision shall comply with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, this title, this code, other city ordinances and resolutions and all city standards and specifications.

B.    The design and improvement of each subdivision shall incorporate all mitigation measures, conditions and requirements identified in the environmental document adopted for the project in any plan prepared for the subdivision pursuant to the conservation and safety and floodplain regulations of the zoning ordinance.

C.    Deed restrictions when required shall run with the land and be enforceable by subsequent owners of property lying within the subdivision. When deemed necessary to effectuate conditions on approved maps, the city shall be named a third party beneficiary of those restrictions and the restrictions shall be filed concurrently with the map and noticed in the owner’s certificate.

D.    To the extent legally feasible, the subdivider shall assure long-term maintenance of the improvements by use of a homeowner’s association, maintenance agreement, participation in established maintenance district, or other similarly enforceable vehicle approved by the city attorney.

E.    No final map or parcel map shall be approved until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do the work. (Prior code § 25.115)

16.32.050 Lot design.
A.    Minimum lot size, lot width, and depth, shall conform to the standards established by the city’s zoning regulations and other applicable laws and regulations.

B.    Building setback lines shall conform with the standards of the zoning ordinance.

C.    The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to any street upon which the lot faces unless the public works director determines that a variation from this condition will give a better street and lot plan.

D.    Double frontage lots less than two hundred (200) feet in depth shall be avoided except where the planning director finds such lots essential to provide separation of residential developments and traffic arterials or where required by unusual topographic conditions.

E.    Long blocks shall generally be encouraged adjacent to main thoroughfares for the purposes of reducing the number of intersections. (Prior code § 25.116)

16.32.060 Circulation and traffic.
A.    The subdivision shall be consistent in concept, alignment and level of improvement with the circulation element of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan, as well as any street connection policy. Where necessary to ensure traffic safety and ease of circulation, off-site and on-site site traffic control devices and improvements, such as signing, striping, signalization, traffic islands, channelization, access limits and provisions, turn lanes, etc. shall be required. On-site parking shall be required to meet zoning regulations.

B.    Satisfactory access to the subdivision and to each lot shall be provided by public streets meeting all applicable standard specifications. Subdivisions with streets longer than five hundred (500) feet may be required to provide multiple access. Access shall be deemed satisfactory only if it will allow reasonable ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, in the event a public street is not necessary for future street connections, a private street may be permitted upon a finding by the planning commission or city council that a private street is justified because of the topography or other natural features of the land or because of limitations imposed by adjacent developed property. In such case the subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for maintenance of, and parking enforcement on, such private street(s), which shall be subject to the approval of the public works director and city attorney.

C.    All streets shall be designed and constructed to ensure the public health, safety and welfare, and to meet the relevant standards set forth in the public works and fire department specifications, and CalTrans standard specifications. In addition:

1.    Where a subdivision abuts upon a street or highway of importance, the public works director may require parallel service roads and may limit the right of access to the street or highways.

2.    The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate geometric section to the centerline of the street, including street structure section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions. Where necessary to provide adequate circulation and safety, two-way traffic flow shall be provided by sufficient pavement construction beyond the centerline of the street.

3.    All streets shall, as far as practicable, be in alignment with existing and adjacent streets by continuation of center lines, or by adjustment by curves, and shall be in general conformity with the plans made for the most advantageous development of the area in which the subdivision lies. Streets shall be required to intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as is practicable in each specific case. Where a street joins acreage, provision may be required for adequate street access thereto.

D.    Pedestrian, equestrian and bike paths may be required to provide access to schools, parks, rivers and other public areas, to conform to the general plan or to assure the public health, safety and welfare.

E.    All street names and numbers shall be approved by the fire chief and the public works director. Duplication of existing names shall not be allowed. Streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall have the same name. Street name signs of an approved type shall be located at all street intersections. Additional regulatory, warning and informational signs shall be installed as required by the public works director.

F.    Unless waived by the planning director, a landscape plan for the public right-of-way, including street trees of an approved type shall be submitted by the subdivider for the approval of the planning director.

G.    All streets shall have adequate street lights installed according to a plan approved by public works director.

H.    Driveways shall be designed and improved in such a way as to preserve the public health, safety and welfare considering such factors as terrain, grade lengths, etc.

I.    Bridges shall be designed and constructed to meet the weight and width requirements of the public works and fire department standards, and applicable CalTrans standards.

J.    Provision shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulations within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the State Public Utilities planning commission for the establishment of a public crossing. All costs necessitated by the establishment and improvement of such crossings shall be borne by the subdivider. (Prior code § 25.117)

16.32.070 Drainage.
A.    Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drainage system. The storm drainage system shall be designed by a registered civil engineer for ultimate development of the watershed and shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff generated by a ten (10) year flood. The system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that may be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. In addition, retention ponds, drainage swales and/or check dams may be required to reduce off-site peak storm flow generated by projects to the historic flow.

B.    Improvements shall be designed to meet the public works standard specifications. Drainage improvements for runoff shall be engineered to minimize erosion through the use of rocked culvert inlets and outfalls, energy reducers, the correct location of culverts, etc. Design features shall include reseeding exposed slopes as well as minimizing the use of artificial slopes. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. (Prior code § 25.118)

16.32.080 Grading.
A.    Development shall maximize retention of natural landforms such as rolling hills, ridgetops, areas of extensive vegetation and water courses. Grading shall not produce large flat planes or sharp angles or intersection with the natural terrain. Slopes shall be rounded to blend with existing terrain.

B.    Grading plans shall be required for all subdivisions. When necessary, the plan shall provide for both on-site and off-site grading and shall be submitted as part of the subdivision’s improvement plan. No grading shall be commenced until the tentative map or tentative parcel map has been approved and a grading permit is issued. Issuance of building permits or release of security for improvement agreements may be conditioned upon receipt of approved written assurance by a registered civil engineer that the lot grading and building pad elevations have been done in conformance with the approved plan and/or geotechnical requirements. (Prior code § 25.119)

16.32.090 Landscaping.
A landscaping plan may be required for subdivisions and shall be required for back-on treatment, common or dedicated open space and where necessary to prevent erosion or to replace vegetation lost during construction. In all subdivisions, existing trees shall be preserved where feasible. (Prior code § 25.120)

16.32.100 Energy conservation.
The design of the subdivision shall provide, in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the state Subdivision Map Act and to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. (Prior code § 25.121)

16.32.110 Fire protection.
A.    Each subdivision shall provide all necessary protective measures and facilities, such as fire hydrants, and shall be designed in accordance with the city’s standard specifications and the board of fire underwriters. Location of fire hydrants shall be as specified by the fire chief and public works director.

B.    Commercial subdivisions shall provide sufficient water capacity, flow and storage to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Prior code § 25.122)

16.32.120 Underground utilities.
A.    All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision, including, but not limited to electric, communication and cable television lines, shall be placed underground except:

1.    Facilities exempted by the public utilities planning commission;

2.    Metal poles supporting only street lights;

3.    Surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts, in commercial or industrial subdivisions only;

4.    Upon approval of the public works director, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes in residential subdivisions.

For the purpose of this section, the subdivision boundary shall be considered to be the centerline of the street or streets adjacent to the subdivision.

B.    No additional poles shall be installed outside of the subdivision in order to comply with this section unless specifically approved by the public works director. This may require undergrounding to the nearest existing poles beyond the subdivision boundaries and/or undergrounding, with the owner’s approval, of existing overhead services to properties on the opposite side of the street.

C.    The city council may waive the undergrounding requirement for existing overhead transmission and distribution lines for tentative maps and the planning commission may waive such requirement for tentative parcel maps upon finding that:

1.    The length of the required undergrounding of existing overhead facilities on peripheral streets is less than two hundred (200) feet; and

2.    It is unlikely that additional undergrounding will occur on adjacent properties within ten (10) years because of the development presently existing on adjacent properties; and

3.    The visual burden of leaving the utilities above ground will be insignificant.

As a condition of such waiver, the city may require that conduits for future undergrounding be included within designated streets within the subdivision. The waiver shall not apply to services to the subdivided property.

D.    The undergrounding of existing overhead transmission and distribution lines in residential subdivisions of four or fewer parcels in which one or more of the proposed parcels have the potential for further subdivision may be deferred by the subdivider upon approval of the public works director until such time that the future subdivision occurs.

E.    Connections for all utility lines placed under streets shall be extended to the right-of-way line and their location shall be marked upon the curb or sidewalk. All such lines shall be installed prior to final street paving. (Prior code § 25.123)

16.32.130 Scenic areas.
In areas such as ridges, hilltops, properties zoned WW, and other scenic areas, development shall ensure adequate mitigation for protection and/or preservation of the scenic resources. Development shall be encouraged to use the form of the land and vegetation to ensure separation of building areas and minimal exposure from roads or other building areas. The use of plantings, generally trees, consistent and compatible with those of the area may be required to mitigate the extent of exposure of the development area in conjunction with land forms, existing vegetation and other features. Screening required for shielding of development areas, not necessarily the immediate house site, shall consist of natural materials of the area, preferably using natural vegetation or land form modification to conform to the natural terrain. (Prior code § 25.124)

16.32.140 Resource areas.
Subdivisions affecting resources described in the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or the zoning ordinance, shall be subject to the following requirements:

A.    Design of projects shall recognize the environmental resource characteristics of the site and be designed in such a manner to allow for the preservation and continued production of the particular resource.

B.    Development shall not adversely affect the natural course of riparian habitat of any intermittent, seasonal, or permanent waterway. Mitigation measures shall be required where development may result in impacts to such areas.

C.    Development shall not adversely affect tidal marshes, freshwater marshes, estuaries, or marine waters. Impact upon these areas by a project shall be mitigated.

D.    Development shall not adversely affect areas identified as significant wildlife habitat, and impacts upon these areas by a project shall be mitigated.

E.    Extensive changes or removal of vegetation shall demonstrate minimal adverse impacts on micro-climate conditions. Erosion protection and vegetation shall be required in the event of vegetation removal.

F.    Whenever significant archeological or paleontological sites may be located within the project area, an appropriate survey by qualified archaeologists shall be made and mitigation measures implemented prior to development of the site.

G.    Development shall not adversely affect the existing volume of any body of water, substantially increase chemical or nutrient pollution, or otherwise contribute to the deterioration of the quality and quantity of water in any body of water.

H.    Where any of the proposed lots adjoins an agricultural pursuit, the city may require an increased building setback line of those lots to protect the agricultural operation and/or residential neighbors.

I.    Development shall not adversely affect any historic site located within the proposed development and impacts shall be mitigated.

J.    A resource management/restoration plan may be required and suggested measures implemented. (Prior code § 25.125)

16.32.150 City water supply.
A.    All new subdivisions, except in areas designated woodlands and watershed in the general plan, shall be required to connect to the city water system. If an auxiliary water supply will also be used, backflow prevention devices shall be installed to isolate the auxiliary supply from the city’s supply. Water service shall be brought to the property line of each lot being served and for residential lots shall be no more than one inch service. Commercial and industrial services shall be no more than two inches for domestic use and six inches for fire protection, unless alternative installation measures are approved by the public works director. A minimum fifteen (15) foot-wide waterline easement is required for all water facilities outside the public street right-of-way.

B.    In the event there is inadequate pressure to serve the subdivision, the subdivider shall install those facilities required to ensure adequate pressure including, but without limitation, pumps, water tanks, hydro-pneumatic tanks, etc., in accordance with the water division’s master plan.

C.    All water mains shall be of C900 PVC CL150 and shall be of no less than eight-inch diameter. The water division may permit six-inch diameter mains in areas where fire hydrants are not required and the water main will not be extended for future use. (Prior code § 25.126)

16.32.160 Sewage disposal.
All new subdivisions shall be required to connect to the city’s sanitary sewer system, except for the following situations;

A.    Single-family residential subdivisions of four parcels or less may utilize a septic disposal system, if approved by the department of environmental health, providing that the minimum parcel size is five acres and the overall density is not greater than one unit per five acres.

B.    Septic tanks shall be installed under inspection by the department of environmental health, in which case a letter shall be submitted by the health officer stating his or her findings and setting forth recommendations on the ultimate subdivision layout.

C.    Areas designated woodlands and watershed in the general plan, upon approval of the city engineer. (Prior code § 25.127)

16.32.170 Minimum subdivision elevation.
No residential lot may be created by subdivision which will be subject to periodic inundation or overflow from storm drainage or floodwaters. The building floor elevations shall be not less than the minimum building floor elevation established by the floodplain regulations of the zoning ordinance. The public works director may require that the top of the curb elevations be designed so as to ensure adequate evacuation of persons by automobile in the event of a one hundred (100) year flood. All elevations shall be referenced to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey or to elevations established by the public works director. (Prior code § 25.128)

16.32.180 Fencing.
Each parcel or lot within the subdivision that is adjacent to property containing a public facility shall have an approved fence adequate to prevent unauthorized access between the properties. A fence of adequate height shall be constructed by the subdivider along all property lines where a condition hazardous to persons or property may exist. (Prior code § 25.129)

16.32.190 Monuments.
A.    Permanent monuments, constructed in accordance with the standard specifications, shall be installed in all new streets and in existing streets adjacent to subdivisions and as directed by the public works director.

B.    Permanent monuments shall be located on all street intersections and center lines, not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart on tangents and at all beginnings and ends of curves. If the point of intersection of the tangents of the curb falls within the paved street area, the monument may be located at the intersection in lieu of the beginning and end of the curve. On long curves, monuments shall be located within the paved street area and on a clear line of sight. On streets extended to subdivision boundaries, monuments shall be installed when the length of the street exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet.

C.    When permanent monuments cannot be located on street center lines due to existing or proposed utilities, they shall be located ten (10) feet south or ten (10) feet west of the above stated center lines, except as follows:

1.    They shall be offset ten (10) feet on the radial line at the beginning and end of the curve.

2.    On long curves, they shall be offset radially within the paved street area, maintaining a clear line of sight.

3.    At the end of a cul-de-sac, they shall be offset ten (10) feet perpendicularly or radially.

4.    At the end of the stub streets, they shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the end of the paved area.

D.    Monuments not less substantial than a three-quarter-inch diameter galvanized iron pipe with a survey tag or other noncorrodable cap permanently attached thereto, not less than thirty (30) inches in length and driven flush with the surface of the ground, shall be set at all angles and curve points on the exterior boundary of the subdivision and as required by the public works director. If monuments are required to be set below the surface of the ground, the depth to the top of the monument shall be stated on the final map. Boundary monuments may be required to be more substantial than the minimum requirements specified in this section due to unusual circumstances, and suitable monuments shall be installed in these cases as directed by the public works director. Concrete monuments, if required, shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications without the frame, cover and concrete collar.

E.    The corners of each lot in the subdivision shall be marked in a manner acceptable to the public works director.

F.    No person shall remove or disturb, or cause to be removed or disturbed, any monument, azimuth, reference or witness mark set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or subdivision or as a benchmark or as a control monument.

G.    In the event it becomes necessary to remove or disturb a monument, the person so requesting shall first obtain permission in writing from the public works director. (Prior code § 25.130)

16.32.200 Off-site improvements.
If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within one hundred twenty (120) days of filing the final or parcel map, acquire the land by negotiation or commence condemnation, pursuant to Government Code Section 66462.5. If the city fails to meet the one-hundred-twenty (120) day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the final or parcel map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into a deferred improvement agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city council or planning commission, as the case may be, acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. (Ord. 02-1 § 14: prior code § 25.131)

16.32.210 Public service facilities.
Where a public service facility such as a fire station, library, police substation, etc., is shown on the general plan or applicable specific plan containing a community facility or public building element, the subdivider shall construct or contribute to the construction of such facility in accordance with the principles and standards contained in the plans or implementing regulations. (Prior code § 25.132)

16.32.220 Soils investigation and geotechnical report requirements.
A.    The soils investigation required by Section 16.16.020 shall include the following:

1.    Field exploration, including test borings and soil samples in sufficient number and extent, in the opinion of the geotechnical engineer, to adequately evaluate the surface and subsurface soil nature, distribution and strength for the development proposed;

2.    Testing of soil samples by an approved testing laboratory to provide the parameters required by the geotechnical engineer to complete the report;

3.    A log of all borings, classifying the soil strata by type and depth, to be included in the report.

B.    The geotechnical report required by Section 16.16.020 shall include the following:

1.    The nature and extent of any seismic or geologic hazard, the effect of the seismic or geologic conditions on the proposed development, and an assessment of the risk such hazards pose the occupants of the proposed project;

2.    An assessment of existing slope stability;

3.    Measures needed to mitigate seismic or geologic hazards and to reduce identified hazards to acceptable risk levels in the opinion of the geotechnical engineer.

Recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for erosion control and corrective measures shall be included;

4.    Recommendations for site design to minimize seismic or geologic hazards and erosion;

5.    Data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, building foundation and roadway design criteria, surface and subsurface drainage criteria and recommended provisions by the geotechnical engineer;

6.    Recommendations for supervision and observation of grading and other recommended construction work;

7.    A plan which shall be drawn to scale, and shall be of sufficient size and clarity to show existing details and the nature and extent of all proposed improvements. The plan shall include the following information:

a.    Name and address of owner,

b.    Name, address, professional status, license number, and phone number of the person who prepared the plan,

c.    Location and assessor’s parcel number of the proposed site,

d.    North arrow, scale and the name and location of the nearest public road intersection,

e.    Existing contours of the site. Contours shall be sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site (generally at two-foot intervals),

f.    Delineation of fault zones, land slides and areas of instability. Delineations of springs or other subsurface water conditions,

g.    Location of any buildings, structures, trees, and other landscape features on the property and the locations of any buildings, structures or trees on adjacent property within fifteen (15) feet of adjoining property lines,

h.    Proposed measures to mitigate any seismic or geologic hazards including building setbacks, foundations, surface and subsurface drainage devices, grading, erosion control, retaining walls, special construction techniques, etc.,

i.    Phasing of proposed work, as appropriate;

8.    A statement by the engineer regarding the suitability of the subdivision design for the site.

C.    The geotechnical engineer shall review and approve the final drawings for grading and other geotechnical work for the subdivision as to compliance with the recommendations of his or her report. All grading and geotechnical related work during construction shall be performed under the observation of the geotechnical engineer, and subject to periodic testing as recommended in the geotechnical report.

D.    Upon completion of all grading and geotechnical construction work, the geotechnical engineer shall submit a final as-built plan describing, in detail, all work performed, reconciling the actual work performed with the plans if different, and expressing a professional opinion that all required work was satisfactorily completed. The final plans shall be submitted to the public works director prior to the occupancy of any structures on any lots created by the subdivision. (Prior code § 25.133)

16.32.230 Construction of improvements—Compliance required.
All streets, drainage facilities, water distribution and fire protection facilities, sanitary sewer facilities and other required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this title and with the following specifications, as applicable: the public works standard specifications, CalTrans standard specifications, the American Water Works Association Board of Fire Underwriters. A copy of each such standard specifications is on file in the public works department. No final map or parcel map shall be forwarded to the county recorder’s office until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such work. (Prior code § 25.138)

16.32.240 Improvement drawings and plans.
A.    Improvement drawings shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer and shall be submitted as part of the checkprint submittal to the public works director along with the required checking fee deposit. Construction activities may not take place until all improvement plans and specifications have been approved and the required number of drawings submitted. Approval by the public works director shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvement and any deficiencies or adverse effects resulting from the design and construction of the improvement.

B.    An improvement plan shall be acted on within sixty (60) working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen (15) working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty (60) working-day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by other than the city or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction.

C.    The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements, both public and private, including common areas. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be required shall be submitted with the improvement plans. Upon completion of the review, one set of the checkprint plans, with the required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer.

D.    After completing all required revisions, the subdivider’s engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the public works director for signature. Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and conditions of approval of the tentative map or tentative parcel map, the public works director shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer. A copy of the approved plans shall remain on file in the office of the public works director. (Prior code § 25.139)

16.32.250 Revisions to approved plans.
A.    Requests by the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the public works director or authorized representative and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the originals shall be submitted to the public works director’s office for initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider’s engineer and copies of the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the public works director. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and approved.

B.    When revisions are deemed necessary by the public works director to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing indicating the revisions shall be made to the subdivider and engineer. The subdivider’s engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the public works director for initialing within the time specified by the public works director. Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider’s engineer shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the public works director. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the public works director until revised drawings have been submitted and approved. The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the public works director to the city council by filing a written appeal within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

C.    Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised prints and applied toward the actual costs. (Prior code § 25.140)

16.32.260 Inspections required.
All improvements are subject to inspection by the city. The city shall, upon not less than three working days’ advance notice or request, make such inspections as are requested and as are deemed necessary to ensure that all construction is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in no case shall such inspection be less than:

A.    The inspection of all underground utility, water, sewer, drainage and fire service lines;

B.    An inspection of the subgrade prior to placing the rock base;

C.    An inspection of road base prior to placing of roadway surfacing;

D.    An inspection of paving;

E.    The inspection of concrete forms;

F.    The inspection of the pouring of any concrete;

G.    A final inspection of the grading;

H.    A final inspection upon completion of all improvements within the subdivision.

The subdivider shall notify the public works director upon the completion of each stage identified in this section and shall not proceed until the subdivider has received the authorized approval. (Prior code § 25.141)

16.32.270 Deficiency list.
A.    Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the city for a preliminary final inspection. The public works director or authorized representative shall schedule a preliminary final inspection. A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items is excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final inspection may be halted and rescheduled on a date as determined by the public works director or authorized representative. When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the subdivider for correction.

B.    Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as outlined by the deficiency list, the subdivider shall certify in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The public works director or authorized representative shall then make a final inspection.

C.    The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the subdivider from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered. (Prior code § 25.142)

16.32.280 Acceptance of improvements.
A.    When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans filed, those subdivision improvements which will be dedicated to the city may be considered for acceptance.

B.    If the offers of dedication on the final or parcel maps have been rejected, the city council (for subdivision for which a final map is required) or the planning commission (for subdivision for which a parcel map is required) shall accept the improved dedications and the city council’s resolution of acceptance or the planning commission’s certificate of acceptance shall be filed with the county recorder.

C.    If the offers of dedication on the final or parcel map have been accepted subject to improvement, the public works director shall file a notice of completion with the county recorder.

D.    Acceptance of improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that they have been accepted for public use. (Prior code § 25.143)

16.32.290 Improvement agreements.
If the required improvements are not satisfactorily completed before the filing of either the final map or the parcel map, the subdivider and owners of the subdivision shall, prior to or concurrently with the approval of such map, enter into an agreement with the city, agreeing to have the work completed within the time required, and specifying that should such work not be satisfactorily completed within the time limit, then the city may complete or have completed all specified improvements and be completely reimbursed for the same by the subdivider and owner of the subdivision. Any such improvement agreement shall be approved as to form by the city attorney and shall at a minimum provide:

A.    Construction of all improvements in accordance with the approved plans;

B.    Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 16.32.300;

C.    Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

D.    Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city’s established fees and charges;

E.    Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes thereof for one year following acceptance of the improvements;

F.    Improvement and warranty security;

G.    Release and indemnification of the city from all liability incurred in connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorney’s fees that the city may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising from the development;

H.    Engineer’s certifications of approved construction;

I.    Payment of all required fees, including, without limitation, park dedication fee, traffic mitigation fees, etc.;

J.    Agreement to be financially responsible for all required city services provided to the subdivision’s residents prior to acceptance by the city. (Prior code § 25.144)

16.32.300 Time of completion.
A.    Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels.

1.    The subdivider shall complete the improvements for a subdivision of five or more parcels within twelve (12) months, or a time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed thirty-six (36) months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the city council.

2.    The subdivider shall complete improvements before final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit in the subdivision.

3.    If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may by resolution of the city council and at its option cause the uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the performance security shall be bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B.    Subdivision of Four or Less Parcels.

1.    The completion of improvements for divisions of four or less parcels is not required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a lot within the subdivision is applied for. However, the city may require completion of the improvements by a specified date when it finds that the completion of the improvements is necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. The city engineer may make this finding. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement.

2.    The subdivider shall complete improvements before final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit in the subdivision.

C.    Extensions.

1.    The completion date may be may be extended by the city council, for subdivisions of five or more parcels, or by the planning commission, for subdivisions of four or less parcels, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

2.    If approved, the subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. For subdivisions of four or less parcels, the same procedure shall be followed, except that the agreement shall be considered by the planning commission.

3.    If an extension for a subdivision of four or less parcels is approved or conditionally approved, the planning department shall make a written report thereof to the city council prior to the extension agreement being executed by the city clerk, and the city clerk shall not execute that agreement if it is called up by the city council until the city council has completed its review as set forth herein. Any member of the city council shall have the right, at a city council meeting held within ten (10) days of the final action by the planning commission to call up that agreement for city council review. If the city council by a majority vote, decides to review the agreement and conditions, it may do so at the same meeting or within thirty (30) days after the date of the request for review. The city council may add, modify or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the agreement conforms to the state Subdivision Map Act and this code. The city council may deny extension of the agreement on any of the grounds contained in this title. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the agreement shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code and the general plan.

4.    In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the city may require the following:

a.    Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

b.    Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;

c.    Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

d.    Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund;

e.    The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements.

5.    The subdivider shall pay the cost incurred by the city in processing the extension request and extension agreement. (Prior code § 25.145)

16.32.310 Deferred improvement agreements.
A.    Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels. The frontage improvements along peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the city engineer. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the city, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future as specified by the city. The city clerk shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. The agreement shall provide for the following:

1.    Construction of improvements shall commence within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city and shall be completed within the time specified by Section 16.32.300;

2.    That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of such cost and expense until paid;

3.    That the agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment;

4.    That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney’s fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

5.    That the terms “subdivider” and “owner” include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it;

6.    Any other improvement security as required by Section 16.32.320;

7.    Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and this code.

The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the state Subdivision Map Act, this code or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this title and all applicable articles of this code in effect at the time of construction.

B.    Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder. The improvements shall be at the subdivider’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final or parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1.    The public health and safety; or

2.    The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Prior code § 25.146)

16.32.320 Improvement security.
A.    General. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the state Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Sections 66499 et seq. Of the state Subdivision Map Act and as provided below. No final map or parcel map may be approved until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B.    Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:

1.    Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the state Subdivision Map Act;

2.    A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

3.    An instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment;

4.    Any other form of security as provided in Section 66499 of the state Subdivision Map Act.

C.    Amount of Security. Except for qualified nonprofits as defined by Government Code Section 66499.3(c), security to guarantee the performance and payment shall be in the following amounts:

1.    A performance bond or other security in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee performance.

2.    A payment bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee payment to subdivider’s contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements.

3.    The estimate of improvements costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for:

a.    Not less than five percent nor more than ten percent (10%) of the total construction cost for contingencies;

b.    Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction;

c.    All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation;

d.    In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured.

D.    Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the city not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) cash for subdivision of four or less parcels, and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for other subdivisions, or an additional amount as required by the city engineer, not to exceed one percent of the total estimated construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unexpected amount will be returned to the subdivider at the time all bonds and other security are released.

E.    Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period, which shall be the period of one year following the completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period.

F.    Reduction in Performance Security. The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than ten percent (10%) of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the state Subdivision Map Act, this code or the improvement agreement.

G.    Release of Improvement Security.

1.    Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

2.    Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city, after the passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Sections 3114-3118 of the Civil Code. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given. If no claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full.

3.    Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

a.    All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected;

b.    Not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city. (Ord. 02-1 § 15: prior code § 25.147)

Title 17
ZONING
Chapters:

17.04    General Provisions and Definitions

17.08    Administrative Procedures

17.12    Zoning and General Plan Amendment Procedures

17.16    Zoning Districts Generally

17.20    Twenty-Acre Agriculture (A-20) District

17.24    Winery (W) District

17.28    Agricultural Preserve (AP) District

17.32    Low Density Residential (LR) District

17.36    Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-1A) District

17.40    Medium Density Residential (MR) District

17.44    High Density Residential (HR) District

17.48    Central Business (CB) District

17.52    Service Commercial (SC) District

17.56    Business and Professional Office (BPO) District

17.60    Industrial (I) District

17.64    Woodlands and Watershed (WW) District

17.68    Public and Quasi-Public (PQP) District

17.72    Parks and Recreation (PR) District

17.76    Open Space (OS) District

17.80    Rural-Residential Overlay (RR) District

17.84    Specific Plan Overlay (SP) District

17.88    Flood Plain Overlay (FP) District

17.92    Historic Preservation Overlay (HP) District

17.96    Planned Development Overlay (PD) District

17.100    Mobilehome Park Overlay (MHP) District

17.104    Parking Impact Overlay (PI) District

17.108    Drainage Improvement Benefit Zone

17.112    General Site Design and Development Standards

17.116    Accessory Buildings, Structures, Dwellings and Uses

17.120    Walls, Fences and Hedges

17.124    Parking and Loading Requirements

17.126    Marijuana Facilities

17.128    Adult Entertainment Facilities

17.132    Bed and Breakfast Inns

17.134    Short-Term Rentals

17.136    Miscellaneous Provisions

17.140    Nonconforming Uses, Buildings, Structures, Lots and Signs

17.144    Affordable Housing

17.146    Housing Trust Fund, Housing Impact Fee and Inclusionary/In-Lieu Fee Requirements

17.148    Signs

17.152    Residential Growth Management System

17.156    Development Agreements

17.160    Condominium Conversions

17.164    Design Review

17.168    Use Permits

17.172    Variances

17.176    Reimbursement for Public Improvements

17.180    Small Wineries

17.190    Beekeeping

17.200    Reasonable Accommodation

APPENDIX

I.    Regulated Food and Beverage Establishments Inventory

II.    Hotels, Motels and B & B Inventory

Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

17.04.010    Short title and citation.

17.04.020    Purpose.

17.04.030    Nature of the zoning ordinance.

17.04.040    Compliance generally.

17.04.050    Permits, approvals and licenses to conform to code.

17.04.060    Interpretation.

17.04.070    Rules governing use of zoning map and symbols.

17.04.080    Principles and standards of the zoning ordinance.

17.04.090    Relationship to the general plan.

17.04.100    Cultivated agricultural use within established zoning districts.

17.04.110    Determination of violation.

17.04.120    Violation—Penalty.

17.04.130    Issuance of stop orders.

17.04.140    Administrative enforcement proceedings.

17.04.150    Remedies are cumulative.

17.04.160    Definitions.

17.04.010 Short title and citation.
These regulations, Title 17 of the St. Helena Municipal Code, shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of St. Helena” or “zoning ordinance.” (Ord. 02-6 § 1: prior code § 27.1)

17.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this title, the zoning ordinance, is to:

A.    Protect and promote the public health, safety, morals, peace, prosperity and general welfare;

B.    Encourage orderly, compatible and beneficial uses of land;

C.    Minimize conflicts which might result from incompatible and inappropriate land uses;

D.    Maintain and enhance the desirable character of the city and its various neighborhoods and areas;

E.    Lessen congestion on streets;

F.    Prevent and lessen the human and property loss resulting from fires;

G.    Facilitate the provision of adequate community facilities such as schools, parks, streets, fire protection and other public requirements;

H.    Provide open space for light and air;

I.    Protect agricultural soils, vegetation, wildlife and other natural resources from incompatible and deleterious activities;

J.    Preserve, protect and enhance the environment of the city;

K.    Provide for a variety of housing types and housing opportunities; and

L.    Otherwise promote the general community welfare in accord with the general plan of the city. (Prior code § 27.2)

17.04.030 Nature of the zoning ordinance.
The zoning ordinance of the city consists of a map depicting the various districts and a set of regulations controlling uses, locations, height, bulk, open spaces, appearance of certain buildings and structures, dimensions of lots, densities of certain developments, on-site parking, conservation and utilization of natural resources, protection of environmental resources, together with procedures for these regulations. (Prior code § 27.3)

17.04.040 Compliance generally.
A.    Except as otherwise provided by this title, no use shall be commenced on or in any land, building, or premises unless the use is either a permitted or conditional use for the zoning district in which the use is to be located and, if listed as a conditional use, unless the required use permit has been received. No use shall be commenced or maintained except in accordance with the regulations for the zoning district in which the use is or will be located and the use is in conformance with the conditions, mitigation measures, and project description of each required permit, approval, clearance or agreement.

B.    No building or structure shall be erected, remodeled, enlarged, rebuilt, or moved, except in conformity with the regulations for the zoning district in which the building or structure is or will be located, and in conformity with the conditions, mitigation measures and project description of each required permit, approval, clearance or agreement.

C.    Where conflict occurs between the regulations of this title and the building code or other regulations effective within the city, the more restrictive regulation shall apply except in areas of building and site design where the design review provisions shall apply.

D.    Except as otherwise authorized by the city council, the city shall not process any application for a permit, approval or clearance that is sought pursuant to this title (including, without limitation, a use permit, variance, zoning amendment, or general plan amendment) for any property found in violation of this title until the violation is corrected. (Prior code § 27.455)

17.04.050 Permits, approvals and licenses to conform to code.
A.    All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, approvals, clearances, or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this code and shall issue no such permit, approval, clearance, or license for uses, buildings, or any purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this code. Such permit, approval, clearance, or license, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this code, shall be null and void.

B.    Except as otherwise authorized by the city council, the city shall refuse to issue any permit, approval, or clearance that is sought pursuant to this title, including zoning clearance for a building permit or a home occupation permit where the existing or proposed use, building or structure has been found to be in violation of this code. (Prior code § 27.456)

17.04.060 Interpretation.
No matter how carefully constructed, the zoning ordinance will require interpretation in its day-to-day administration. In adopting the zoning ordinance it is the intent of the city to interpret and administer the zoning ordinance in a reasonable fashion consistent with the public interest of the residents of the city. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements guided by the following:

A.    Where this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other rules, regulations or ordinances the provisions of this title shall control.

B.    Where provisions of this title are in conflict, the more specific regulations shall apply over the more general; where provisions of this title remain in conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Prior code § 27.4)

17.04.070 Rules governing use of zoning map and symbols.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following property, street or alley, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B.    In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map.

C.    A symbol indicating the classification of property on the zoning map shall in each instance apply to the whole of the area within the district boundaries.

D.    Where a public street, alley or parcel of land is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply equally to such vacant or abandoned street or alley.

E.    Where one land ownership is divided by a district boundary the total ownership may be placed in either district by approval of a variance application. (Prior code § 27.5)

17.04.080 Principles and standards of the zoning ordinance.
The zoning ordinance is based on the general plan of the city and has been prepared in accordance with the following principles and standards:

A.    The zoning ordinance is based on the general plan of the city.

B.    Each principal zone is exclusive with respect to every other zone in order to protect all uses from other uses which are unrelated or incompatible.

C.    Site area, setback, yard, use and other development and design standards contained in the zoning ordinance are based on contemporary planning practices.

D.    Certain uses which may by their nature or location adversely affect nearby uses unless designed, situated in specific locations or operated in a particular manner shall be permitted only as conditional uses subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. Conditions for the design, location and operation of such uses may be specified by the planning commission as appropriate.

E.    This title includes procedures for the review and approval of large scale, integrated, mixed use or other innovative projects. (Prior code § 27.5)

17.04.090 Relationship to the general plan.
A.    It is the policy of the city as expressed in the general plan that the zoning ordinance be consistent with the general plan. For this purpose consistency is achieved when the various land uses authorized by this title are compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan.

B.    In accord with this policy, the zoning ordinance is intended to implement the general plan of the city as expressed in the text, maps and diagrams of all elements of the general plan taken together. In determining consistency, the compatibility and timing of proposed developments and other uses of land shall be considered pursuant to the policies of the general plan.

C.    This title recognizes the supremacy of the general plan. If an inconsistency between the zoning ordinance and the general plan should for whatever reason arise, the general plan shall prevail over the zoning ordinance; the city, shall, in good faith, make every effort to resolve the inconsistency within a reasonable period of time. Any amendment of this title shall be consistent with the general plan. (Prior code § 27.7)

17.04.100 Cultivated agricultural use within established zoning districts.
It is the policy of the city as expressed in the general plan to recognize and provide for cultivated agriculture within the city limits. Cultivated agricultural uses are permitted within the A-20 zoning district and regulated by use permit in the woodlands and watershed zoning district. It is the intent of the city to allow cultivated agricultural uses including, but not limited to, farming, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture, but excluding animal husbandry and livestock farming, in all zoning districts within the urban limit line prior to establishment of urban land uses. Allowing cultivated agriculture within the urban limit line shall not compromise the long-term objective of providing for designated urban uses. Water used for cultivated agriculture shall be in conformance with Section 13.04.100 of this code. (Prior code § 27.8)

17.04.110 Determination of violation.
The city planner, fire chief, building official or other code enforcement official may conduct any investigation necessary to determine whether persons are complying with this title, including the terms, conditions, mitigation measures, or project descriptions incorporated into any permit, approval or clearance issued pursuant to this title. (Prior code § 27.457)

17.04.120 Violation—Penalty.
A.    No person shall violate or fail to comply with any term, condition, mitigation measure or project description incorporated into any permit, approval or clearance granted pursuant to this title. Violation of, or noncompliance with, any term, condition, mitigation measure or project description incorporated into any permit, approval or clearance granted pursuant to this title is unlawful and declared a public nuisance.

B.    Any building set up, erected, built, or moved, and any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title, is unlawful and declared a public nuisance. The city may immediately commence any action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code or state law.

C.    Any persons, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such persons shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, considered to be any time period within a day when a violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person. (Prior code § 27.458)

17.04.130 Issuance of stop orders.
A.    Whenever the city planner, fire chief, building official or other code enforcement official determines that a violation of this title exists, each such official is authorized to issue stop orders to prohibit further construction or use of any land, building, or premises which are in violation of this title. The stop order shall be served by posting a copy on the premises which is the location of the violation or which is the subject of the permit or approval issued by the city. In addition, a copy of such stop order shall be personally served on the owner or responsible person or mailed to the owner or responsible person at the address shown on the current planning department records or on the current records in the office of the Napa County assessor. Such order shall become effective immediately upon posting.

B.    After service of a stop order, no person shall perform any act in violation of the terms of the stop order, except such actions as are determined by the city planner, fire chief, building inspector, or other code enforcement official to be necessary to correct the violation or to render the premises safe and secure, until such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the person serving the stop order.

C.    Within ten (10) days after the posting of a copy of the order on the premises, any person adversely affected by the terms of the stop order may appeal such order to the city council, which shall hold a hearing and make such decisions as may be appropriate in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code.

D.    The property owner and responsible person shall be liable for all processing costs, including attorney fees, incurred by the city in carrying out this section, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 17.08.190. (Prior code § 27.459)

17.04.140 Administrative enforcement proceedings.
Whenever the planning director or building official determines that a violation of this title exists or where the operation of a use is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, such person may refer the matter to the planning commission for a public hearing for the revocation or modification of any permit, approval or clearance, or such determination or enforcement as may be appropriate under the circumstances. The following provisions shall be observed in the conduct of administrative enforcement proceedings:

A.    Notice of any administrative enforcement hearing shall be given to the public in the same manner as generally provided for public hearings pursuant to Section 17.08.070.

B.    Where an enforcement proceeding has been commenced by the city, the city has the burden of demonstrating that a violation has occurred or that the operation of the use is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. Where the party against whom the enforcement proceeding has been directed raises a defense, such as a prior nonconforming use, that party has the burden of proving the defense.

C.    Public hearings shall be conducted in the manner generally provided for public hearings.

D.    If the planning commission determines that there has been a violation of this title or that the use has been conducted in such a way as to be detrimental to the public’s health, safety or welfare, the planning commission may make any order it deems appropriate under the circumstances, including the revocation or modification of permits or approvals previously issued and/or the referral of the matter to the city attorney for the initiation of any criminal or civil proceeding that may be deemed appropriate. Any action taken by the planning commission shall set forth the following:

1.    The municipal code section, permits or approvals violated and/or a statement describing the detrimental effect found upon public health, safety or welfare;

2.    The ultimate facts upon which the determination or violation and/or detrimental effect is based;

3.    The action(s) ordered to be taken; and

4.    In the event the planning commission chooses to modify a permit or approval, the modifications including any new conditions to be imposed to ensure that violation or the detrimental effect will cease and will not be repeated.

E.    The acts and determination of the planning commission or designated hearing officer shall be appealable to the city council pursuant to the terms of Section 17.08.180.

F.    The property owner and responsible person shall be liable for all processing costs, including attorney fees, incurred by the city in carrying out this section, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 17.08.190. (Prior code § 27.460)

17.04.150 Remedies are cumulative.
All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. In addition, the remedies set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code are available. (Prior code § 27.461)

17.04.160 Definitions.
A.    General.

Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “used” includes arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used or occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. Whenever any of the following terms is used, it shall mean the corresponding officer or designated representative, department, board or commission of the city.

B.    Definitions.

The words below shall have the following definitions:

“Abut” means bordering on.

“Accessory use, building or structure” means a use, building or structure both subordinate to and incidental to the principal use, building or structure on the same lot.

“Addition” means a building or structure added to the original structure at some time after the completion of the original structure.

“Affordable” (as in affordable housing) means housing which is available for purchase or rent to households with median or below-median incomes based on standards established by the state of California using data provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Agency” means an office or commercial establishment in which goods, materials or equipment is received for servicing, treatment or processing elsewhere.

“Agent (or owner)” means any authorized person acting for the property owner or applicant.

“Agricultural employee” means a person engaged in agriculture, as defined in California Labor Code Section 1140.4.

“Agriculture” means the use of the land for agriculture purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture (including Christmas trees), floriculture, viticulture, apiaries and animal farms; but not including stockyards or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.

“Alley” means a public or private way or lane less than forty (40) feet in width which affords only secondary access to abutting property.

“Alteration” means any change, addition or modification in construction.

“Amendment” means a revision, addition, or deletion in the wording of this title, or the general plan; or a change in the zone classification or zoning district boundary upon the zoning map, or a change in the land use designation upon the general plan map.

“Animal” means any mammal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other creature or any live vertebrate creature other than a human being.

“Animal farm” means any premises on which the primary use is the breeding, raising or maintaining of animals for sale or where the primary income from the premises is derived from the aforesaid occupation. For the purposes of this title, animals shall include cattle, horses, sheep, rabbits, poultry and the like, but not hogs.

“Annexation” means the addition of parcels into the city with a resulting change in the boundaries of the city.

Apartment. See “Dwelling, multiple-family” in this section.

“Applicant” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or any entity, combination of entities or consortium who seek approval of a city permit, license or other entitlement for use of property.

Application, complete. “Complete application” means an application shall be deemed complete when it contains all maps, drawings and other information requested by the planning department and, where necessary, an environmental assessment.

“Attic” means a room or space immediately below the roof of a building that is not habitable and is utilized only for storage. The area must be unconditioned, unfinished area less than seven feet at its highest point with an average height not exceeding four feet.

“Automobile, truck trailer, recreation vehicle, mobilehome, motorcycle and boat sales” means an open or enclosed area used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreation vehicles, mobilehomes, motorcycles and boats in operable condition.

“Awning” means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building, shielding a doorway or window from the elements.

“Back-on or side-on treatment” means a combination of landscaping, generally ten (10) feet wide and fencing, with a height generally greater than three and one-half feet and not exceeding six feet, that has received design review approval to be located in a required rear or side setback.

“Balcony” means a platform, enclosed by a parapet or railing, projecting from an exterior wall of a building.

“Bar” means a commercial establishment for the on-site sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.

“Basement” means any floor level below the first story in a building in which the finished floor level directly above is less than four feet above finished grade on all sides. If the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade, as defined herein, at any point such basement shall be considered a story.

“Bed-and-breakfast inn” means a building which provides guests rooms and breakfast for guests and which is managed and occupied by the owner of the property.

“Bedroom” means any habitable room with no less than seventy (70) square feet of floor area and no dimension less than seven feet in a dwelling other than bathroom(s), kitchen, living and dining room. Unless specifically designed to exclude its use as a bedroom (e.g., no closet, enlarged entryway without doors, no windows open to the exterior, etc.), any den, study or other room meeting the above definition of a bedroom shall be considered a bedroom for the purpose of meeting the regulations and standards of the code.

“Block” means the collection of assessor’s parcels that share the same block number on the Napa County assessor’s map.

“Boat dock” means a landing pier for boats; a wharf; a structure supported by pilings or floats in such a manner as to allow free flow of water beneath it and on which any buildings constructed are incidental to the use of the structure as a wharf or landing pier.

“Branch bank” means a banking facility generally subsidiary to a central or headquarters bank. Such branch banks may or may not offer the full range of banking services; are located primarily for service and convenience to a particular neighborhood service area.

“Breezeway” means a roofed or trellised open passage with a minimum width of four feet connecting two buildings.

“Building” means a structure intended for any use or occupancy with substantial walls and roof.

“Building area” means the portion of a lot where the principal building can be located and does not include the setback(s) and yard(s) required by the zoning district in which the lot is located.

“Building coverage” means the land area covered by all buildings on a lot, including all projections except eaves.

“Building face” means the outer surface of a main exterior wall of a building. For example, a building with a rectangular plan has four exterior walls and four building faces.

Building, height of. “Height of building” means the vertical distance from “average grade,” as defined herein, to the highest point of the roof, ridge or parapet wall. In calculating the height of a stepped or terraced building, the height of each individual segment of the building shall first be calculated; the height of a stepped or terraced building is the height of the tallest segment of the building.

Building official, chief. “Chief building official” means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the building, housing, plumbing, electrical and related codes, as provided by the St. Helena Municipal Code.

“Building plane” means an imaginary flat surface measured from a property line which regulates the relationship between the height of a building or structure and the distance to a property line; used primarily to provide a buffer between residential and nonresidential uses or lower density residential from higher residential development. A building plane is described as a ratio between the horizontal or run (in feet) and vertical or rise (in feet) (e.g., a two to one slope (expressed as 2:1) shall mean two horizontal feet to one vertical foot).

Building, Principal or Building, Main. “Principal building” or “main building” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is located.

“Building site” means the land area occupied by, or capable of being covered by, all structures permissible under this title.

“Bulk” means total volume as measured from the exterior surfaces of a building or structure.

“Bulk storage” means the storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other materials in aboveground containers for subsequent resale to distributors or retail dealers or outlets.

“Canopy” means a structural, ornamental roof-like appendage, freestanding or attached to a building, including roof overhangs, but excluding awnings or metallic hoods.

“Caretaker residence” means a building which is used as a residence by a security guard or caretaker of a use, which is located on or adjacent to the premises occupied by the use, and which is reasonably necessary to provide adequate security for the use.

“Carport” means a roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and open on one or more sides.

“Car wash” means a building or site, or portion thereof, designed and intended for washing motor vehicles; whether designed as a principal or an accessory use, and attended or unattended.

Center Line. See: “Street, center line of.”

Club, Private. “Private club” means a facility owned or operated by the members of an organization for living or recreational purposes, for the benefit of the members or their guests. The term includes country clubs, tennis and swim clubs, social clubs, athletic clubs, fraternal lodges, fraternity and sorority houses, and the like.

“Commercial or C-district” means any principal zoning district, which is primarily oriented toward commercial activities; this term shall include the BPO district.

Commission, Planning. “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of St. Helena.

“Community care facility” means any facility, place, or building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day care, or home-finding agency services for children, adults or children and adults, including but not limited to the physically handicapped, mentally impaired or incompetent persons. This definition and all other definitions relating to community care facilities shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with definitions found in state law or state administrative regulations.

“Conditional use” means a use, structure or other development for which a conditional use permit is required.

“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property together with a separate interest in space or a portion of such real property in a residential, industrial, or commercial building or such real property, such as an apartment, office or store.

“Congregate housing” means a type of housing for the elderly where meals are provided in communal dining facilities and which may include housekeeping, recreation and other services as a part of an overall package of services.

“Construction work” means any work for which a building permit is required, and also includes grading, landscaping and the erection, installation or painting of signs or public art.

“Contiguous” means bordering on (see: “Abut”).

“Convalescent hospital” means a type of hospital which provides bed care for persons suffering chronic illness, or convalescent care for patients who by reason of illness or physical infirmity are unable to care for themselves properly.

“Cooperative” means a form of multiple ownership of real estate in which a corporation or business trust entity holds title to a property and grants occupancy rights to particular units to shareholders by means of proprietary leases or similar arrangements.

“Cottage food operation” means an enterprise within the registered or permitted area of a dwelling unit where the cottage food operator, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, resides and where cottage food products pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113758 are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sale to consumers.

“Cottage food products” means foods that are prepared for sale in the home kitchen of a person’s primary private home and are not potentially hazardous food, as defined in Section 113871 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food products include, but are not limited to, nonpotentially hazardous baked goods without cream, custard, or meat fillings, such as breads, biscuits, churros, cookies, pastries, and tortillas; candy, such as brittle and toffee; chocolate-covered nonperishable foods such as nuts and dried fruit; dried fruit; dried pasta; dry baking mixes; fruit pies, fruit empanadas, and fruit tamales; granola, cereals, and trail mixes; herb blends and dried mole paste; honey and sweet sorghum syrup; jams, jellies, preserves, and fruit butter; nut mixes and nut butters; popcorn; vinegar and mustard; roasted coffee and dried tea; waffle cones and pizelles; and similar products.

Council, City. “City council” means the council of the city of St. Helena.

“Cupola” means a small, usually domed structure surmounting a roof for decorative purposes only. It does not contain flooring nor does it serve as a story.

“Day care facilities for children” means those facilities which provide nonmedical care to infants and preschool and school-aged children under eighteen (18) years of age during a portion of the day. This term includes infant centers, preschools and day care centers.

“De novo” means anew.

“Deck” means platform requiring ground supports usually extending from the main wall of the structure and used as exterior floor space.

“Deed restriction” means a restriction on the use of land set forth in the deed.

“Demolition” means the intentional removal of all or part of a building or structure when a building or structure is a designated historic landmark or located in a designated historic district. In all other areas of the city “demolition” means the intentional removal of all or part of a building or structure resulting in removal of more than fifty (50) percent of the exterior walls or removal of significant architectural features.

“Density bonus” means an increase in the number of dwelling units over the otherwise allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance provisions.

“Distance between buildings” means the shortest horizontal distance between the walls of two buildings.

“District” means a portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this title; includes zoning district and zone.

Drive, Access. “Access drive” means a paved way located outside of the public right-of-way that provides vehicular access between the public street and the required parking for one or more lots.

“Drive-in use” means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods including food, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles is a drive-in use.

Drive-Through Use. See: “Drive-in use.”

Drive-up Window. See: “Drive-in use.”

Driveway, Residential. “Residential driveway” means a form of access drive consisting of a paved way which provides direct access from a public street or private street developed to city public street standards to an individual dwelling unit.

Duplex. See: “Dwelling, two-family.”

Dwelling, Attached. “Attached dwelling” means a single-family dwelling attached to one or more single-family dwellings by a common vertical wall.

Dwelling, Detached. “Detached dwelling” means a single-family dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.

Dwelling, Group. “Group dwelling” means a group of two or more detached buildings, each of which contains one dwelling unit, located on a single lot in one ownership.

Dwelling, Multiple-Family. “Multiple-family dwelling” means a multiple-family dwelling which is designed or used exclusively as a residence, including four or more separate dwelling units or any combination of dwelling units.

Dwelling, Single-Family. “Single-family dwelling” means a single-family dwelling, including a mobilehome constructed to meet 1976 HUD standards, when placed on a permanent foundation, which is designed or used exclusively as a residence, including only one dwelling unit.

Dwelling, Three-Family (Triplex). “Three-family dwelling (triplex)” means a three-family dwelling or triplex which is designed or used exclusively as a residence, including three separate dwelling units.

Dwelling, Townhouse. “Townhouse dwelling” means a single dwelling unit in a townhouse group, located or capable of being located on a separate lot; and being separated from the adjoining dwelling unit by an approved wall, extending from the foundation through the roof and structurally independent of the corresponding wall of the adjoining unit.

Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex). “Two-family dwelling (duplex)” means a two-family dwelling or duplex which is designed or used exclusively as a residence, including two separate dwelling units.”

“Dwelling unit” means:

A building or portion of a building including one or more rooms which is designed or used as a residence for one family or housekeeping unit with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and dining.

In determining the number of units in a particular building or group of buildings, the city shall consider and weigh any or all of the following factors: the design of any building, including the internal floor plan and the availability of access between various parts of the building; the fixtures and furnishings installed or capable of being installed; the number and types of different rooms (including their actual or potential uses); the size of any building; the number of families or housekeeping units actually or capable of occupying the building; the location of the building; the number and location of primary entrances to the building; and any other factor that may be relevant. In making this determination with respect to proposed new uses, the city shall give primary consideration to design-related factors. In making this determination with respect to existing uses, the city may give primary consideration to the number of families actually using the premises, or to design-related factors, or to both, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. No building shall be deemed to be a dwelling with a fewer number of units based on its actual use if the design-related factors indicate that it has a greater number of units.

Dwelling Unit, Accessory. “Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or detached residential dwelling unit equal to or less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet and which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling is situated. Accessory dwelling units are also known as “second units” or “granny units.” An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:

1.    An efficiency unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.

2.    A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

Dwelling Unit, Studio. “Studio dwelling unit” means any habitable room having cooking facilities and intended or designed to be used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes.

“Easement” means a limited right of one person or class of persons to use real property owned or occupied by another, which right is described specifically as to location and entitlement to use.

“Eave” means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.

“Educational use” means any use devoted to education and learning, whether it be public, private, commercial or non-commercial.

“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person.

“Enlargement” means an increase in the size of an existing building or structure or an increase in the physical area occupied by a use of land.

“Erect” means to erect, construct, place, relocate, enlarge, substantially alter, attach, suspend, paint, post, or display. Normal maintenance, including refinishing, is not included in this definition.

Erosion, Soil. “Soil erosion” means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity.

“Extended care facility” means a long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged, or a governmental medical institution.

“Factory built housing” means a residential building, dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly manufactured or is in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be wholly or partially assembled on site, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Commission of Housing and Community Development of the state of California pursuant to Section 19990 et. seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California.

“Family” means any of the following groups living together in the same dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit:

1.    Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption;

2.    A nuclear family identified by extended cohabitation;

3.    A group not exceeding five persons whose interpersonal relationships relating to shared household expenses, duties and private lives are indistinguishable from groups listed in subsections 1 and 2 above.

“Family day care home” means a community care facility which is the family residence of the person operating the facility, in which the operator regularly provides care, protection and supervision to a child or children, other than the operator’s own children, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. (See 22 California Administrative Code Section 86001 and California Health and Safety Code Section 1501.)

“Farm labor housing” means an area or place containing living quarters including dwellings, tents, bunkhouses, trailer coaches or other housing accommodations and any accessory dining, sanitary or recreational facilities, maintained by a labor contractor for the housing of farm laborers, for hire for work off the site.

“Farmer’s market” means an outdoor, seasonal, one-day per week market at which farmers sell their own produce.

“Fault hazard zone, earthquake or seismic” means areas of land along and adjacent to a break or fracture in rock strata that may be subject to dislocation or damage.

“Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technical factors.

“Fence” means a barrier enclosing or defining an area, as separating or screening areas, usually made of posts and wires or wood and including walls or like structures.

Filling Station. See: “Service station.”

“Final inspection” means an inspection performed by the building division of the city planning department to verify completion of the project per approved plans; a precondition to occupancy.

“Flag lot” (also known as a “panhandle lot”) means a lot which has less than the minimum required frontage on a public or private street, is connected to a public or private street by a narrow strip of land and has the largest portion of the lot situated behind adjoining lots which front on the same public or private street.

“Flea market” means an occasional or periodic selling of goods held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer new and used goods for sale to the public.

“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings. In cases where no walls exist, the gross horizontal floor area shall be that area covered by the roof excluding two feet on each side of the structure for a standard roof projection.

“Floor area ratio (F.A.R.)” means the ratio of building gross floor area divided by net parcel area. For example, one building (or a group of buildings) with a total of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area on a forty thousand (40,000) square foot lot would translate to a 0.50 F.A.R.

“Foster family home” means a residential facility which is the family residence of the persons operating the facility, in which twenty-four (24) hour care and supervision are provided for not more than six foster children exclusive of the operator’s own children (see: 22 California Administrative Code Section 85023 and Health and Safety Code Section 1502).

“Fractional ownership hotel” means a hotel of forty (40) rooms or more in which seventy-five percent (75%) of the rooms of the hotel may be made available to individuals as “time-share estates,” which is defined as a time-share interest, which is the right to occupy a time-share property, coupled with a freehold estate or an estate for years with a future interest in a time-share property or a specified portion thereof, pursuant to Section 11212(x)1 of the California Business and Professions Code, and subject to obtaining permission required to do so obtained from the California Department of Real Estate.

“Frontage” means that portion of a building or lot facing on a street, place or way.

“Full service automobile service stations” means full service gasoline stations offering gas, air, water, oil, window-washing performed by a service station attendant in addition to the range of services and products found in conjunction with a service station (see: “Self-service gasoline station” and “Service station”).

Garage, Motor Vehicle Repair. “Motor vehicle repair garage” means a building or structure or portion thereof, used for the care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles or trailers.

Garage, Private. “Private garage” means an accessory building or a portion of the principal building in which motor vehicles may be stored or kept.

Garage, Public. “Public garage” means a building or structure or portion thereof, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the public.

Gas Station. See: “Service station.”

“General plan” means the comprehensive, long-term plan for the orderly physical development of the land and the preservation of open space in the city according to Section 653009 et seq. of the California Government Code. The plan is an integrated, internally consistent and compatible statement of land use policies, consisting of maps and texts stating principles, standards, proposals and objectives as contained in the area plans, required elements or other permitted elements.

“Glare” means the effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility.

Grade. See: “Slope.”

Grade, Average. “Average grade” means the average of the finished ground level (finished grade, as defined herein) at the outermost corners of a building (or building segments of stepped or terraced buildings (see: “Building, height of”).

Grade, Finished. “Finished grade” means the elevation of the ground surface in its final state, after manmade alterations.

Grade, Natural. “Natural grade” means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

Gradient. See: “Slope.”

Group Dwelling. See: “Dwelling, group.”

“Guest house” means an accessory building or portion of an accessory building, used for living quarters, which is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal building(s) on the same lot, without facilities for cooking, and which is not separately rented, let or leased for direct or indirect compensation.

“Guest ranch” means a vacation resort, generally a farm or ranch, which derives all or part of its income from the use of its facilities by paying visitors or guests, and provides food, lodging and entertainment.

“Guest room” means any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for sleeping purposes in a principal or detached accessory building, but without kitchen or cooking facilities.

“Habitable” means meeting the requirements of the California Administrative Code, Title 24, including but not limited to insulation, heating, ventilation and lighting (in relation to building construction).

“Height” is the maximum height of any segment of a building as measured from the average of the natural grade within five feet of the exterior wall of the building.

“Helipad” means a landing area for helicopters on public or private lands or buildings, for the picking up and discharging of passengers or freight.

“Home occupation” means an occupation conducted within a dwelling unit and/or accessory building on a residential property by the occupants thereof, which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.

“Hospital” means an institution in which patients are given medical or surgical care and which is licensed by the state to use the title “hospital” without qualifying descriptive word.

“Hotel” means any building or portion thereof containing six or more guest rooms used or intended or designed to be used, let or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied by six or more guests, whether the compensation for hire be paid directly or indirectly in money, goods, ware, merchandise, labor or otherwise and shall include hotels, lodging and rooming houses, dormitories, public and private clubs and any such building of any nature whatsoever so occupied, designed or intended to be so occupied except jails, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes and similar buildings where human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint.

“Household pets” means small animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, domesticated pigs, pigeons, hens, and the like; but not including roosters, quacking ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, hogs, apiaries, kennels, or the presence of animals for commercial purposes.

“Housing authority” means the Napa Valley housing authority.

“Housing costs” means the monthly mortgage principal and interest, property taxes, association fees, and required homeowner’s insurance, for ownership units and the monthly rent for rental units.

Housing unit. See: “Dwelling unit.”

“Industrial or I-district” means any principal zoning district, which is primarily oriented toward industrial activities.

“Industry” means those fields of economic activity including forestry, fishing, hunting and trapping, mining, construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electric, gas and sanitary services, warehousing and wholesale trade.

“Integrated commercial center” means two or more separate commercial businesses in one or more buildings, located on one or more lots characterized by common parking, access, function and appearance (see: “Shopping center”).

“Kennel” means any lot or premises or portion thereof on which dogs, cats and other household domestic animals are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or kept for sale.

“Kitchen” means an area within any structure, including, but not limited to, dwelling units, equipped to allow the storage, cooking, refrigeration of food and/or intended for the preparation of food.

“Land disturbance” means any activity involving the clearing, cutting, excavating, filling or grading of land or any other activity which alters land topography or vegetative cover.

“Landscaping” means a use of land for permanent, planned ornamental planting and related structures.

“Large recycling center” means a recycling facility established either as an accessory use, five hundred (500) square feet or larger in size, or as a principal use, regardless of size, devoted exclusively to the collection of recyclable materials from the public. A large recycling center may include: mobile recycling units, reverse vending machines and groupings of reverse vending machines (including bulk reverse vending machines), kiosk type units (may be permanent), unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials, and other types of mobile or permanent buildings and structures.

“Living quarters” means an accessory structure without kitchen facilities designed and used exclusively by persons and families employed on the premises.

“Lodging house” means a building, or portion thereof, other than a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast inn providing room and board or rooming only for compensation.

“Loft” means a floor space directly beneath the roof of a structure raised above the main floor. When the total area of such loft exceeds one-half of the floor area below the loft it shall be considered a story.

“Lot” means a piece or unit of land, occupied or intended to be occupied, or capable of being occupied, by a permitted principal building or structure, or a group of such buildings, structures and accessory buildings or structures, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are required by this title; having access from a dedicated, accepted and improved public street, plaza, mall, parking facility, or on a private street, which has been approved by the city council.

Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.

“Lot coverage” means the land area covered by all buildings or structures on a lot, including all projections except eaves. Decks or other structures with an elevation of eighteen (18) inches or less above finished grade shall not be considered as contributing to lot coverage.

“Lot depth” means the average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines, or between the front lot line and the intersection of the two lot lines if there should be no rear lot line.

Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

“Lot line” means the property line bounding the lot.

Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means the line separating the lot from a public or private street, or the line separating the principal access to the lot from a publicly owned plaza, mall or parking facility. In the case of a corner lot, the front line is the shorter of any two adjacent street lot lines.

Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means the lot line opposite to, and most distant from, the front lot line, other than a side lot line.

Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot line, other than a front or rear lot line, which intersects a front lot line.

Lot of Record. See “Lot.”

Lot, Substandard. “Substandard lot” means any lot in any district with less than the minimum dimensions or area for the district in which it is located, unless the reduction is specifically authorized under the provisions of this title.

Lot, Through. “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel, streets.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the front setback line.

“Manufacturing” means the establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling or component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.

“Marquee” means a structural flat roof structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public property.

“Marsh” means a low-lying tract of soft, wetland characterized by high water tables and extensive vegetation peculiar to and characteristic of wet places.

“Material change” means any exterior or interior alteration which requires a building permit and which will cause a change in the exterior appearance of a structure. This shall not include painting and ordinary maintenance.

“Medical clinic” means an establishment where patients are studied or treated by physicians specializing in various ailments. Also, a dispensary or out-patient department of a hospital.

Mezzanine. See “Loft.”

“Mixed use development” means the development of a tract of land or building or structure with two or more different uses such as, but not limited to: residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment, in a relatively compact, integrated urban form.

“Mobilehome access drive” means a private thoroughfare which affords internal circulation for a mobile home park.

Mobilehome, Double Wide. “Double wide mobilehome” means a mobilehome built and transported on two or more separate chassis, designed to be joined at the location of use to form a single dwelling.

“Mobilehome park” means any lot or portion thereof which is used or offered for use as a location for two or more mobilehomes.

“Mobilehome park setback” means an area along the perimeter of a mobilehome park, suitably landscaped with plant materials, adequately maintained and equipped with sprinklers.

“Mobilehome space” means a plot of ground within a mobilehome park abutting one or more access drives, designed for the accommodation of one mobilehome.

“Mobilehome space setback” means an area along the perimeter of a mobilehome space in which the mobilehome or any structure shall not be located.

“Mobilehomes (manufactured home)” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in a travel mode, is eight feet or more in width, or forty (40) feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A mobilehome is not built according to Uniform Building Code requirements.

“Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also shall mean the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

“Motel” means a building containing guest rooms or dwelling units, with the room or unit having a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or from an inner court. Such facilities are designed, used or intended to be used, rented or hired out for temporary or overnight accommodations for guests and are offered primarily to automobile tourists or transients. Motel includes an auto court, motor lodge and tourist court.

Motor court, motor hotel. See “Motel.”

“Motor vehicle” means any automobile, truck, or motorcycle.

Motor vehicle repair, major. “Major motor vehicle repair” means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, collision service, including body, frame or fender repair; overall painting.

Motor vehicle repair, minor. “Minor motor vehicle repair” means upholstering, replacement or adjustment of accessories and parts, (i.e., tires, batteries, mufflers, oil change, lube, tune up, etc.) and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half ton capacity; but not including other operations defined under “Motor vehicle repair, major.”

Multiple-Family Dwelling. See “Dwelling, multiple-family.”

“Natural grade” means the elevation of the undisturbed natural surface of the ground adjoining a building or structure as determined by the site grading plan.

“Neighborhood” means an area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other community areas and which may include distinct ethnic or economic characteristics, schools or social clubs, or boundaries defined by physical barriers such as major highways and railroads or natural features such as rivers. Where none of the conditions or characteristics described above apply a neighborhood is assumed to be the area within a radius of approximately one-half mile of a specified site.

“Net parcel area” means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a parcel, excluding area within vehicular rights-of-way and vehicular easements.

“Nightclub” means a commercial establishment which serves alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption and which provides entertainment, whether live or mechanical as its principal use or as an adjunct use to another use; provided, however, that no such commercial establishment shall be considered a nightclub unless dancing by patrons occurs.

“Nonconforming building or structure” means a building or structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this title, but which, under this title, does not conform to the standards of coverage, yards, setbacks, height of buildings or structures, or distances between buildings or structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which building or structure is located.

“Nonconforming lot” means a legally established lot which does not conform to the regulations regarding area, width, frontage or other such standard for the zoning district in which it is located because of rezoning, annexation or change in the regulations of the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance or Subdivision Map Act.

“Nonconforming use” means a use of a structure or land, which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of this title, but which, under this title, does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located.

Nursery School. See “Day care facilities for children.”

“Nursing home” means any premises with sleeping rooms where persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care, not including persons suffering from contagious disease, mental disease, alcoholism or drug addiction.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. A change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors without an accompanying change of use.

“Office” means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government.

“Office building” means a building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand.

Open Space, Common. “Common open space” means land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designated and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary.

Open Space, Usable. “Usable open space” means outdoor area on the ground, roof, balcony, deck or porch which is designed and used for outdoor living or recreation. The term shall not include pedestrian access, required landscaped areas, on-site parking or driveway areas, nor shall more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required open space be assigned to roof or private balcony areas, nor shall such area have a slope greater than ten percent (10%), or any dimension of less than ten (10) feet. The term may include private balconies with a minimum of twenty-four (24) square feet if their least dimension is four feet.

“Open storage” means the keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for an extended period of time.

“Overhang” means the part of a roof or wall which extends beyond the facade of a lower wall. “Overhang” also shall mean that portion of a vehicle extending beyond the wheel stops or curb.

“Owner” means a person, persons or corporation holding fee title to property within the city as shown on the most recent assessor’s role in the county of Napa.

“Parcel” means a lot or tract of land. “Parcel” or “assessor’s parcel” is also a term for a unit of land created and assigned a number by the Napa County assessor. Since assessor’s parcels are established for assessment purposes only, they are not necessarily lots of record.

“Parking” means the parking of a vehicle at the same approximate location for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or less.

“Parking area” means an open area for the same use as a private garage.

“Parking facility” means a site or a portion of a site, devoted to on-site parking of vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas, and providing vehicular access to a public street. For the purpose of this title a site with five or more parking spaces situated contiguous to one another or in close proximity shall be considered a parking facility.

Parking lot. See “Parking facility.”

“Parking space” means a permanently surfaced area for vehicular parking and connected to a public street, alley or other public way by a permanently surfaced driveway or access or access drive. The zoning ordinance establishes several types of parking spaces depending upon the size of the vehicle and duration of the individual parking in the space. The specific size requirements for these types of parking spaces are contained in the Standard Specifications for Public Works, available from the St. Helena public works department.

Parking space, bicycle. “Bicycle parking space” means a permanent parking space designed for bicycles.

“Perimeter” means the boundaries or borders of a lot or lots if developed as a unit.

“Permitted use,” for the purpose of this title, means a permitted use in any district shall include any use listed as a principal permitted use or as an accessory use.

“Persons” means individual persons and any form of organization, including but not limited to sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, trusts and any other form of commercial or noncommercial enterprise; person applies to any person who is the owner, lessee, sublessee, manager of premises, to any other person who is in possession of or in charge of premises, and to any person who has management or supervisory authority or responsibility to direct construction work or any other activity or use taking place on premises.

“Planned development” means an area developed according to an approved planned development permit as a single entity and containing one or more buildings or structures.

“Planning department” means the planning department of the city.

“Planning director” means the director of the planning department of the city.

“Porch” means a roofed approach to a doorway usually extending from the exterior wall of the structure and requiring ground supports.

“Principal building” means the building or buildings in which is conducted the main use or uses of the lot on which it is located.

“Principal place of residence” means that address at which the owner spends the majority of nonworking time, receives the majority of personal mail, registers personal motor vehicles, claims as personal residence on income tax forms, claims a homeowner’s exemption on property taxes and (if applicable) registers to vote.

“Professional office” means the office maintained for the conduct of a profession.

“Projected ground area” means the area within a continuous line that completely encloses the exterior limits, including all projections, of an accessory building or structure. The projected ground area is measured on a plan view drawing of the proposed accessory building or structure included in the building plans.

“Public” means a land use or building open to the public, whether free or on a fee basis.

“Public hearing” means a meeting noticed as required by this title in which testimony and arguments are presented publicly before any of the hearing bodies established herein; city planning commission, city council, etc.

“Public recreation” means any recreational use that is not private.

“Publicly owned” means land or building owned or operated by a governmental or other public agency.

“Recreational trailer” means any camping trailer and any trailer designed for transporting boats, airplanes, motorcycles, horses or other livestock, tents and any other recreational equipment.

“Recreational vehicle” means any vehicular unit primarily designated as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use and shall include buses, motor homes, truck campers, and camper shells.

“Recyclable material” means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(d)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Recyclable material processing center” means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. “Processing” means the preparation of materials for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such shall mean as baling, briquetting, compacting flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing.

“Recycling facility” means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A “certified recycling facility” or “certified processor” means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer.

“Rehabilitate” means to improve a structure in order to correct a health and/or safety problem.

“Religious use” means a structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals or education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.

“Residential condominium project” means and includes a community apartment project, a condominium, a condominium project, a stock cooperative or a planned development as those terms are defined by California Civil Code Section 783, California Business and Professions Code, respectively. A residential condominium project does not mean or include:

1.    Financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or store space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobilehome parks or trailer parks;

2.    Mineral, oil or gas leases;

3.    Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state of California.

“Residential density” means a computation expressing number of dwelling units per acre, based on the gross lot area prior to the dedication of any rights of way, public parks or other public areas.

“Residential facility” means any family home, group-care facility, or similar facility determined pursuant to state law, for twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal service, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. All residential facilities shall be appropriately licensed or registered pursuant to state law, unless exempted therefrom by state law. This definition and all other definitions relating to residential facilities shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with definitions found in state law or state administrative regulations.

“Residential or R-district” means any principal zoning district, which is primarily oriented toward residential activities.

“Rest home” means a private residence providing board and room as well as twenty-four (24) hour protective and personal care and services to ambulatory aged guests, assuming for them responsibilities which go beyond those customarily associated with a landlord-tenant relationship; and where bedside care is provided only for conditions determined by a physician to be temporary and minor. Such establishments do not provide individual cooking and eating facilities for the guests. The term does not include “nursing home” as defined herein.

“Restaurant” means a commercial establishment for the on-site sale and consumption of meals consisting of foodstuffs which have been prepared or packaged on the premises.

Restaurant, Carry-Out. “Carry-out restaurant” means an establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged.

“Retirement home or center” means multiple dwelling units containing not less than four dwelling units which are designated and intended to provide suitable living quarters and specialized services to elderly, or retired, ambulatory persons. These units are designed to serve elderly persons, and may include such special facilities and services as, but not limited to, communal cooking and eating areas, special dietary programs, wheelchair ramps, hallway handrails and other special features and programs intended to serve the needs of elderly, retired persons.

“Reverse vending machine” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. A bulk reverse vending machine is a type of reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container.

Rezoning or Reclassification. See “Amendment.”

“Right-of-way” means a strip or area of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and is intended to be occupied or is occupied by a street, road or other similar public utility or use. The right-of-way includes the area behind the curb (i.e., planting strip, sidewalk and sometimes the area behind the sidewalk).

“Riparian” means of or pertaining to land and vegetation which is located adjacent to a natural or man-made water course or body of water.

“Roof” means the outside top covering of a building.

“Run with the land” means a covenant, restriction, permit or entitlement to the use of the land contained in a deed or other recorded instrument which is binding on the present and future owners of the property.

“Satellite antenna” means an antenna established to receive transmissions from satellites.

“Scientific use” means an industrial use devoted to research and development.

“Screening” means a method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another or from the public right-of-way by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.

“Section 8 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965” means a federal rent subsidy program (or its successors) in which eligible, very low-income and low-income households receive financial assistance to rent housing units.

“Self-service gasoline stations” are defined as stations providing fewer services for fewer products than full-service stations. See “Full service gasoline stations and service stations.”

“Servants’ quarters” means a secondary dwelling or apartment without any kitchen facilities designed for and used only by persons or families of persons regularly employed on the property.

“Service station” means a parcel of land, or any portion of a parcel of land, developed exclusively for the purpose of, and with facilities for, the sale of motor vehicle fuels; and which may also provide lubricants, tires, batteries, accessory items and other customary services for motor vehicles, the delivery of which is made directly to the vehicle. The servicing of motor vehicles shall be generally limited to lubrication, nonmechanical washing, the replacement of spark plugs, lamps, fan belts and batteries, the repair or replacement of tires and tubes; and minor motor vehicle repair. Major motor vehicle repair (engine rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender repair; over-all painting) is not permitted. For purposes of this title, the term shall also include gas station and accessory service station. See “Motor vehicle repair, major,” “Motor vehicle repair, minor,” “Service station, accessory.”

Service Station, Accessory. “Accessory service station” means a facility incidental and secondary to the primary land use, offering motor vehicle fuels for sale. The delivery of such fuel may be made directly to the vehicle by its operator.

Service Station, Pump Island. “Pump island service station” means a facility, generally a raised concrete apron, designed primarily to hold motor vehicle fuel dispensing devices, and separated from other pump islands by sufficient space for the maneuvering of an automobile.

“Setback” means the distance by which any use, building or structure is required to be removed from a property line contiguous to a public or private right-of-way (excluding alleys), except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title.

Setback, Front. “Front setback” means the shortest horizontal distance by which any use, building or structure is required to be removed from the front lot line, except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title. The front lot line is normally the shorter of any lot lines which border a street. See “Lot line, front.”

Setback, Rear. “Rear setback” means the shortest horizontal distance by which any use, building or structure is required to be removed from the rear lot line, except for such encroachments as specifically permitted by this title.

Setback, Side. “Side setback” means the shortest horizontal distance by which any use, building or structure is required to be removed from the side lot line on a corner lot which is contiguous with a street, except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title. The side lot line is normally the longer of any lot lines which border a street. See “Lot line, side” and “Lot, corner.”

“Shopping center” means a type of integrated commercial center specifically designed for occupancy or occupied by a minimum of five separate uses devoted predominantly to retail and personal service activities which are characterized by common parking, access, function and appearance. Shopping centers may also include other nonretail uses (i.e., restaurants, real estate offices, travel agencies, law offices, etc.) when permitted by district regulations. See “Integrated commercial center.”

“Short-term rental” means a use in which overnight accommodations are provided to guests for compensation for periods of less than thirty (30) days in a single-family dwelling.

Side-On Treatment. See “Back-on or side-on treatment.”

Sign. See Chapter 17.148 for definitions and details.

“Single room occupancy housing” means multi-unit housing that consists of single room dwelling units rented for at least thirty (30) days in which all living activities occur within a single room.

“Site development plan” means a description of the development proposed in conjunction with a discretionary permit consisting, at a minimum, of a map and a written statement setting forth a unified, organized and internally coordinated overall development program, which at a minimum includes the location and arrangement of all proposed buildings, structures, signs, improvements and uses (if known) to be included in the development. Site development plans may include, but are not limited to, a legal description, a subdivision map, precise site and plot plans, architectural drawings, landscape plans, building plans, building elevations, studies and analysis of population, density, traffic, engineering, economic and social factors, community and environmental impact and the like. Site development plans shall be supplemented and accompanied by such other material and information as may be required to initiate actual development or construction.

“Slope” means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent, degrees or ratios. Slope is referenced or measured in the following ways:

1.    Percent slope: the change in elevation or rise (in feet) divided by the horizontal distance or run (in feet) multiplied by one hundred (100) (e.g., 50 feet/480 feet x 100 = 10.5 percent).

2.    Degrees: the angle of deviation from the horizontal which ranges from zero degrees for horizontal to ninety (90) degrees for vertical (e.g., a fifty percent (50%) slope is equal to 26.5 degrees).

3.    Slope ratio: the ratio between the horizontal or run (in feet) and vertical or rise (in feet) (e.g., a three to one slope (expressed as 3:1) shall mean three horizontal feet to one vertical foot; a one hundred percent (100%) slope is the same as a slope ratio of 1:1 and is the same as forty-five (45) degrees).

“Small lot development” is the subdivision of land into lots which are smaller than the minimum lot size of the zoning district, including but not limited to those specifically designed to accommodate zero lot line dwellings (detached single-family dwellings which abut a side lot line or two single-family dwellings attached at a common wall located on a side lot line) meeting the standards of Section 17.112.090 on property designated for low or medium density residential in the general plan when located on a public street developed to city standards (including right of way width) and when no open space, facilities or other real property is owned in common.

“Small recycling center” means a recycling facility established as an accessory use to a principal use, not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet in size, devoted exclusively to the collection of recyclable materials from the public. A small recycling center may include: mobile recycling units, reverse vending machines and groupings of reverse vending machines (including bulk reverse vending machines), kiosk type units (may be permanent), and unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials.

“Specific plan” consistent with Government Code Section 65451 of state law, means a compilation of all ordinances, maps, regulations, documents or other descriptive materials, based on the general plan, setting forth in detail a plan or program for the effectuation of a particular element, or portion of an element, of the general plan; usually applied to a particular geographic area of a city or county.

Stable, Private. “Private stable” means any building, barn, corral or paddock used or designed to shelter or keep livestock, as regulated herein.

Stable, Public or Riding. “Public or riding stable” means an establishment where livestock is kept, boarded, groomed or trained, rented for riding, or bred for profit, etc.

“Stock cooperative” is as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, containing two of more rights of exclusive occupancy.

“Storage” means the placement of material objects on a site for any period in excess of seven consecutive days or the parking of a vehicle in the same approximate location for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or more.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above “grade,” as defined herein, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade, at any point such basement shall be considered a story.

Story, Half. “Half-story” means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, of which the wall plates of two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor.

Street, Arterial. “Arterial street” means a street designed to serve high volume inter- and intra-city traffic and to act as a distributor between freeways, other thoroughfares and major traffic generators.

Street, Center Line of. “Center line of street” means the line drawn at points midway between the face of curbs of an improved street; or as determined by the city engineer, in the case of unimproved or partially improved streets.

Street, Collector. “Collector street” means a street which collects traffic from local streets and connects with arterials.

Street, Local. “Local street” means a street which provides direct access to abutting properties, primarily in residential districts.

Street, Private. “Private street” means a right-of-way or easement, approved by the city council, in private ownership, not dedicated or maintained as a public street, and not an alley, and which affords the principal shall mean of access to two or more sites. See “Drive, access.”

Street, Public. “Public street” means a way, the entire width of which is within a publicly owned right-of-way and which contains pedestrian, vehicular and utility improvements, facilities and appurtenances. The term shall include avenue, drive, road, circle, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term. Also any dedicated street accepted by the city for maintenance.

“Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders and floor joists, ceiling joists or roof rafters.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected, except fences, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. (Note: All buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings. See “Building.”)

“Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, or any unit or units of improved or unimproved land or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. The term subdivision includes a “condominium project,” as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a “community apartment project,” as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwellings to a “stock cooperative,” as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and professions Code.

“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by a target population, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

“Swimming pool” means every outdoor pool, lake or artificial body of water designed, constructed or used for swimming, dipping, or immersion purposes, and having a depth in excess of twenty-four (24) inches, or with a surface area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet.

“Theater” means a building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, musical or live performances.

Townhouse. See “Dwelling, townhouse.”

Townhouse Group. See “Dwelling, townhouse group.”

“Transitional housing” means rental housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.

“Trip ends” means the total of motor vehicle trips entering and leaving a specific land use or site over a designated period of time.

“Trip generation” means the average or typical number of trip ends produced by a specific land use or activity.

Triplex. See “Dwelling, three-family.”

“Unenclosed” means open on at least one side.

Use, Accessory. See “Accessory use or structure.”

Use Permit, Conditional. “Conditional use permit” means a permit issued by the planning commission authorizing the establishment of a conditional use.

Uses Permitted. See “Permitted use.”

“Vacancy rate” means the number of uninhabited dwelling units that are available and suitable for occupancy expressed as a ratio to the total number of housing units.

“Variance” is the term applied to the procedure whereby the strict application of the provisions of this title relating to height, area, yard requirements or other requirements of this title may be modified in a particular instance. The term “variance” does not apply to a use modification.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The definition of vehicles includes motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, recreational trailers and boats.

“Veterinary clinic” means an infirmary for the treatment of animals not including overnight care.

“Veterinary hospital” means an establishment for the care and treatment of the disease and injuries of animals, where animals may be boarded during their convalescence.

“Video game center” means a commercial establishment which offers six or more electronic games for temporary hire as a form of entertainment.

“Visibility triangle” means, on a corner lot, the triangle formed by the street frontage lines extended to their intersection and a line connecting such lot line measured thirty-five (35) feet from their point of intersection.

“Wall” means the vertical exterior surface of a building; or the vertical interior surfaces which divide a building’s interior space into rooms.

“Warehouse” means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.

“Water course” means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, water-way, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water.

“Wetlands” means swamps, marshes or other areas characterized by wet soil conditions either permanently or seasonally which are important to sustaining wildlife.

Without Prejudice. When an application is denied without prejudice, it is meant as a declaration that no rights or privileges of the applicant are considered waived or lost with respect to the submittal or resubmittal of his or her application. Under these conditions, an application may be resubmitted at any time.

“Yard” means an open space established in relation to interior lot lines which is required under the provisions of this title, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, which open space shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted in this title.

Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means an open space extending the full width of an interior lot or from the interior side lot line to the side setback in the case of a corner lot, between the principal building and the rear lot line, measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such rear yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title.

Yard, Side. “Side yard” means an open space extending from the front setback to the rear yard, between the principal building and the adjacent interior side lot line, measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the adjacent exterior side lot line. Such side yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title.

“Zero lot line” means the location of a building on a lot line in such a manner that one or more of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line. See “Small lot development.”

Zone. See “District.”

“Zoning map” means the officially adopted zoning map or maps of the city, together with all amendments subsequently adopted.

“Zoning ordinance” means Title 17 of the St. Helena Municipal Code consisting of the official adopted zoning map and text. (Ord. 17-2 § 2; Ord. 16-3 § 1; Ord. 15-2 § 2; Ord. 12-2 § 2; Ord. 10-4 § 4; Ord. 03-4 § 1; Ord. 02-6 § 18; Ord. 00-5 § 8; prior code § 27.466)

Chapter 17.08
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Sections:

17.08.010    Purpose.

17.08.020    Decision-making bodies and officials.

17.08.030    Determination of similar use.

17.08.040    Permit application, time limits and fees.

17.08.050    Environmental review.

17.08.060    Authority of final decision-making body—Conditions of approval.

17.08.070    Notice of public hearing.

17.08.080    Special notice requirements.

17.08.090    Continuance of hearing.

17.08.100    Concurrent permit/approval processing—Multiple jurisdiction.

17.08.110    Ownership and transferability of permits and approvals.

17.08.120    Term of permits and approvals.

17.08.130    Extension of permits and approvals.

17.08.140    Modifications.

17.08.150    Denied applications.

17.08.160    Withdrawn applications.

17.08.170    Simultaneous active permits/approvals.

17.08.180    Appeal procedure.

17.08.190    Processing fees.

17.08.200    Refund of city’s defense costs on appeal.

17.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures required for the administration of this title and to set forth the basic responsibilities of the officials and bodies charged with its administration. (Prior code § 27.400)

17.08.020 Decision-making bodies and officials.
The following decision-making bodies and officials are established and/or their responsibilities acknowledged:

A.    The planning director shall have such duties assigned by this code as may be required to fulfill the purposes of this title. These duties shall be in addition to those contained in Government Code Sections 65900 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended or added to. References to the planning director shall also mean any employee(s) of the planning department authorized by the planning director to act in the director’s behalf.

B.    The public works director shall have such duties assigned by this code as may be required to fulfill the purposes of this title. References to the public works director shall also mean any employee(s) of the public works department authorized by the public works director to act in the director’s behalf.

C.    The building official shall have such duties assigned by this code as may be required to fulfill the purposes of this title. References to the building official shall also mean any employee(s) of the building division of the planning department authorized by the building official to act in the building official’s behalf.

D.    The planning commission shall have such duties assigned by this code as may be required to fulfill the purposes of this title. References to the planning commission shall also mean any employee(s) of the planning department when acting in the planning commission’s behalf while carrying out specific tasks which have been delegated to staff by the planning commission.

E.    The city council shall have such duties as assigned by this code as may be required to fulfill the purposes of this title. These duties shall be in addition to those contained in Government Code Sections 65900 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended. References to the city council shall also mean any employee(s) of the city when acting in the city council’s behalf while carrying out specific tasks which have been delegated to staff by the city council. (Prior code § 27.401)

17.08.030 Determination of similar use.
Each zoning district establishes a list of uses which are permitted or permitted with a use permit. In addition, each district establishes a list of accessory uses which are permitted in conjunction with a principal use. From time to time, uses may be proposed which are not specifically listed as permitted, permitted with a use permit or permitted as an accessory use. The following procedures shall be observed when an unlisted use is proposed in a zoning district:

A.    The planning director may, at his or her discretion, administratively determine that such uses are similar to those of the appropriate use category (e.g., permitted, permitted with a use permit or accessory) where such uses are clearly similar in character to those uses listed and consistent with the purposes of the zoning district and general plan. Action of the planning director shall be confirmed by the planning commission prior to establishment of the use.

B.    In making a determination that a proposed use is or is not similar to those listed, the planning director and planning commission shall consider the character of the proposed use, those listed in the appropriate category, the purposes of the zoning district in which it is proposed and the general plan. The planning commission’s determination of similar use is subject to appeal to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.08.180. A use determined to be similar shall apply to the zoning district uniformly regardless of location. (Prior code § 27.402)

17.08.040 Permit application, time limits and fees.
The following provisions apply to the submittal and processing of an application for a permit or other discretionary approval:

A.    Application for any permit shall be made by the property owner, or his or her authorized agent, to the planning director on forms prescribed for this purpose. The application shall include information as may be necessary for adequate review of the application. For projects which do not require a legislative act by the city, the planning department shall determine within thirty (30) days whether the submitted application is complete and shall notify the applicant accordingly.

B.    All applications shall be acted on in accordance with California Government Code Section 65950 unless an extension of time is granted according to the provisions of state law.

C.    For the purpose of reimbursing the city for administration of this title, the city council shall, by resolution, from time to time set the amount of fees and penalties to be charged for processing all applications and appeals provided for in this title. (Prior code § 27.403)

17.08.050 Environmental review.
The California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (CEQA) and city guidelines, as amended, require environmental review of all projects which must obtain discretionary approval from the city. The intent of the review process is to evaluate and make publicly known the possible impacts of proposed projects on the environment and to mitigate significant adverse impacts. Each project is evaluated by planning department staff according to CEQA guidelines and a determination made whether additional environmental review is required. (Prior code § 27.404)

17.08.060 Authority of final decision-making body—Conditions of approval.
A.    In considering an application for a permit or other discretionary approval authorized by this title, the final decision-making body may approve, deny or modify the application consistent with the evidence presented to it and the appropriate findings required by this title. Final decision-making bodies may require changes to applications and/or impose conditions of approval in order to affect the policies of the general plan and the purpose of this title. Such conditions include but are not limited to: dedication of land; installation of specific improvements; size, design and placement of buildings or structures; landscaping; the defense and indemnity of the city in litigation challenging the approval; and limitations on use and/or hours of operation. Such conditions shall be reasonably related to the use of the property for which the permit or other discretionary approval is requested.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the final decision-making body may condition its approval of an application for a permit or other discretionary approval for a residential project, as defined in Section 17.08.200(A)(3), to relieve the applicant from the obligation to provide for the city’s defense costs on appeal, as defined in Section 17.08.200(A)(1).

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if the final decision-making body has not relieved an applicant of a residential project from the obligation to provide for the city’s defense costs on appeal pursuant to subsection B of this section, upon application by an applicant in accordance with Section 17.08.200, the city council may authorize a refund of the city’s defense costs on appeal paid by applicant. (Ord. 19-6 § 1 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.405)

17.08.070 Notice of public hearing.
The following procedures shall be observed when a public hearing is required by this title:

A.    Notice shall include:

1.    The date, time and place of the hearing;

2.    The identity of the hearing body;

3.    A brief description of the matter to be considered and permits required;

4.    A description (text or diagram) of the location of the property involved;

5.    The following statement: “If you challenge the City’s decision on this matter in Court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice or in written correspondence delivered to the City at, or prior to, the public hearing.”

B.    Notice shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing.

C.    Except as provided in Section 17.08.080, notice shall be given by the following:

1.    Mailed notice to the applicant, the owner of the property, persons who have requested notice of a hearing for a specific project, and all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed project site. The applicant shall provide appropriate mailing labels (name, address and assessor’s parcel number) for surrounding property owners; and

2.    Publication of legal notice in a newspaper determined to be a newspaper of general circulation in St. Helena.

D.    Notice for all applications considered by the city council at a public hearing which have been considered previously by the planning commission shall consist of the same notice required for the planning commission hearing. (Prior code § 27.406)

17.08.080 Special notice requirements.
The following special public hearing notice provisions shall apply to the adoption of a general plan, general plan element, substantive text amendment of the general plan, substantive text amendment of the zoning ordinance and any project, including general plan land use map amendment, for which the number of property owners who would be sent a public hearing notice pursuant to this title is greater than one thousand (1,000):

A.    Placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper determined to be a newspaper of general circulation in St. Helena; or

B.    Placing an insert with any generalized mailing sent by the county or city to property owners in the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment, such as billing for city services.

Except for the applicant and property owner, the public hearing notice required pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of that required by Section 17.08.070. (Prior code § 27.407)

17.08.090 Continuance of hearing.
The hearing body, on its own motion, may continue a hearing from time to time. No additional notice shall be required for the continuance of a notice public hearing to a specific date. At their own discretion, applicants may request that their project be acted upon rather than continued. (Prior code § 27.408)

17.08.100 Concurrent permit/approval processing—Multiple jurisdiction.
The following provisions shall apply to multiple permit/approval processing and action by decision-making bodies:

A.    Whenever a project requires more than one discretionary permit or other approval, all permits or other approvals shall be processed concurrently. The concurrent processing of other discretionary permits and approvals associated with but not required for the development of the project (e.g., development agreement) is encouraged.

B.    When more than one permit or other discretionary approval is required and authority rests with both the planning commission and city council, the final action on all discretionary permits or other approvals shall be taken by the city council. In such cases the planning commission’s actions shall consist of recommendations to the city council.

C.    When a subdivision is proposed, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply, in addition to the provisions of this title. Decision-making bodies may combine in a single action or review such approvals as are required by this title and the single approval shall have the same effect as though each action were taken individually, provided each separate approval required is appropriately entered in the record. (Prior code § 27.409)

17.08.110 Ownership and transferability of permits and approvals.
Except as specifically provided in this title, an approved permit or other discretionary approval applies to the subject property and runs with the land. Once vested, an approved permit or other discretionary approval remains effective unless terminated, abandoned, revoked or modified even if the subject property is subsequently rezoned. An approved permit or other discretionary approval is transferable to any future owner of the subject property. (Prior code § 27.410)

17.08.120 Term of permits and approvals.
Except for a general plan amendment, zoning ordinance text amendment, rezoning or amendment of a specific plan, a permit (i.e., use permit, variance, etc.) or other discretionary approval authorized by this title shall be valid for a period of one year from the date such approval becomes effective or for as long as any subdivision map concurrently approved is valid, whichever is longer. A permit or other discretionary approval shall become effective the day following the expiration of the appeal period if no appeal is filed or the day following the denial of an appeal. The following shall apply to the expiration of permits or other discretionary approval:

A.    A permit or other discretionary approval shall remain valid as long as the use authorized by the permit is lawfully established prior to the expiration of the permit, or the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has timely established to the satisfaction of the planning director a good faith, diligent effort to lawfully establish the use pursuant to the procedures set forth by this section.

B.    A permit or other discretionary approval shall remain valid as long as there is a valid building permit for construction authorized by the permit. If the building permit expires, or if no building permit has been issued for construction authorized by the permit or other discretionary approval during the one year that the permit is valid, the permit or other discretionary approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time has been granted pursuant to Section 17.08.130, or the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has timely established to the satisfaction of the planning director a good faith, diligent effort to lawfully establish the use pursuant to the procedures set forth by this section.

C.    Any permit or discretionary approval which authorizes the establishment of any use which has been exercised by receiving a building permit or a zoning compliance determination shall expire and become null and void when such use has ceased for a period of six consecutive months, unless the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has timely established to the satisfaction of the planning director a good faith, diligent effort to continue the use pursuant to the procedures set forth by this section.

D.    If only a portion of a project is completed pursuant to a permit authorizing its development, the permit or other discretionary approval for the balance of the project shall expire if no substantial action is taken toward completion of the balance of the project in a one-year period.

E.    No later than thirty (30) days prior to each annual expiration of any permit or other discretionary approval, the holder of such permit or discretionary approval shall provide the planning director with information sufficient for the planning director to determine whether the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has attempted to establish or continue the approved use diligently and in good faith.

F.    After having reviewed the submittal, the planning director shall determine whether the permit or other discretionary approval should be deemed to have expired or lapsed pursuant to this section. The planning director’s determination shall be based on factors including, without limitation, efforts to obtain financing, creation of architectural or engineering plans, drawings and specifications, or letting or negotiation of contracts necessary to establish the use.

G.    If the planning director determines that the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has not attempted to establish or continue the approved use diligently and in good faith, the planning director shall notify the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval in writing of that determination, and that the permit or other discretionary approval is expired, lapsed and null and void. The planning director’s determination that the permit or other discretionary approval has expired may be appealed to the planning commission by the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval. If the planning director determines that the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has attempted to establish or continue the approved use diligently and in good faith, the planning director shall notify the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval in writing of that determination, and that the permit or other discretionary approval has been extended for an additional period. Any such extension shall be for a period of one year and shall be subject to the requirements set forth in subsections A and B of this section for establishing the use within that time period and the requirements set forth in subsection E of this section for submitting additional information prior to the expiration of any such extension. The planning director’s determination to extend the permit or other discretionary approval shall be final.

H.    If the holder of a permit or discretionary approval fails to timely submit the evidence required by subsection E of this section and said holder has not otherwise established the use authorized by such permit or other discretionary approval, the planning director shall be deemed to have determined that the holder of the permit or other discretionary approval has not attempted to establish or continue the approved use diligently and in good faith and that the permit or other discretionary approval is expired, lapsed and null and void as provided m subsection G of this section. (Ord. 14-5 § 1: prior code § 27.411)

17.08.130 Extension of permits and approvals.
Provided that an application is filed at least thirty (30) days prior to its expiration date, a permit (i.e., use permit, variance, etc.) or other discretionary approval, excluding planned development permit, may be extended for not more than two one-year periods, or for as long as any subdivision concurrently approved is extended, whichever is longer. The procedure and findings for the approval of an extension shall be that required by this title for the original permit or approval. Such extensions may be granted subject to additional conditions or amendments; however, if the permit or other discretionary approval is no longer in conformance with this title, general plan, or other city regulations, no extension shall be granted. A permit or other discretionary approval shall remain valid during the time an application for an extension is processed and considered by the appropriate decision-making body. (Prior code § 27.412)

17.08.140 Modifications.
Major modifications or changes to: (1) an approved development plan such as an increase in the density, enlargement of a building or structure; (2) establishment of a use or category of uses not specifically authorized by a permit or other discretionary approval, or the zoning district in which it is located; or (3) conditions of approval, shall require an amendment to the permit or other discretionary approval. Such an amendment shall be processed in the same manner as the original permit except that the information required for a modification shall be that needed to adequately describe the proposed modification or change as determined by the planning director. Relatively minor physical changes to the development plan such as the use of different landscaping materials, slight alterations in building elevations, rearrangement of the parking or insignificant relocation of structures may be approved by the planning director. (Prior code § 27.413)

17.08.150 Denied applications.
A.    Whenever any application for a permit (i.e., use permit, variance, etc.) or other discretionary approval is denied, no new application for the same or a substantially similar project may be filed for a period of one year from the date of the denial unless the denial is made without prejudice (a declaration that no rights or privileges of the applicant are considered waived or lost with respect to the submittal or resubmittal of his or her application). Where an application has been denied without prejudice, an application for the same or a substantially similar project may be filed within one year from the date of the denial. Any such application shall be considered a new application and be processed accordingly.

B.    Where a project has been denied without a nonprejudice finding and an application for a discretionary permit on the same property is received within one year from the date of denial, the planning director shall make the threshold decision whether the project is substantially similar to the rejected project and therefore cannot be filed for processing. The planning director shall provide the applicant, each member of the decision-making body and any person who has submitted a written request for notice a copy of the director’s proposed decision. Unless an appeal is filed, the proposed decision shall become final fifteen (15) days after notice is given by mail or by placing a copy of the notice in the decision-maker’s office mail box. Upon request of any member of the decision-making body voting with the majority, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a decision whether the project is substantially similar. (Prior code § 27.414)

17.08.160 Withdrawn applications.
An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the opening of the public hearing or thereafter with the consent of the decision-maker. A request to withdraw an application must be submitted by the applicant in writing. Withdrawal of an application shall terminate all further action on the application. Where an application has been withdrawn, an application for the same or substantially similar project may be filed within one year from the date of denial. Any such subsequent application shall be considered a new application and be processed accordingly. (Prior code § 27.415)

17.08.170 Simultaneous active permits/approvals.
Although more than one permit or discretionary approval for more than one use or project may be reviewed, approved and be valid concurrently for any specific location (such as a lot or structure or a portion of a lot or structure), only one use or project authorized by these permits or discretionary approvals may be established, developed or built. The establishment of any use or the filing of a final map, or construction, or zoning compliance approval pursuant to Section 17.08.150, when authorized by these permits or discretionary approvals, shall render the alternative permits or approvals null and void. (Prior code § 27.416)

17.08.180 Appeal procedure.
In accord with the following provisions, any applicant or other interested person dissatisfied with any action taken under this title may appeal such action and decision:

A.    Unless otherwise indicated, appeals from the decision of the planning director or any other administrative official in taking any of the actions authorized by this title shall be made to the planning commission through the planning director. Appeals from the decision of the planning commission in taking any of the actions authorized by this title shall be made to the city council through the city clerk.

B.    Fourteen (14) Day Appeal Period.

1.    Unless otherwise indicated, all appeals shall be made in writing and be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Appeals must be received by the planning director or city clerk not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of action from which such appeal is being taken. If the fourteenth calendar day is a weekend or a city holiday, the deadline is extended to the next working day of the city.

2.    No appeal is allowed or shall be heard, and the decision shall be final, after the lapse of the fourteen (14) day appeal period.

3.    The appeal period shall commence the day following the date of action or decision. The fourteen (14) day appeal period shall not commence unless notice of the decision has been provided as required by law. For appeals of decisions by the planning director, the fourteen (14) day appeal period shall not commence unless the planning director, in addition to any other notice required by law, has provided notice of the decision to the applicant. At the discretion of the director, when an administrative decision has the potential to generate significant public interest, the director shall notify all property owners and physical addresses within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the subject property within three days of the decision so that sufficient time remains for an appeal.

C.    The letter of appeal must state: (1) the specific action objected to; (2) the action appellant requests the city council to take; (3) the reason for the appeal; and (4) the name, address, and telephone number of the appellant or contact person if there are multiple appellants.

D.    Within three working days of receipt of the appeal, the planning director or city clerk shall examine the appeal, and if it is found to be incomplete, return it in person or by certified mail to the appellant for revision. Appellant shall have five working days to file an amended appeal. Upon failure to file an amended appeal within the five days, the appeal shall be deemed withdrawn.

E.    The receipt of a written appeal shall stay all actions, or put in abeyance all permits or other discretionary approvals which may have been granted, pending the effective date of the decision of the body hearing the appeal.

F.    The planning commission or the city council may, by motion adopted by majority vote, initiate an appeal on that decision-making body’s behalf. A motion for appeal must be passed within fourteen (14) days following rendering of the decision appealed; provided, however, that if no regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission or city council occurs within such fourteen (14) day time period, the time for such appeal shall be extended through the date of the next succeeding regularly scheduled meeting. No grounds for appeal need be stated nor must a letter of appeal be submitted.

G.    Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting of the hearing body, not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days after the date of filing an appeal or passing a motion for appeal, consistent with the agenda preparation procedures and schedule of the hearing body.

H.    All appeals shall be considered in a public hearing if a public hearing was required for the decision appealed, consistent with the procedures set forth in Section 17.08.070. All decision-making bodies hearing appeals shall consider the project in its entirety, or de novo. The planning commission or the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed as deemed just and equitable, provided such action is not contrary to any provisions set forth in this title. (Ord. 16-7 § 1: prior code § 27.417)

17.08.190 Processing fees.
This section is adopted to ensure that the city is reimbursed for its costs of providing services to applicants for development projects and to the extent advisable, provide uniformity with respect to such provisions. The provisions hereof shall apply to all such projects except to the extent that more specific state or local regulations preempt its application.

A.    Definitions. As used in this section:

“Development” means the same as that set forth in Government Code Section 65927; however, the term shall include a change of organization as defined in Government Code Section 56021.

“Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including the issuance of a permit or approval for construction, reconstruction, use or operation whether or not the permit or approval is ministerial or discretionary in nature. Examples of development projects include, but are not limited to, general plan amendments, rezoning and permits, approvals or use permits.

“Processing fee” or “processing costs” means the charges for staff time, transmission and communication costs, including but not limited to charges for postage, telephone, fax, transportation, etc., as well as the costs of production or reproduction of materials, exhibits, etc., used in the investigation, processing, inspection or review of development projects or the enforcement of regulations and conditions to development projects.

“Staff” includes the employees, agents, contractors, and consultants of the city.

B.    Billing Rates. The hourly rate to be billed by the city staff shall be periodically set by resolution of the council; other processing costs shall be at rates set by resolution of the council (e.g., costs of reproduction) or at direct cost to the city (e.g., postage). Such rates shall not exceed the costs (direct and indirect) of the services provided. Consultants shall be billed at the rate and for the expenses charged to the city plus any allocable overhead.

C.    Billing Records. All processing costs associated with the investigation, processing, inspection or review of development projects, or the enforcement of applicable regulations and conditions to development projects shall be recorded and charged to each such project.

D.    Payment of Processing Fees.

1.    No application for a development project may be filed without a deposit in an amount estimated to cover processing costs unless payment of processing fees have been waived by action of the council, or the applicant is a public entity exempted from payment of such fees. The city shall make subsequent periodic invoices to ensure that the balance in the project account remains sufficient to cover anticipated processing costs, and it shall be the responsibility of those liable for payment to make such payments.

2.    Each applicant for or operator of a development project, as well as the owner of the subject property, if different, shall be liable for payment of all processing fees associated with the development project.

E.    Lien on Subject Property.

1.    The finance director may notify an applicant or operator and, if different, the owner of the subject property, of the failure to comply with this section, the amount outstanding and of the fact that if not paid, the processing fees shall become a lien against the property. Such notice shall be given by registered or certified mail upon the owner or owner’s agent, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Service on one property owner in multiple ownership shall be deemed in compliance with this section. If an address for an owner cannot be reasonably obtained, the notice required by this section may be given by posting the subject property.

2.    Within ten (10) days from the date of posting, or date of registered or certified mail service, the applicant or operator, and if different, the owner or any person interested in the property may appeal to the council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk, setting forth in detail the reasons for appeal. The council shall hear from the appellant and thereafter pass upon such appeal. The decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.

3.    At the expiration of the time set for appeal or upon determination of the council upon appeal, the processing fees due and owing shall become a lien upon the subject property.

F.    Failure to Pay Processing Fees.

1.    As a separate, distinct and cumulative remedy established for the violation of this section, any city body with the authority to approve or conditionally approve or deny a development project may deny such project without prejudice if after notice the responsible party(ies) fail to comply with this section. The applicant and/or operator shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days’ mailed notice of the city’s intent to take such action.

2.    As a separate, distinct and cumulative remedy established for the violation of this section, the planning director, public works director or building official may issue a stop work order if the job site has previously been posted with a notice of intent to issue a stop work order for failure to comply with this section. The stop work order shall be served by posting a copy of the order on the subject property. In addition, a copy of such notice shall be promptly mailed to the applicant or operator and, if different, the owner of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Such order shall become effective immediately upon posting of the notice. After service of a stop order, no person shall perform any act with respect to the subject property in violation of the terms of the stop order, except such actions as the city determines are reasonably necessary to render the subject property safe or secure until the violation has been corrected.

3.    As a separate, distinct and cumulative remedy established for the collection of processing fees, an action may be brought in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the lien established by subsection E of this section. In such action, reasonable attorney’s fees shall be awarded to the prevailing party.

4.    As a separate, distinct and cumulative remedy established for the collection of processing fees, a civil action may be brought. The finance director, or his or her designee, may bring an action in the name of the city to collect the fees owing pursuant to this section. In such action, reasonable attorney’s fees shall be awarded to the prevailing party. (Prior code § 27.418)

17.08.200 Refund of city’s defense costs on appeal.
A.    As used in this section and Section 17.08.060, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1.    “City’s defense costs on appeal” shall mean all expenses, costs and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by city and paid for by applicant in defense of or an appeal of a trial court entry of judgment regarding the city’s approval of a residential project, from the date of entry of the trial court judgment through the date of the final decision on appeal.

2.    “Final decision on appeal” shall mean the issuance of a remittitur by the California Supreme Court, or the court of appeal, to the trial court in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 43 and 912.

3.    “Residential project” shall mean (a) a “residential development project” defined in Section 17.146.020, (b) which satisfies the requirements of Section 17.146.050(A), (B) or (C) and, if in compliance with Section 17.146.050(A) or (B), the units must also qualify towards satisfying the city’s regional housing needs allocation for households of very low incomes (as defined by Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code), lower incomes (as defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code), or moderate incomes (as defined by Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code), and (c) a permit application for the residential project was submitted in accordance with Section 17.08.040 on or after January 1, 2016.

B.    An application to request a refund of the city’s defense costs on appeal shall be filed by an applicant with the city clerk no later than (1) thirty (30) calendar days following the filing of an appeal of a trial court entry of judgment regarding the city’s approval of a residential project, or (2) thirty (30) calendar days following the effective date of this section with respect to a residential project that has received a final decision on appeal prior to the effective date of this section. Failure to timely file an application required by this subsection shall forfeit applicant’s ability to request a refund of the city’s defense costs on appeal, unless waived by the city council upon a showing of good cause by the applicant, as determined by the city council in its sole and exclusive discretion.

C.    Upon receipt of the application required by subsection B of this section, the city clerk shall identify, confirm and note the date of receipt of the application and transmit a copy thereof to the city attorney and finance director. The city attorney and finance director shall take all necessary steps to thereafter separately account for the city’s defense costs on appeal.

D.    Upon issuance of a final decision on appeal, the applicant shall transmit a copy forthwith to the city clerk, who shall promptly provide a copy to the city attorney and finance director. If the final decision on appeal reverses or overturns the city’s approval of the residential project, in whole or in part, then the application shall be dismissed forthwith by the city manager, which decision shall be final and nonappealable. If the final decision on appeal affirms the city’s approval of the residential project, then the city clerk shall schedule the application for consideration by the city council at their next available regular meeting.

E.    The city attorney and finance director shall provide to the city council in connection with its consideration of the application the total amount of the city’s defense costs on appeal. Further, the city attorney shall advise whether the applicant has, to date, paid all trial court litigation defense costs, city’s defense costs on appeal, and complied with all other indemnity requirements or conditions.

F.    The city council may, in its sole and exclusive discretion, following its consideration of the application and all appropriate testimony and public comment, deny or approve the application. In connection with approval of an application, the city council shall appropriate and allocate funds, as necessary, and authorize the city manager and finance director to refund to the applicant, in accordance with subsection G of this section, a fixed sum, as determined by the city council, in a range from zero dollars ($0.00) to an amount not to exceed the city’s defense costs on appeal. Furthermore, if the residential project is part of a mixed use development (as defined in Section 17.04.160), the eligible refund amount shall not exceed the city’s defense costs on appeal times the quotient of the floor area devoted to the residential project divided by the floor area devoted to the entire mixed use development. The foregoing notwithstanding, if the applicant has not paid all trial court litigation defense costs, city’s defense costs on appeal, or complied with any other indemnity requirements or conditions, then unless waived by the city council upon a showing of good cause by the applicant, as determined by the city council in its sole and exclusive discretion, the application shall be denied.

G.    Within thirty (30) calendar days following issuance by the city of a final certificate of occupancy for the residential project, the city manager and finance director shall take such steps as are necessary to refund to the applicant the fixed sum determined by the city council in accordance with subsection F of this section. The foregoing notwithstanding, in the event the city manager becomes aware prior to issuing the refund approved by the city council that the applicant has not paid all trial court litigation defense costs, city’s defense costs on appeal, or complied with any other indemnity requirements or conditions not previously considered by the city council, the application shall be returned to the city council for reconsideration.

H.    Applicant shall have no right to transfer or assign to any third party, or to pledge or otherwise hypothecate, the sum appropriated, allocated and approved by the city council to be refunded to the applicant in accordance with subsection F of this section, and any such attempt by applicant to transfer, assign, pledge or hypothecate said sum shall be null and void.

I.    The provisions of Section 17.08.060 and this section are not intended to and shall not be deemed or interpreted to relieve an applicant of a residential project of the requirement, condition or obligation to pay trial court litigation expenses, costs and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by city in connection with the defense of the city’s approval of the residential project, city’s defense costs on appeal, or any other indemnity requirement, condition or obligation, including without limitation the requirement, condition or obligation to indemnify the city from and against any damages, costs and/or attorney’s fees should the city’s approval of the residential project be reversed. (Ord. 19-6 § 1 (Exh. A (part)))

Chapter 17.12
ZONING AND GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

Article 1
General Plan Amendments

17.12.010    Statement of policy.

17.12.020    Determination of general plan conformance.

17.12.030    Initiation.

17.12.040    Property owner initiation.

17.12.050    Amendment guidelines.

17.12.060    Annual review.

Article 2
Additional Amendment Procedures

17.12.070    Purpose.

17.12.080    General provisions.

17.12.090    Application.

17.12.100    Procedure.

17.12.110    City council/planning commission considerations.

17.12.120    Modifications by city council.

17.12.130    Adoption and amendment of specific plan.

17.12.140    Adoption and amendment of general plan.

Article 1
General Plan Amendments

17.12.010 Statement of policy.
The city council finds that the community is best served by having a general plan which is stable, widely understood and accepted; and that such stability, understanding, and acceptance is jeopardized by too-frequent amendment of the general plan. While recognizing that the general plan evolves over time, the city council intends to limit the rate and manner of amendment to the general plan so that the community, individually and collectively, may make its own plans in reliance on a reasonable constancy of the city general plan. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.1)

17.12.020 Determination of general plan conformance.
Initial determination of general plan applicability to a specific parcel or proposal shall be the responsibility of the city planner. Such determination when made verbally shall be advisory only. A formal determination in writing may be obtained upon written request of the city and payment of a fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. Such a formal determination may be appealed in writing to the planning commission and ultimately the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.08 of this title. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.2)

17.12.030 Initiation.
A general plan amendment may be initiated by a majority vote of the planning commission or of the city council or by an application filed by a property owner or the owner’s authorized agent. Generally, initiation by the city council shall be a direction to the planning commission to initiate such an action. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.3)

17.12.040 Property owner initiation.
A.    All general plan amendments initiated by property owners must be processed for preliminary review pursuant to the provisions of this section, unless exempted pursuant to subsection F of this section.

B.    A completed application for a general plan amendment shall be submitted on a form provided by the planning department at least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled review date and shall include the following:

1.    A description of the land use proposal;

2.    A completed general plan amendment application form including a statement of general goals and objectives and social, economic, and physical conditions which relate to the requested amendment and its relationship with adjoining land uses;

3.    A general plan diagram showing adjoining land use projections in the area requested for change within at least a five hundred (500) foot radius of the exterior limits of the subject property;

4.    A completed environmental information questionnaire;

5.    A processing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council.

C.    Complete applications received for a general plan amendment shall be presented to the city council for preliminary review at the council’s first regularly scheduled meetings in March and September of each year. Following the review, the city council, at its discretion, may order the application to be further processed or may direct staff to cease processing the application. Any authorization to proceed does not imply in any way ultimate approval or disapproval of an application.

D.    If the city council authorizes the application to be processed, it shall refer the matter to the planning commission, which shall hold public hearings pursuant to state law after the necessary environmental review process and staff analysis have been completed.

E.    In the event the city council directs staff to cease processing an application pursuant to subsection C of this section, a new application for a general plan amendment involving substantially the same request for a parcel or area shall not be reviewed by the city council for at least one year after such direction.

F.    Applications for general plan amendments shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if they:

1.    Propose only residential development and that at least sixty percent (60%) of the planned residential units shall be “affordable” as defined in Section 17.04.160(B) of this title;

2.    Were properly filed with the city prior to March 26, 1991; or

3.    The city council finds for specified reasons that it is in interest of the public health, safety or welfare to allow the processing to proceed forthwith. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.4)

17.12.050 Amendment guidelines.
The planning commission and city council in reviewing general plan amendments shall consider the following guidelines:

A.    To allow for the consideration of an element not initially considered at the time of approval of the general plan;

B.    To reflect changes in goals, policy, physical, social or economic conditions; and

C.    When, due to naturally occurring physical constraints or changes, the projected land usage on the general plan is no longer feasible. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.5)

17.12.060 Annual review.
At least once a year, generally in January, the planning commission shall conduct a comprehensive review of the general plan map and text and report its findings to the city council. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 26.6)

Article 2
Additional Amendment Procedures

17.12.070 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures required for the adoption or amendment of this title including zoning map (rezoning), general plan including general plan land use map and specific plan. These procedures shall also apply to pre-zoning of unincorporated lots. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.425)

17.12.080 General provisions.
The city council may by ordinance amend the provisions (text) of this title or zoning map, according to procedures established by this article, whenever the public necessity, the general community welfare and good zoning practice warrant such amendment. All amendments to this title or zoning map shall be consistent with the general plan, any adopted specific plan, and other appropriate city policies. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.426)

17.12.090 Application.
Amendments may be initiated by the city council, planning commission or planning director. In the case of the zoning map, amendments (rezoning) may also be initiated by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the property included in any proposed change. An application for a rezoning shall be made in writing in a form prescribed by the planning director. (Note: individuals or groups seeking to change the general plan land use classification or zoning in an area independent of an application should contact the city council.) (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.427)

17.12.100 Procedure.
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments and make a recommendation to the city council, where a public hearing shall also be held prior to a final decision by the city council. The planning commission may recommend the approval, modified approval or denial of the proposed amendment. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.428)

17.12.110 City council/planning commission considerations.
In considering an ordinance amending any of the provisions of this title including an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the planning commission and city council shall:

A.    Take into consideration the consistency of the proposed amendment with the goals, policies and programs of the general plan, adopted planning commission (where applicable) and other existing city policies;

B.    If, considering the reduction of residential density, ensure compliance with Government Code Section 65863 by either finding that the remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need or by identifying sufficient additional, adequate, and available sites with an equal or greater density so that there is no net loss in residential density. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.429)

17.12.120 Modifications by city council.
The following provisions shall be observed when the city council determines to modify any proposed amendment:

A.    The city council may modify any proposed amendment by making nonsubstantive changes in the wording of a proposed text amendment; or in the case of a rezoning, by reducing the area involved, or by adopting a more restrictive zoning classification without first referring the matter to the planning commission for a report and recommendation. However, any substantive change proposed by the city council which was not discussed by the planning commission shall be referred back to the planning commission for a report and recommendation.

B.    When the city council has referred a matter back to the planning commission, it shall report back to the city council within thirty (30) days after the date of the city council referral unless the city council specifically allows for a longer period of time for the planning commission report and recommendation. Where action cannot be taken within thirty (30) days by the planning commission, a longer period of time may be requested and the city council may at its discretion grant such a request. Although no additional public hearing shall be required, the planning commission may at its discretion hold a public hearing prior to a report and recommendation on any matter referred to it by the city council.

C.    The city council or planning commission may abandon any proceedings for an amendment initiated by its own action, when such proceedings are before either the city council or planning commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.430)

17.12.130 Adoption and amendment of specific plan.
Except as provided in Section 17.12.140 of this chapter, specific plans shall be adopted and amended in the same manner as provided for zoning ordinance amendments, pursuant to Sections 17.12.090 through 17.12.120, of this adoption or amendment of a specific plan may be by ordinance, resolution or both depending on the proposed planning commission. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.431)

17.12.140 Adoption and amendment of general plan.
Except as provided in Title 16 of this code, the general plan and any element thereof shall be adopted and amended in the same manner as provided for zoning ordinance amendments, pursuant to Sections 17.12.090 through 17.12.120, inclusive of this article. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.432)

Chapter 17.16
ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY
Sections:

17.16.010    Principal districts and overlay districts.

17.16.020    Adoption of map.

17.16.030    Interpretation of district boundaries.

17.16.040    Application of regulations.

17.16.050    Procedures for zoning compliance.

17.16.060    Annexation of territory.

17.16.070    Interim zoning ordinance.

17.16.080    Designation of districts.

17.16.090    Designation of overlay districts.

17.16.010 Principal districts and overlay districts.
The zoning ordinance establishes and divides the city into a number of principal zoning districts within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land, uses, structures and buildings. The application of zoning districts to private property is guided by and shall be consistent with the general plan pursuant to Section 17.04.090. Overlay districts establish regulations which shall be in addition to those of the principal district with which they overlay. These districts are intended to provide for the regulation of properties with special or unique conditions. The principal and overlay districts established by this title are described below in this article. (Prior code § 27.10)

17.16.020 Adoption of map.
The designations, locations and boundaries of the districts established in this title shall be shown on the zoning map or maps of the city. The zoning map accompanying and incorporated into this title by reference shall govern the administration and enforcement of all regulations, standards and permits. The zoning map as amended or changed from time to time, together with all notations, references, data and other information, is adopted and made a part of this title. Any amendment or rezoning of a property or properties from one district to another district shall constitute an amendment to this section and shall be so referenced in the amending ordinance. (Prior code § 27.11)

17.16.030 Interpretation of district boundaries.
All areas within the incorporated boundaries of the city whether land or water, public or private shall be considered to be zoned and shall be governed by the regulations of this title. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on the zoning map, the planning commission, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall determine the location of such boundaries. In its determination, the planning commission shall be guided by the following rules:

A.    The legal description of the lot or lots referenced by the assessor’s parcel number of any prior rezoning and/or the existing zoning map;

B.    Unless otherwise clearly indicated on the zoning map, zoning district boundaries shall coincide with property lines, sectional lines, center lines of blocks and/or the boundaries of publicly owned lands;

C.    Where the location of the zoning district boundaries cannot be determined by the above rules, the boundaries shall be located by the use of the scale on the zoning map. (Prior code § 27.12)

17.16.040 Application of regulations.
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the following shall apply within the incorporated boundaries of the city:

A.    No land, building, structure or premises shall be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than that which is permitted by this title, the regulations of the applicable zoning district in which such land, building, structure and premises is located, and any conditions of approval imposed upon any permit authorized by this title.

B.    No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, rebuilt or removed except in conformity to the yard, setback, building location and height regulations of this title, the regulations of the applicable zoning district in which such building or part thereof or structure is located, and any conditions of approval imposed upon any permit authorized by this title.

C.    No yard or other open space provided about any building on one lot for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or lot except in conjunction with condominium projects or as specifically provided for in this title or in any conditions of approval imposed upon any permit authorized by this title.

D.    No lot for sale, lease or financing may be created except in compliance with the regulations governing the minimum size, area and dimensions of this title, the regulations of the applicable zoning district in which such land is located, and any conditions of approval imposed upon any permit authorized by this title. (Prior code § 27.13)

17.16.050 Procedures for zoning compliance.
Prior to approval of the following land use activities the planning department shall first establish compliance with the provisions contained in this title:

A.    Business license requests;

B.    Issuance of building permits;

C.    The first and subsequent nonresidential occupancies or uses of any land, lot, building or structure;

D.    Any full or partial change in the nonresidential occupancy or use of any land, lot, building or structure; or

E.    The expansion of any nonresidential occupancy or use of any land, lot, building or structure.

The planning department shall confirm if the use, building or structure complies with all applicable city ordinances and the city general plan, and compliance with any conditions of approval imposed on any permit authorized by this title. Actions of the planning department taken in regard to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the planning commission and city council pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.14)

17.16.060 Annexation of territory.
Properties annexed into the city shall be zoned in accord with the following provisions:

A.    The city may prezone unincorporated territory adjoining the city for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the city. The method of accomplishing such prezoning shall be as provided for by Chapter 17.12, Article 2. All properties which have been pre-zoned in such manner shall be annexed with the retention of their pre-zoning classifications.

B.    All properties which have not been pre-zoned in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.12, Article 2 shall automatically be zoned A-20, agriculture district upon annexation. (Prior code § 27.15)

17.16.070 Interim zoning ordinance.
Without following the procedures otherwise required preliminary to the adoption of a zoning ordinance, the city council, to protect the public safety, health and welfare, may adopt as an urgency measure an interim ordinance prohibiting any use which may be in conflict with a contemplated zoning proposal which the city council, planning commission or the planning department is considering or studying or intends to study within a reasonable time. Such urgency measure shall require a four-fifths vote of the city council for adoption and comply with the provisions of Section 65858 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 27.16)

17.16.080 Designation of districts.
The several classes of general districts established and into which the city is divided are created to establish conformity with the general plan land use designation as follows:

General Plan Land Use Designation

Zoning District

Agriculture

A-20 twenty-acre agriculture

 

W winery

 

AP agricultural preserve

Woodlands and watershed

WW woodlands and watershed

Low density residential

LR low density residential

Medium density residential

MR medium density residential

High density residential

HR high density residential

Central business

CB central business

Service commercial

SC service commercial

Business and professional office

BPO business and professional office

Industrial

I industrial

Public and quasi-public

PQP public and quasi-public

Parks and recreation

PR parks and recreation

Open space

OS open space

(Prior code § 27.17)

17.16.090 Designation of overlay districts.
In addition to the foregoing classes of districts, certain overlay districts are established and are designated as follows:

RR

rural-residential district

SP

specific plan district

FLP

special flood plain district

HP

historic preservation district

PD

planned development district

MHP

mobilehome park district

PI

parking impact district

(Prior code § 27.18)

Chapter 17.20
TWENTY-ACRE AGRICULTURE (A-20) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Permitted uses.

17.20.030    Conditional uses.

17.20.040    Design review required.

17.20.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.20.060    Development standards.

17.20.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.20.010 Purpose.
The twenty-acre agriculture district (A-20) provides for agricultural and residential uses. With the exception of those hillside areas designated woodlands and watershed, and wineries designated winery, all lands outside the urban limit line are designated A-20 regardless of their size or use. The purpose of the A-20 district is to promote and implement the policies of the general plan to preserve agricultural land uses and provide for future orderly development as the urban limit line is adjusted to accommodate urban growth. This district restricts the density of residential use and stipulates the location and area of residential development to promote preservation of agricultural land use and reduce impacts to the provision of infrastructure as the urban area of the city expands. (Prior code § 27.20)

17.20.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the A-20 district:

A.    One single-family dwelling per parcel in existence on October 1, 1993, consistent with the development standards and density regulations of the agriculture general plan land use designation;

B.    Cultivated agriculture including, but not limited to, farming, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture; retail sales area in excess of two hundred (200) square feet regulated by use permit;

C.    Animal husbandry and livestock farming; provided, that not more than one horse, one mule, one cow, one steer or similar large animal shall be kept for each one-half acre of area;

D.    One accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030;

E.    Accessory buildings or structures without toilet plumbing or cooking facilities, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.010;

F.    One short-term rental per parcel, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.134;

G.    Agricultural employee housing of up to thirty-six (36) beds in group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6;

H.    Supportive housing, consistent with the development standards and density regulations of the agriculture general plan land use designation;

I.    Transitional housing, consistent with the development standards and density regulations of the agriculture general plan land use designation;

J.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the A-20 district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 17-2 § 3; Ord. 15-2 § 3 (part): Ord. 12-2 § 3: Ord. 03-4 § 2: prior code § 27.21)

17.20.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the use consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the A-20 district:

A.    More than one single-family dwelling per parcel in existence on October 1, 1993; provided, that the density and development standards of the A-20 district shall be observed;

B.    Buildings for agriculture related uses on existing or proposed parcels;

C.    Facilities for the processing of agricultural products primarily produced on the premises; excluding large wineries;

D.    Hog farms, dairies, commercial poultry farms and egg ranches;

E.    Roadside stands which exceed two hundred (200) square feet in floor area and/or the sale of agricultural products not produced on the premises;

F.    Kennels, veterinarian hospitals and clinics, public and private stables, riding academies; commercial and agricultural nurseries;

G.    Agricultural employee housing not expressly permitted in Section 17.20.020;

H.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the A-20 district pursuant to Chapter 17.08;

I.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112;

J.    Small wineries subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.180. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 15-2 § 3 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 3: Ord. 02-8 § 3; prior code § 27.22)

17.20.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164, all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.116.030), or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part))

17.20.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the A-20 district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers, and other accessory buildings and structures without plumbing or cooking facilities;

B.    Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.116;

C.    Roadside stands, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in floor area, for the sale of agricultural products produced on site;

D.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

E.    Swimming pools when located at least five feet from the property boundary and are fenced in a fashion to protect children in compliance with the Uniform Building Code;

F.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

G.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 3: Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 03-4 § 4: prior code § 27.23. Formerly 17.20.040)

17.20.060 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the A-20 district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Parcel Size.

1.    The minimum parcel size for new lots created after October 1, 1993 is twenty (20) acres.

2.    Parcels created as a result of lot line adjustments may be less than twenty (20) acres, provided the number of parcels existing prior to the lot line adjustment does not increase.

3.    As set forth in Section 17.20.060, the density allowed on a legal parcel ten (10) acres or larger existing on October 1, 1993, shall be limited to one dwelling unit per five acres. The density allowed shall be determined on the basis of parcels existing on October 1, 1993; parcels created after October 1, 1993, shall not be further subdivided unless consistent with density based on the parcel(s) in existence on October 1, 1993. The units allowed in excess of one unit shall be located on parcels of no greater than one-half acre each in compliance with the policies of the agriculture land use designation of the general plan. One of the permitted residential units shall be located on the remainder parcel devoted to agricultural uses and/or a deed restriction shall be placed on the remainder parcel which precludes additional residential use unless consistent with the general plan.

B.    Standards for Lots Less Than Two Acres in Area. Development regulations and floor area ratio shall be the same as those for the LR:1A: low density residential one acre minimum zoning district (Chapter 17.36).

C.    Standards for Lots Two Acres or Greater in Area:

Maximum nonagricultural coverage

1 acre1

Floor area ratio (F.A.R.)

Not regulated

Front setback

50 feet2

Side setback

50 feet2

Rear yard

20 feet

Side yard

20 feet

Height of buildings/structures

30 feet

1    Nonagricultural coverage: No more than one acre of any one parcel shall be removed from active agricultural use. “Active agricultural use” means animal husbandry, crop, tree farming, and viticulture. All structures, driveways (except for a sixteen (16) foot wide driveway no greater than two-thirds the length of the parcel), parking, patios, lawn or other nonagricultural uses shall be limited to the one acre maximum per parcel.

2    Measured from the centerline of abutting streets.

(Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 00-5 § 2: prior code § 27.24. Formerly 17.20.050)

17.20.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
A.    Special Yards and Distances Between Buildings. Barns, stables, chicken houses and similar accessory buildings shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from a street, nor less than forty (40) feet from any dwelling on an adjacent parcel or R district boundary line.

B.    General Plan. General plan policy 2.6.61 limits residential development on properties existing at the time of adoption of the general plan (October 1, 1993) which are designated agriculture and are outside of the urban limit line in accordance with the following criteria:

1.    Maximum density of one unit for every five acres of base parcel area;

2.    New parcels created after October 1, 1993. Parcels created for new development shall not exceed one-half acre in area unless consistent with policy 2.6.62;

3.    For a legal parcel existing on October 1, 1993 the total area for new residential developments shall not exceed a ratio of one-half acre per unit allowed. To determine the area of the parcel which can be used for residential development, the maximum number of units allowed shall be multiplied by one-half acre per unit. After determining the area of the parcel which can be used for residential development, any number of units below the maximum permitted may be located within that area;

4.    Existing unit(s) on the base parcel shall be included when determining compliance with the criteria establishing the permitted number of parcels;

5.    New parcels shall be contiguous and accessible from existing streets;

6.    New parcels shall be located so that they minimize the impact on the agricultural viability of the base parcel and adjoining properties;

7.    Adequate provision of utilities shall be considered prior to approval of creation of new parcels and/or building sites.

C.    Outside Urban Limit Line. In areas outside the urban limit line, new parcels can be created to separate residential development that existed prior to the adoption of the 1993 general plan from remaining agricultural lands. The area of the new parcel on which the existing residential development is located may exceed one-half acre, provided the area does not include existing agricultural land except land which is restricted to agricultural use. The area of the new parcel on which the existing residential development is located and the number of units existing within the area of the new parcel(s) shall be counted against the development potential of the base parcel as set forth in guiding policy 2.6.61. Neither the area (one-half acre per unit) nor the number of units (one unit per five acres) shall be exceeded, except as provided for residential development which existed prior to the adoption of the general plan.

D.    Right to Farm. Property owners within this A-20 district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); prior code § 27.25. Formerly 17.20.060)

Chapter 17.24
WINERY (W) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.24.010    Purpose.

17.24.020    Permitted uses.

17.24.030    Conditional uses.

17.24.040    Design review required.

17.24.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.24.060    Development standards.

17.24.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.24.010 Purpose.
The winery district (W) provides for winery and winery-related uses within the agriculture general plan land use designation. Lands devoted to the production of wine and vineyards which are owned by the winery are classified as W. (Prior code § 27.30)

17.24.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the W District:

A.    All uses permitted in the A-20 district;

B.    Any winery and its accessory and related uses existing as of June 25, 1979, provided, however, that any new use, change of use, or expansion of facilities shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this title.

C.    Uses accessory to a winery, to include offices, laboratories, equipment maintenance shops, employees’ eating facilities, cooperage repair shops, wine storage tanks, scales and boiler rooms. (Prior code § 27.31)

17.24.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the use consistent with the policies of the AG general plan land use designation and the purpose of the winery district:

A.    Conditional uses regulated in the A-20 district;

B.    Establishment of new wineries, to include grape sampling, crushing of grapes, fermenting and processing of grape juice, aging and processing of wine, bottling of wine, on-site disposal of winery waste generated on a site and warehousing and shipping of wine produced on the premises;

C.    Any winery equipment or improvements proposed to be located within four hundred (400) feet of any R district or within two hundred (200) feet of State Highway 29, the Silverado Trail or Deer Park Road;

D.    The following winery-related uses:

1.    Facilities for major public assembly events, such as concerts, art festivals, banquets and special tastings,

2.    Additional dwellings for occupancy by owners, caretakers and/or other employees, provided density does not exceed one dwelling unit per each five acres of the winery’s contiguous property,

3.    Winery visitor center (day use only), to include tour and tasting facilities, retail sales of wines and wine-related items, catering shops, cafes, restaurants, delicatessens and drinking places;

E.    Commercial scales and commercial grape sampling facilities;

F.    Distilleries and breweries;

G.    Winery refuse recycling facilities;

H.    Warehousing of wine from grapes not crushed on the premises. (Prior code § 27.32)

17.24.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164, all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.33)

17.24.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the W district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers and other accessory buildings and structures;

B.    Roadside stands, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in floor area, for the sale of agricultural products produced on site;

C.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

D.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

E.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 4: prior code § 27.34)

17.24.060 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the W district, except as otherwise provided in this chapter:

A.

Maximum Standards.

 

1.

Density of units

1 unit/5 acres*

 

2.

Height of buildings/ structures

45 feet

 

3.

Building coverage

50 percent

B.

Minimum Standards.

 

1.

Lot area

20 acres*

 

2.

Lot width

300 feet

 

3.

Front setback

100 feet

 

4.

Side setback

50 feet

 

5.

Rear yard

75 feet

 

6.

Side yard

50 feet

*    The residential density allowed on a legal parcel ten (10) acres or larger existing on October 1, 1993, shall be limited to one unit per five acres. The density allowed shall be determined on the basis of parcels existing on October 1, 1993; parcels created after October 1, 1993, shall not be further subdivided unless consistent with density based on the parcel(s) in existence on October 1, 1993. The units allowed in excess of one unit shall be located on parcels of no greater than one-half acre each in compliance with the policies of the agriculture land use designation of the general plan. One of the permitted residential units shall be located on the remainder parcel devoted to agricultural uses.

(Prior code § 27.35)

17.24.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
A.    All wine storage tanks and surface winery waste treatment facilities shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 17.24.060.

B.    No use authorized under the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted where use, occupancy or patronage will exceed the capability of the site to provide off-street parking, waste disposal system and reasonable provisions for public safety.

C.    Retail sales and food and drink facilities must be integrated with a visitor center, and no advertising or other exterior evidence of such use shall be visible from any public right-of-way.

D.    Winery operations shall generate sound levels no greater than fifty-five (55) decibels at any property line more than ten (10) percent of the time (L 10). “L 10" is the noise level at the property line that is exceeded ten (10) percent of the operating time.

E.    Winery operations shall generate no discernible odors of sewerage or putrefying organic material origin, other than normal fermentation odors, at the property lines.

F.    Bottling, warehousing and retail sales activities shall be conducted within structures specifically designated for such uses.

G.    Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.124.

H.    Approval of a use permit pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to all provisions of Chapter 17.168. (Prior code § 27.36)

Chapter 17.28
AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE (AP) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Permitted uses.

17.28.030    Conditional uses.

17.28.040    Development standards.

17.28.010 Purpose.
The agricultural preserve district (AP) is intended to be applied in the fertile areas of the city in which agriculture is and should continue to be the predominant land use, where uses incompatible to agriculture should be precluded and where the development of urban-type uses would be detrimental to the continuance of agriculture and the maintenance of open space which are economic and aesthetic attributes and assets of the city. (Prior code § 27.3.50)

17.28.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the AP district:

A.    Agriculture;

B.    One single-family dwelling unit per legal lot;

C.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

D.    Agricultural employee housing up to thirty-six (36) beds in group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6;

E.    Supportive housing;

F.    Transitional housing. (Ord. 16-3 § 5; Ord. 15-2 § 4 (part): prior code § 27.3.51)

17.28.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the use consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the AP district.

A.    Farmworker housing and seasonal farm labor camps not expressly permitted in Section 17.28.020;

B.    Facilities, other than wineries, for the processing of agricultural products grown or raised on the same parcels or contiguous parcels under the same ownership;

C.    Kennels and veterinary facilities;

D.    Feed lots;

E.    Noncommercial wind energy and conversion systems;

F.    On-site reclamation and disposal of treated wastewater generated by the city’s public wastewater treatment facilities;

G.    Any and all of the following uses; provided, that in the aggregate, such uses are clearly incidental, related and subordinate to the primary operation of the city’s treated wastewater reclamation and disposal facilities:

1.    Office and laboratory uses,

2.    Marketing of treated and reclaimed wastewater and agricultural products produced upon the premises;

H.    Public outdoor parks and recreation facilities compatible with agriculture, but excluding golf courses and tennis courts. (Ord. 15-2 § 4 (part): prior code § 27.3.52)

17.28.040 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the AP district, except as otherwise provided in this chapter:

A.

Maximum Standards.

 

Height of buildings/structures

35 feet

B.

Minimum Standards.

 

 

Lot area

40 acres

 

Front setback

20 feet

 

Side setback

20 feet

 

Rear yard

20 feet

 

Side yard

20 feet

(Prior code § 27.3.54)

Chapter 17.32
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (LR) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.32.010    Purpose.

17.32.020    Permitted uses.

17.32.030    Conditional uses.

17.32.040    Design review required.

17.32.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.32.060    Development standards.

17.32.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.32.010 Purpose.
The LR district is established for consistency with the low density residential general plan designation. The district provides for single-family detached homes, accessory dwelling units, limited agricultural uses and compatible uses. Residential densities shall not be less than one dwelling unit per acre nor more than five dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.40)

17.32.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the LR district:

A.    Remodeling or reconstruction of one single-family dwelling;

B.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is 1.99 units or less;

C.    Day care facility serving six or fewer children;

D.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving six or fewer persons;

E.    The installation of mobile homes constructed and/or purchased after October 1976, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction of Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code shall be permitted in accordance with the following conditions:

1.    To be occupied only as a single-family residential use,

2.    To be subject to all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable to conventionally built dwellings,

3.    To be attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations,

4.    To be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventionally built dwellings extending to the top of the foundation,

5.    To have parapet walls or roofs which utilize shingle or other materials customarily used on conventionally built dwellings;

F.    Residential facility serving six or fewer persons;

G.    One accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030;

H.    Accessory buildings or structures without toilet plumbing or cooking facilities, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.010;

I.    One short-term rental per parcel, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.134;

J.    Supportive housing;

K.    Transitional housing;

L.    Agricultural employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees;

M.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the LR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 17-2 § 4; Ord. 15-2 § 5: Ord. 12-2 § 4: Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 5: prior code § 27.41)

17.32.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

A.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is two units or greater, pursuant to Section 17.32.060;

B.    Small lot development meeting the standards of Chapter 17.112 limited to one primary unit per lot;

C.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112;

D.    Bed and breakfast inns when located in an existing residential dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.132;*

E.    Utility substations;

F.    Day care facility serving seven or more children;

G.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving seven or more persons;

H.    Residential facility serving seven or more persons;

I.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and pursuant to Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city.

(Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 6: prior code § 27.42)

17.32.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.116.030) for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.43)

17.32.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the LR district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers and other accessory buildings or structures without plumbing or cooking facilities;

B.    Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.116;

C.    Family day care home serving twelve (12) or fewer children;

D.    Lodging house providing housing for not less than thirty (30) consecutive days for not more than two paying occupants, when located within the principal building, one on-site parking space is provided for each room, and the dwelling is owner occupied. Lodging house for more than two but not more than five paying occupants is permitted only upon approval of a use permit;

E.    Household pets and not more than twelve (12) small domestic animals in total. “Household pets” means small animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, domesticated pigs, pigeons, hens, and the like; but not including roosters, quacking ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs, kennels or the presence of animals for commercial purposes. Beekeeping (apiaries) shall be allowed pursuant to Chapter 17.190, Beekeeping;

F.    Gardening excluding the retail sale of any products on the premises;

G.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

H.    Swimming pools when located at least five feet from the property boundary and are fenced in a fashion to protect children;

I.    Satellite television receiving antennas subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.136;

J.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

K.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

L.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 6: Ord. 11-2 § 2 (Exh. A (part)); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 7: Ord. 02-6 § 2; prior code § 27.44)

17.32.060 Development standards.
The following standards and requirements shall apply in the LR district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Maximum Standards.

 

1.    Density

5.0 dwelling units per acre or as set forth in subsection E of this section.

2.    Lot coverage

35%

3.    Height of principal building

30 feet

4.    Height of accessory building as regulated by Chapter 17.116

15 feet

5.    Floor Area Ratio

(F.A.R.) shall be as regulated in Section 17.32.070.

6.    Width

The width of a structure shall not exceed 60% of the width of the lot as measured at the front elevation, excluding lineal footage of staggered architectural features that start at least 20 ft. back from the front elevation. The width is measured from the outside wall and shall not include roof eaves, but shall include porches and cantilevered floor areas. The front of lots shall be determined as set forth in Section 17.112.030, Front of lot/setbacks and yards in unusual situations.

B.    Minimum standards for parcels, except for flag lots and small lots as provided for in Chapter 17.112:

 

1.     Density

1 dwelling unit per acre consistent with subsection E of this section.

2.     Lot area

7,000 square feet

3.     Lot width

70 feet

4.     Lot frontage

70 feet

C.    Minimum standards for structures with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet or less:

 

1.     Front setback

20 feet

2.     Side setback

20 feet

3.     Side yard

10 feet

4.     Rear yard

20 feet

D.    Minimum standards for structures with a maximum height greater than twenty-five (25) feet and thirty (30) feet or less:

 

1.     Front setback

30 feet

2.     Side setback

30 feet

3.     Side yard

15 feet

4.     Rear yard

30 feet

E.    The planning director shall determine the density of the parcel utilizing assessor parcel information or a record of survey. Generally, if the density calculation results in housing that is a fraction of a unit and the fraction is less than one-half, the whole number shall be rounded down. If the fraction is one-half or greater, the whole number shall be rounded up. The determination of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission.

1.    The planning commission may approve a use permit to allow a reduced density on a parcel if environmental site constraints, the size and configuration of pre-existing development, or the provision of city services make compliance with the minimum density and other development standards impractical. Environmental constraints may include, without limitation, the presence of streams, significant trees, steep slopes, unusual lot configurations, or the presence of historic structures and cultural resources.

2.    Approval of a general plan amendment is required to reduce the density for other reasons. In approving a general plan amendment the city council and planning commission shall make the findings of Section 17.12.110.

3.    A legal accessory dwelling unit may be counted for purposes of compliance with the minimum density standard, but is exempt from the maximum density standard pursuant to Section 17.116.030(B)(5).

4.    Prior to permitting a density reduction by use permit or by general plan amendment, the city shall ensure compliance with Government Code Section 65863 by either finding that the remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need; or by identifying sufficient additional, adequate, and available sites with an equal or greater density so that there is no net loss in residential density.

F.    Consistent with California Government Code Section 65915, a density bonus may be given for housing projects that are affordable for persons of very low, low, or moderate income. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 00-5 § 3 (part): prior code §§ 27.45, 27.47)

17.32.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
The floor area ratio in the LR District shall be regulated as follows:

A.    The maximum gross floor area is the product of the parcel area multiplied by the floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shown on the table below:

Net Parcel Area (Square Feet)

Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)

Maximum Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

4,999 and less

—

1,800

5,000

0.36

1,800

6,000

0.35

2,100

7,000

0.34

2,380

8,000

0.33

2,640

9,000

0.32

2,880

10,000

0.31

3,100

11,000

0.30

3,300

12,000

0.29

3,480

13,000

0.28

3,640

14,000

0.27

3,780

15,000

0.26

3,900

16,000

0.25

4,000

17,000

0.24

4,080

18,000

0.23

4,140

19,000

0.22

4,180

20,000

0.21

4,200

25,000

0.195

4,875

30,000

0.18

5,400

35,000

0.165

5,775

40,000

0.15

6,000

43,560

0.139

6,069

The F.A.R. shall be interpolated to the nearest two-tenths of one percent based upon each two hundred (200) square feet of parcel area. For example, a parcel that is ten thousand six hundred (10,600) square feet in size has an allowable F.A.R. of .304.

B.    The maximum floor area permitted, regardless of parcel size, is six thousand sixty-nine (6,069) square feet.

The maximum gross floor area may be increased by four hundred (400) square feet per parcel for construction of an accessory dwelling unit in compliance with Section 17.116.030.

C.    The following buildings and areas are exempt from the F.A.R. provisions:

1.    One covered parking space of two hundred (200) square feet in size;

2.    Nonhabitable accessory buildings less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size;

3.    A nonhabitable basement or attic as defined in subsection E of this section;

4.    A balcony, porch, deck, or other structure where at least one of the longest dimensions is unenclosed;

5.    A legally constructed building which exceeds the maximum floor area permitted by this title and which is destroyed by fire, flood, landslide, or other act of God. Such a building may be rebuilt with up to the same amount of floor area, subject to development plan review and approval by the city in accordance with Section 17.16.050.

D.    Definitions:

“Attic” means a room or space immediately below the roof of a building that is not habitable and is utilized only for storage. The area must be an unconditioned, unfinished area less than seven feet at its highest point with an average height not exceeding four feet.

“Basement” means any area of the building in which the finished floor level directly above is less than four feet above finished grade on all sides.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of building gross floor area divided by net parcel area.

“Gross floor area” means the total horizontal area in square feet of each floor within the exterior walls of all buildings on a parcel, as measured at the exterior face of the enclosing walls, unless specifically excluded by subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section.

“Lot coverage” means the land area covered by all buildings or structures on a lot, including all projections except eaves. Decks or other structures with an elevation of eighteen (18) inches or less above finished grade shall not be considered as lot coverage.

“Net parcel area” means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a parcel, excluding area within vehicular rights-of-way and vehicular easements.

“Pre-existing development” means structures and improvements that were vested with a building permit prior to March 8, 2005, the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

E.    Property owners within this district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 00-5 § 3 (part): prior code §§ 27.46, 27.49 (part))

Chapter 17.36
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ONE ACRE MINIMUM (LR-1A) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Permitted uses.

17.36.030    Conditional uses.

17.36.040    Design review required.

17.36.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.36.060    Development standards.

17.36.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.36.010 Purpose.
The LR-1A low density residential one acre minimum district is established for consistency with the low density residential general plan designation. The district provides for single-family detached homes, accessory dwelling units, limited agricultural uses, and compatible uses. Residential densities in the LR-1A district shall not exceed 1.0 units per gross acre. (Prior code § 27.4.50)

17.36.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the LR-1A district:

A.    Day care facility serving six or fewer children;

B.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving six or fewer persons;

C.    The installation of mobile homes constructed and/or purchased after October 1976, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.), on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code shall be permitted in accordance with the following conditions:

1.    To be occupied only as a single-family residential use,

2.    To be subject to all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable to conventionally built dwellings,

3.    To be attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations,

4.    To be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventionally built dwellings extending to the top of the foundation,

5.    To have parapet walls or roofs which utilize shingles or other materials customarily used on conventionally built dwellings;

D.    One detached single-family dwelling per parcel;

E.    Residential facility serving six or fewer persons;

F.    One accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030;

G.    Accessory buildings or structures without toilet plumbing or cooking facilities, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.010;

H.    One short-term rental per parcel, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.134;

I.    Supportive housing;

J.    Transitional housing;

K.    Agricultural employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees;

L.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the LR north district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 17-2 § 5; Ord. 15-2 § 6: Ord. 12-2 § 5: Ord. 03-4 § 8: prior code § 27.4.51)

17.36.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

A.    Bed and breakfast inns when located in an existing residential dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.132;*

B.    Day care facility serving seven or more children;

C.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112;

D.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving seven or more persons;

E.    Residential facility serving seven or more persons;

F.    Utility substations;

G.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and pursuant to Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city.

(Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 03-4 § 9: prior code § 27.4.52)

17.36.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164, all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.116.030), or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part))

17.36.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the LR-1A district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers, and other accessory buildings and structures without plumbing or cooking facilities;

B.    Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.116;

C.    Family day care home serving twelve (12) or fewer children;

D.    Household pets such as dogs, cats, domesticated pigs, etc., and not more than twelve (12) small domestic animals in total, including rabbits, pigeons, hens, and the like; but not including roosters, quacking ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs, kennels or the presence of animals for commercial purposes. Beekeeping (apiaries) shall be allowed pursuant to Chapter 17.190, Beekeeping;

E.    Gardening excluding the retail sale of any products on the premises;

F.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

G.    Swimming pools when located at least five feet from the property boundary and are fenced in a fashion to protect children;

H.    Satellite television receiving antennas subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.136;

I.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

J.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

K.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 7: Ord. 11-2 § 2 (Exh. A (part)); Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 03-4 § 10: prior code § 27.4.53. Formerly § 17.36.040)

17.36.060 Development standards.
The following standards and requirements shall apply in the LR-1A district, except as otherwise provided in this title.

A.    Maximum Standards.

 

1.    Density

1.0 dwelling units per acre

2.    Lot coverage

35%

3.    Height of principal building

30 feet

4.    Height of accessory building

15 feet1

5.    Floor Area Ratio

(F.A.R.) shall be as regulated in Section 17.36.060.

6.    Width

The width of a structure shall not exceed 60% of the width of the lot as measured at the front elevation, excluding lineal footage of staggered architectural features that start at least 20 feet back from the front elevation. The width is measured from the outside wall and shall not include roof eaves, but shall include process and cantilevered floor areas. The front of lots shall be determined as set forth in Section 17.112.030, front of lot/setbacks and yards in unusual situations.

B.    Minimum Standards for parcels, except for flag lots and small lots as provided for in Chapter 17.112:

 

1.    Lot area

1.0 acre – Parcels created as a result of lot line adjustments may be less than 1 acre provided the number of parcels existing prior to the lot line adjustment does not increase and that no lots are less than 7,000 sq. ft. in size.

2.    Lot width

70 feet

3.    Lot frontage

70 feet

C.    Minimum Standards for structures with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet or less:

 

1.    Front setback

20 feet

2.    Side setback

20 feet

3.    Side yard

10 feet

4.    Rear yard

20 feet

D.    Minimum Standards for structures with a maximum height greater than twenty-five (25) feet and thirty (30) feet or less:

 

1.    Front setback

30 feet

2.    Side setback

30 feet

3.    Side yard

15 feet

4.    Rear yard

30 feet

1    Additional standards for accessory buildings are contained in Chapter 17.116.

(Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 04-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 00-5 § 3 (part): prior code §§ 27.48, 27.4.54. Formerly 17.36.050)

17.36.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
The floor area ratio in the LR-1A district shall be regulated as follows:

A.    The maximum gross floor area is the product of the net parcel area multiplied by the floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shown on the table below:

Net Parcel Area (Square Feet)

Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)

Maximum Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

4,999 and less

—

1,800

5,000

0.36

1,800

6,000

0.35

2,100

7,000

0.34

2,380

8,000

0.33

2,640

9,000

0.32

2,880

10,000

0.31

3,100

11,000

0.30

3,300

12,000

0.29

3,480

13,000

0.28

3,640

14,000

0.27

3,780

15,000

0.26

3,900

16,000

0.25

4,000

17,000

0.24

4,080

18,000

0.23

4,140

19,000

0.22

4,180

20,000

0.21

4,200

25,000

0.195

4,875

30,000

0.18

5,400

35,000

0.165

5,775

40,000

0.15

6,000

43,560

0.139

6,069

The F.A.R. shall be interpolated to the nearest two-tenths of one percent based upon each two hundred (200) square feet of parcel area. For example, a parcel that is ten thousand six hundred (10,600) square feet in size has an allowable F.A.R. of .304.

B.    The maximum floor area permitted, regardless of parcel size, is six thousand sixty-nine (6,069) square feet. The maximum gross floor area may be increased by four hundred (400) square feet per parcel for construction of an accessory dwelling unit in compliance with Section 17.116.030.

C.    The following buildings and areas are exempt from the F.A.R. provisions:

1.    One covered parking space of two hundred (200) square feet in size;

2.    Nonhabitable accessory buildings less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size;

3.    A nonhabitable basement or attic as defined below;

4.    A balcony, porch, deck or other structure where at least one of the longest dimensions is unenclosed;

5.    A legally constructed building which exceeds the maximum floor area permitted by this title and which is destroyed by fire, flood, landslide or other act of God. Such a building may be rebuilt with up to the same amount of floor area, subject to development plan review and approval by the city in accordance with Section 17.16.050.

D.    Definitions.

“Attic” means a room or space immediately below the roof of a building that is not habitable and is utilized only for storage. The area must be unconditioned, unfinished area less than seven feet at its highest point with an average height not exceeding four feet.

“Basement” means any area of the building in which the finished floor level directly above is less than four feet above finished grade on all sides.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of building gross floor area divided by net parcel area.

“Gross floor area” means the total horizontal area in square feet of each floor within the exterior walls of all buildings on a parcel, as measured at the exterior face of the enclosing walls, unless specifically excluded by subsection (C)(1) through (C)(5) of this section.

“Lot coverage” means the land area covered by all buildings or structures on a lot, including all projections except eaves. Decks or other structures with an elevation of eighteen (18) inches or less above finished grade shall not be considered as lot coverage.

“Net parcel area” means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a parcel, excluding area within vehicular rights-of-way and vehicular easements.

E.    Property owners within this district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 00-5 § 3 (part): prior code §§ 27.49 (part), 27.4.55. Formerly 17.36.060)

Chapter 17.40
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MR) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Permitted uses.

17.40.030    Conditional uses.

17.40.040    Design review required.

17.40.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.40.060    Development standards.

17.40.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.40.010 Purpose.
The MR district is established for consistency with the medium density residential general plan designation. The district provides for single-family detached homes, accessory dwelling units, limited agricultural uses and compatible uses. Residential densities shall not be less than 5.1 dwelling units per acre nor more than sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.50)

17.40.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the MR district:

A.    Remodeling or reconstruction of one single-family dwelling on a parcel of record;

B.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is 1.99 units or less;

C.    Day care facility serving six or fewer children;

D.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving six or fewer persons;

E.    Residential facility serving six or fewer persons;

F.    The installation of mobile homes constructed and/or purchased after October 1976, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code shall be permitted in accordance with the following conditions:

1.    To be occupied only as a single-family residential use,

2.    To be subject to all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable to conventionally built dwellings,

3.    To be attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations,

4.    To be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventionally built dwellings extending to the top of the foundation,

5.    To have parapet walls or roofs which utilize shingles or other materials customarily used on conventionally built dwellings;

G.    One accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030;

H.    Accessory buildings or structures without toilet plumbing or cooking facilities, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.010;

I.    One short-term rental per parcel, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.134;

J.    Supportive housing;

K.    Transitional housing;

L.    Agricultural employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees;

M.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the MR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08;

N.    Multiple-family dwellings, apartments, and dwelling groups at a density up to the maximum allowed by the medium density residential district shall be allowed as a permitted use on the following MR zoned parcels, which are identified as “Key Housing Sites” in Table 42 of the city’s 2015-2023 housing element, and are identified as follows by street address and assessor’s parcel number (APN): 567 Pope St. APN 009-070-002; 591 McCorkle Ave. APN 009-070-003; 1817 Spring St. APN 009-322-009; Sulphur Springs Ave. APN 009-362-015; Spring St. APN 009-441-023 and 009-552-002; 576 Pope St. APN 009-552-003; 1105 Pope St. APN 009-090-003. (Ord. 17-2 § 6 (part); Ord. 16-8 § 1; Ord. 15-2 § 7 (part): Ord. 12-2 § 6: Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 11: prior code § 27.51)

17.40.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

A.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is two units or greater, pursuant to Section 17.40.060;

B.    New attached duplex or triplex units or conversion of an existing single-family dwelling to duplex or triplex, compatible with the design and architecture of the neighborhood and consistent with the density and floor area ratio of the district;

C.    Bed and breakfast inns when located in an existing residential dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.132;*

D.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112;

E.    Small lot development meeting the standards of Chapter 17.112 limited to one primary unit per lot;

F.    Day care facility serving seven or more children;

G.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving seven or more persons;

H.    Residential facility serving seven or more persons;

Residential condominium or townhouse dwelling projects subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112; provided, that the density and development standards of the MR district shall be observed. The minimum lot size of the MR district shall not apply to an individual dwelling lot, airspace unit or common area lot in a condominium project;

I.    Utility substations;

J.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the MR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city.

(Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 15-2 § 7 (part): Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 12: prior code § 27.52)

17.40.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.116.030), or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 § 6 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.53)

17.40.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the MR district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers and other accessory buildings or structures without plumbing or cooking facilities;

B.    Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.116;

C.    Family day care home serving twelve (12) or fewer children;

D.    Lodging house providing housing for not less than thirty (30) consecutive days for not more than two paying occupants, when located within the principal building, one on-site parking space is provided for each room, and the dwelling is owner occupied. Lodging house for more than two but not more than five paying occupants is permitted only upon approval of a use permit;

E.    Household pets and not more than twelve (12) small domestic animals in total. “Household pets” means animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, domesticated pigs, pigeons, hens, and the like; but not including roosters, quacking ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs, kennels or the presence of animals for commercial purposes. Beekeeping (apiaries) shall be allowed pursuant to Chapter 17.190, Beekeeping;

F.    Gardening excluding the retail sale of any products on the premises;

G.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

H.    Swimming pools when located at least five feet from the property boundary and are fenced in a fashion to protect children;

I.    Satellite television receiving antennas subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.136;

J.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

K.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

L.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 8: Ord. 11-2 § 2 (Exh. A (part)); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 13: Ord. 02-6 § 3; prior code § 27.54)

17.40.060 Development standards.
The following standards and requirements shall apply in the MR medium density residential district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Maximum Standards.

 

1.    Density

16.0 dwelling units per acre or as set forth in subsection E of this section.

2.    Lot coverage

45%

3.    Height of principal building

30 feet

4.    Height of accessory building as regulated by Chapter 17.116

15 feet

5.    Floor Area Ratio

(F.A.R.) shall be as regulated in Section 17.40.070.

6.    Width

The width of a structure shall not exceed 60% of the width of the lot as measured at the front elevation, excluding lineal footage of staggered architectural features that start at least 20 ft. back from the front elevation. The width is measured from the outside wall and shall not include roof eaves, but shall include porches and cantilevered floor areas. The front of lots shall be determined as set forth in Section 17.112.030, Front of lot/setbacks and yards in unusual situations.

B.    Minimum standards for parcels, except for flag lots, small lots or residential condominium projects and townhouses as provided for in Chapter 17.112:

 

1.    Density

Not less than 5.1 dwelling units per acre consistent with subsection E of this section.

2.    Lot area

7,000 square feet

3.    Lot width

70 feet

4.    Lot frontage

70 feet

C.    Minimum standards for structures with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet or less:

 

1.    Front setback

20 feet

2.    Side setback

20 feet

3.    Side yard

10 feet

4.    Rear yard

20 feet

D.    Minimum standards for structures with a maximum height greater than twenty-five (25) feet and thirty (30) feet or less:

 

1.    Front setback

30 feet

2.    Side setback

30 feet

3.    Side yard

15 feet

4.    Rear yard

30 feet

E.    The planning director shall determine the density of the parcel utilizing assessor parcel information or a record of survey. Generally, if the density calculation results in housing that is a fraction of a unit and the fraction is less than one-half, the whole number shall be rounded down. If the fraction is one-half or greater, the whole number shall be rounded up. The determination of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission.

1.    The planning commission may approve a use permit to allow a reduced density on a parcel if environmental site constraints, the size and configuration of pre-existing development, or the provision of city services make compliance with the minimum density and other development standards impractical. Environmental constraints may include, without limitation, the presence of streams, significant trees, steep slopes, unusual lot configurations, or the presence of historic structures and cultural resources.

2.    Approval of a general plan amendment is required to reduce the density for other reasons. In approving a general plan amendment the city council and planning commission shall make the findings of Section 17.12.110.

3.    A legal accessory dwelling unit may be counted for purposes of compliance with the minimum density standard, but is exempt from the maximum density standard pursuant to Section 17.116.030(B)(5).

4.    Prior to permitting a density reduction by use permit or by general plan amendment, the city shall ensure compliance with Government Code Section 65863 by either finding that the remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need; or by identifying sufficient additional, adequate, and available sites with an equal or greater density so that there is no net loss in residential density.

F.    Consistent with California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, a density bonus may be given for housing projects that are affordable for persons of very low, low, or moderate income. (Ord. 17-2 § 6 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 04-4 § 2 (part); Ord. 00-5 § 4 (part): prior code § 27.55)

17.40.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
The floor area ratio in the MR district shall be regulated as follows:

A.    The maximum floor area limitation pertains to the construction of single-family dwelling units, duplexes, and triplexes. Exceptions to the limitation may be granted by the planning commission dependent upon the minimum density requirements for the parcel and the size and configuration of the pre-existing development.

1.    The maximum gross floor area is the product of the parcel area multiplied by the floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shown on the table below:

Net Parcel Area (Square Feet)

Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)

Maximum Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

4,999 and less

—

1,800

5,000

0.36

1,800

6,000

0.35

2,100

7,000

0.34

2,380

8,000

0.33

2,640

9,000

0.32

2,880

10,000

0.31

3,100

11,000

0.30

3,300

12,000

0.29

3,480

13,000

0.28

3,640

14,000

0.27

3,780

15,000

0.26

3,900

16,000

0.25

4,000

17,000

0.24

4,080

18,000

0.23

4,140

19,000

0.22

4,180

20,000 or greater

0.21

4,200

2.    The F.A.R. shall be interpolated to the nearest two-tenths of one percent based upon each two hundred (200) square feet of parcel area. For example, a parcel that is ten thousand six hundred (10,600) square feet in size has an allowable F.A.R. of .304.

B.    The maximum gross floor area for a single-family dwelling, regardless of parcel size, is four thousand two hundred (4,200) square feet. The maximum gross floor area may be increased by four hundred (400) square feet per parcel for construction of an accessory dwelling unit in compliance with Section 17.116.030.

C.    The following buildings and areas are exempt from the F.A.R. provisions:

1.    One covered parking space of two hundred (200) square feet in size;

2.    Nonhabitable accessory buildings less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size;

3.    A nonhabitable basement or attic as defined in subsection D of this section;

4.    A balcony, porch, deck or other structure where at least one of the longest dimensions is unenclosed;

5.    A legally constructed building which exceeds the maximum floor area permitted by this chapter and which is destroyed by fire, flood, landslide or other act of God. Such a building may be rebuilt with up to the same amount of floor area, subject to development plan review and approval by the city in accordance with Section 17.16.050.

D.    Definitions.

“Attic” means a room or space immediately below the roof of a building that is not habitable and is utilized only for storage. The area must be an unconditioned, unfinished area less than seven feet at its highest point with an average height not exceeding four feet.

“Basement” means any floor level below the first story in a building in which the finished floor level directly above is less than four feet above finished grade on all sides.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of building gross floor area divided by net parcel area.

“Gross floor area” means the total horizontal area in square feet of each floor within the exterior walls of all buildings on a parcel, as measured at the exterior face of the enclosing walls, unless specifically excluded by subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section.

“Lot coverage” means the land area covered by all buildings or structures on a lot, including all projections except eaves. Decks or other structures with an elevation of eighteen (18) inches or less above finished grade shall not be considered as lot coverage.

“Net parcel area” means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a parcel, excluding area within vehicular rights-of-way and vehicular easements.

“Pre-existing development” means structures and improvements that were vested with a building permit prior to March 8, 2005, the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

E.    Property owners within this district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Ord. 17-2 § 6 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 4; Ord. 00-5 § 4 (part): prior code § 27.56)

Chapter 17.44
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (HR) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.44.010    Purpose.

17.44.020    Permitted uses.

17.44.030    Conditional uses.

17.44.040    Design review required.

17.44.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.44.060    Development standards.

17.44.070    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.44.010 Purpose.
The HR district is established for consistency with the high density residential general plan designation. The district provides for single-family and multifamily residential units, group quarters and compatible uses. Residential densities shall not be less than 16.1 dwelling units per acre nor more than twenty-eight (28) dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.60)

17.44.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the HR district:

A.    Remodeling or reconstruction of one single-family dwelling;

B.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is 1.99 units or less;

C.    Multiple-family dwellings, apartments and dwelling groups consistent with the density requirements of this chapter;

D.    Day care facility serving six or fewer children;

E.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving six or fewer persons;

F.    Residential facility serving six or fewer persons;

G.    The installation of mobile homes constructed and/or purchased after October 1976, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code shall be permitted in accordance with the following conditions:

1.    To be occupied only as a single-family residential use,

2.    To be subject to all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable to conventionally built dwellings,

3.    To be attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations,

4.    To be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventionally built dwellings extending to the top of the foundation,

5.    To have parapet walls or roofs which utilize shingles or other materials customarily used on conventionally built dwellings;

H.    One accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030;

I.    Accessory buildings or structures without toilet plumbing or cooking facilities, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.010;

J.    One short-term rental per parcel, as defined in Section 17.04.160, and consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.134;

K.    Single room occupancy housing;

L.    Supportive housing;

M.    Transitional housing;

N.    Agricultural employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees;

O.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the HR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 17-2 § 7 (part); Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 15-2 § 8 (part): Ord. 12-2 § 7: Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 14: prior code § 27.61)

17.44.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

A.    New construction of one single-family dwelling on parcels where the minimum density is two units or greater, pursuant to Section 17.44.060;

B.    Small lot development meeting the standards of Chapter 17.112;

C.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112;

D.    Residential condominium or townhouse projects subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112; provided, that the density and development standards of the HR district shall be observed. The minimum lot size of the HR district shall not apply to an individual dwelling lot, airspace unit or common area lot in a condominium project;

E.    Bed and breakfast inns when located in an existing residential dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.132;*

F.    Utility substations;

G.    Day care facility serving seven or more children;

H.    Intermediate care facility or developmentally disabled nursing facility serving seven or more persons;

I.    Residential facility serving seven or more persons;

J.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the HR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city.

(Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 16-8 § 3: Ord. 15-2 § 8 (part): Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 15: prior code § 27.62)

17.44.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all subdivisions, signs, new structures or buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.116.030), or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 § 7 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.63)

17.44.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the HR district:

A.    Garages, carports, workshops, pool houses, gazebos, patio covers and other accessory buildings or structures without plumbing or cooking facilities;

B.    Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.116;

C.    Family day care home serving twelve (12) or fewer children;

D.    Lodging house providing housing for not less than thirty (30) consecutive days for not more than two paying occupants, when located within the principal building, one on-site parking space is provided for each room, and the dwelling is owner occupied. Lodging house for more than two but not more than five paying occupants is permitted only upon approval of a use permit;

E.    Household pets and not more than twelve (12) small domestic animals in total. “Household pets” means animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, domesticated pigs, pigeons, hens, and the like; but not including roosters, quacking ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs, kennels or the presence of animals for commercial purposes. Beekeeping (apiaries) shall be allowed pursuant to Chapter 17.190, Beekeeping;

F.    Gardening excluding the retail sale of any products on the premises;

G.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

H.    Swimming pools when located at least five feet from the property boundary and are fenced in a fashion to protect children;

I.    Satellite television receiving antennas subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.136;

J.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

K.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

L.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 9: Ord. 11-2 § 2 (Exh. A (part)); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 16: Ord. 02-6 § 5; prior code § 27.64)

17.44.060 Development standards.
The following standards and requirements shall apply in the HR district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Maximum Standards.

 

1.    Density

28.0 dwelling units per acre or as set forth in subsection C of this section.

2.    Lot coverage

45 percent

3.    Floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shall be as regulated in Section 17.44.070

 

4.    Height of principal building if four units or less

30 feet

5.    Height of principal building if more than four units

35 feet

6.    Height of accessory building as regulated by Chapter 17.116

15 feet

B.    Minimum standards for parcels, except for flag lots, small lots or residential condominium projects and townhouses as provided for in Chapter 17.112:

 

1.    Density

Not less than 16.1 dwelling units per acre consistent with subsection C of this section.

2.    Lot area

7,000 sq. ft.

3.    Lot width

70 feet

4.    Lot frontage

70 feet

5.    Front setback

20 feet

6.    Side setback

20 feet

7.    Side yard

10 feet

8.    Rear yard

20 feet

C.    The planning director shall determine the density of the parcel utilizing assessor parcel information or a record of survey. Generally, if the density calculation results in housing that is a fraction of a unit and the fraction is less than one-half, the whole number shall be rounded down. If the fraction is one-half or greater, the whole number shall be rounded up. The determination of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission.

1.    The planning commission may approve a use permit to allow a reduced density on a parcel if environmental site constraints, the size and configuration of pre-existing development, or the provision of city services make compliance with the minimum density and other development standards impractical. Environmental constraints may include, without limitation, the presence of streams, significant trees, steep slopes, unusual lot configurations, or the presence of historic structures and cultural resources.

2.    Approval of a general plan amendment is required to reduce the density for other reasons. In approving a general plan amendment the city council and planning commission shall make the findings of Section 17.12.110.

3.    A legal accessory dwelling unit may be counted for purposes of compliance with the minimum density standard, but is exempt from the maximum density standard pursuant to Section 17.116.030(B)(5).

4.    Prior to permitting a density reduction by use permit or by general plan amendment, the city shall ensure compliance with Government Code Section 65863 by either finding that the remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need; or by identifying sufficient additional, adequate, and available sites with an equal or greater density so that there is no net loss in residential density.

D.    Consistent with California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, a density bonus may be given for housing projects that are affordable for persons of very low, low or moderate income. (Ord. 17-2 § 7 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.65)

17.44.070 Other uses, standards and requirements.
The floor area ratio in the HR district shall be regulated as follows:

A.    The maximum floor area limitation pertains to the construction of single-family homes, duplexes, and triplexes. Exceptions to the limitation may be granted by the planning commission dependent upon the minimum density requirements for the parcel and the size and configuration of the pre-existing development.

1.    The maximum gross floor area is the product of the parcel area multiplied by the floor area ratio (F.A.R.) shown below:

Net Parcel Area (Square Feet)

Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)

Maximum Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

4,999 and less

—

1,800

5,000

0.36

1,800

6,000

0.35

2,100

7,000

0.34

2,380

8,000

0.33

2,640

9,000

0.32

2,880

10,000

0.31

3,100

11,000

0.30

3,300

12,000

0.29

3,480

13,000

0.28

3,640

14,000

0.27

3,780

15,000

0.26

3,900

16,000

0.25

4,000

17,000

0.24

4,080

18,000

0.23

4,140

19,000

0.22

4,180

20,000 or greater

0.21

4,200

2.    The F.A.R. shall be interpreted to the nearest two-tenths of one percent (.002) based upon each two hundred (200) square feet of parcel area.

B.    The maximum gross floor area for a single-family dwelling is four thousand two hundred (4,200) square feet. The maximum gross floor area may be increased by four hundred (400) square feet per parcel for construction of an accessory dwelling unit, duplex or triplex.

C.    The following buildings and areas are exempt from the F.A.R. provisions:

1.    One covered parking space of two hundred (200) square feet in size for one single-family dwelling;

2.    A garage or carport for development consisting of more than one single-family dwelling;

3.    Nonhabitable accessory buildings less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size;

4.    A nonhabitable basement or attic as defined below;

5.    A balcony, porch, deck or other structure where at least one of the longest dimensions is unenclosed;

6.    A legally constructed building which exceeds the maximum floor area permitted by this chapter and which is destroyed by fire, flood, landslide or other act of God. Such a building may be rebuilt with up to the same amount of floor area, subject to development plan review and approval by the city in accordance with Section 17.16.050.

D.    Definitions.

“Attic” means a room or space immediately below the roof of a building that is not habitable and is utilized only for storage. The area must be an unconditioned, unfinished area less than seven feet at its highest point with an average height not exceeding four feet.

“Basement” means any floor level below the first story in a building in which the finished floor level directly above is less than four feet above finished grade on all sides.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of building gross floor area divided by net parcel area.

“Gross floor area” means the total horizontal area in square feet of each floor within the exterior walls of all buildings on a parcel, as measured at the exterior face of the enclosing walls.

“Net parcel area” means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a parcel, excluding area within vehicular rights-of-way and vehicular easements.

“Pre-existing development” means structures and improvements that were vested with a building permit prior to March 8, 2005, the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

E.    Property owners within this district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Ord. 17-2 § 7 (part); Ord. 07-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 6: prior code § 27.66)

Chapter 17.48
CENTRAL BUSINESS (CB) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Permitted uses.

17.48.030    Conditional uses.

17.48.040    Design review required.

17.48.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.48.060    Prohibited uses.

17.48.070    Development standards.

17.48.080    Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.

17.48.090    Other standards and uses.

17.48.100    Reserved.

17.48.010 Purpose.
The central business district (CB) designation provides for retail, personal service uses, offices, restaurants, hotels/motels, service stations, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses that serve local residents and the surrounding area. Emphasis is on pedestrian-oriented retail and service uses on the ground floor level, with office and residential uses on the upper levels. The intent is for the CB district to remain primarily local resident-serving in character. New uses which serve both local residents and tourists will be allowed. Uses which are primarily tourist-serving are not permitted.

Implementing Policy 2.6.42 of the 1993 General Plan states:

Allow only businesses which are primarily local-serving within all commercial areas. Exclude all fast food restaurants, outlet and discount type stores as well as large retail businesses whose consumer base requires a population larger than St. Helena and its vicinity. For purposes of the General Plan, vicinity shall be defined as the surrounding agricultural area for which St. Helena has historically provided goods and services.

Local-serving businesses are considered to be those that derive a significant portion of their revenues from St. Helena residents, and which provide services and products which satisfy local residents’ day-to-day needs. They are those businesses for which a majority of the shoppers are regular repeat customers from the community. Nonlocal-serving or tourist-serving uses are those which would generally not be in St. Helena if it were not for the presence of visitors. Tourist-serving business use is generally characterized by a redundancy in merchandise from store to store with goods sold being substantially similar to such goods sold in other major destination points. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.70)

17.48.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the CB district within usable floor areas of two hundred (200) square feet or greater:

Auto supply store;

Bakery, limited to products baked on the premises;

Bank and savings and loan institutions;

Bicycle and four-stroke moped (that meet standard manufacturer specifications) rental businesses, excluding motorcycles (as a primary or accessory use);

Bicycle store, retail sales, repairs, and rentals:

1.    Storage or display of rental vehicles shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way, except where the city has jurisdiction over the sidewalk and as may be allowed by use permit with the following conditions in subsection (2) below.

2.    For those vehicle rental businesses that wish to establish storage or display of rental bicycles on a sidewalk, the following will be required:

a.    One-and-one-half-foot “recovery zone” from the edge of curb that must be kept free of obstructions (CalTrans requirement).

b.    A four-foot clear path of travel along the sidewalk must be maintained to provide disabled access.

c.    Bicycles must be brought indoors when the business is closed.

d.    An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city of St. Helena. Application must include documentation of required liability insurance. The city of St. Helena maintains the preeminent right to use the sidewalk and suspend the right to encroach whenever the city needs use of the sidewalk for other public use or for repair.

Bookstore;

Chamber of Commerce office;

Clothing store, limited to the sale of new clothing and clothing accessories;

Computer and computer supply store;

Confectionery shop;

Consignment shop;

Dry cleaners, drop-off and pick-up only;

Florist;

Frame shop (gallery allowed only as accessory to the primary use);

Furniture store, new and unfinished;

General retail, the sale of goods in small quantities directly to the consumer except those uses prohibited in Section 17.48.060;

Hardware store;

Hobby, toy, and game store;

Home furnishings and interior decorating stores, limited to establishments engaged in the retail sale of such items as china, glassware, and metalware for kitchen and table use; bedding and linen; brooms and brushes; lamps and shades; mirrors and pictures; carpets and rugs; and window coverings;

Ice cream, frozen yogurt and shaved ice shops as regulated by Section 17.48.090(C) including sale of these items as accessory to an approved food establishment;

Music store;

Newsstand;

Office use, local-serving business and professional offices, upper floors only for properties with frontage on Main Street. Off-site winery offices are permitted with no wine tasting;

Opticians and optometrist shop;

Paint and wallpaper store;

Pharmacy and drugstore;

Photographic supply store;

Postal services;

Printing and copy services;

Real estate services located in spaces without frontage on Main Street;

Tailor and dressmaking;

Variety store except those uses prohibited in Section 17.48.060;

Watch and clock shop, provided the business includes on-premises repair;

Watch, clock, and/or jewelry repair shops;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the CB district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 18-7 § 4 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 11-5 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 04-8 § 2: prior code § 27.71)

17.48.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses requires approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168. A use permit is also required for a business which consists of two or more of the permitted uses listed in Section 17.48.020. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the use consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the CB zoning district. When a use permit is considered for a use in the CBD, the standard use permit findings included in Section 17.168.050 shall be made to determine consistency of the use with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the CB zoning district:

Antique store;

Art gallery;

Barber shop/beauty shop, including manicures, pedicures, make-up, facials, waxing, electrolysis, piercing, massage, and tanning when accessory to the primary use of hairstyling;

Catering establishments;

Cleaners and dry cleaners;

Delicatessen as regulated by Section 17.48.090(C);

Department store;

Drinking establishments serving alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic beverages as regulated by Section 17.48.090(C), provided the following are not allowed:

1.    Establishments serving customers within their vehicles on the premises or preparing beverages or food intended for consumption within their vehicles on the premises,

2.    Establishments primarily preparing beverages or food for consumption off the premises,

3.    Music or entertainment which is not accessory to the approved use and/or audible beyond the confines of the building in which such music or entertainment is being performed,

4.    Drive-in or walk-up window for take-out service;

Eating and drinking establishments as regulated by Section 17.48.090(C), provided the following are not allowed:

1.    Establishments serving customers within their automobiles on the premises or preparing food intended for consumption within their automobiles on the premises,

2.    Establishments primarily preparing food for consumption off the premises,

3.    Music or entertainment which is not accessory to the approved use and/or audible beyond the confines of the building in which such music or entertainment is being performed,

4.    The addition of on-site general liquor sales to any existing eating establishment when the operation of the eating place has been in violation of any city ordinance or any conditions of a use permit within the preceding two years and the premises do not conform in all respects with municipal code requirements,

5.    Drive-in or walk-up window for take-out service,

6.    Formula or take-out food establishments;*

Farmers’ market;

Foodstore, no seating permitted;

Formula business. “Formula business” (not including formula restaurants, which are prohibited) means a business which is required by contractual or other arrangement to maintain any of the following: standardized services, decor, uniforms, architecture, signs or other similar features. This shall include, but not be limited to, retail sales and service, visitor accommodations, wholesale and industrial operations;

Health clubs;

Hotel, rental of rooms limited to upper floors;**

Household appliance and repair shop;

Jewelry store, provided the business includes on-premises repair;

Laundromat or laundry;

Liquor store;

Locksmith;

Market;

Massage salon;

Off-site winery offices with nonpublic wine tasting. Tasting of wine may be offered to wine distributors and wine merchants only;

Parking facilities (including parking for a fee) when not required to serve an approved use;

Pawnshops, subject to police chief review of information included in state or local statutes;

Photography studio;

Real estate services when located on the first floor with access and frontage on Main Street;

Residential units, limited to upper floors only for nontransient occupancy;

Service station, pursuant to Section 17.136.080;

Spa;

Supportive housing, limited to upper floors only;

Tanning salon;

Tattoo and/or piercing salon;

Theaters, movie and legitimate;

Tobacco/smoke shop, including the sale of tobacco, tobacco and/or nicotine products and equipment for smoking;

Transitional housing, limited to upper floors only;

Used merchandise store, including clothing, with no off-hours or exterior drop-off donation areas permitted;

Wine shops. “Wine shops” are establishments that purchase and sell wines from multiple wineries and distributors. Wines may be made in other counties in California, other states or other countries. Incidental wine tastings may occur in wine shops. Wine shops are not owned by wineries and must possess a Type 20, 21, or 42 license from ABC;

Winery tasting rooms. “Winery tasting rooms” are establishments that sell wines on behalf of one or more wineries and enable consumers to taste wine (with and without charge) as a regular part of the sales process. The wines for tasting and for sale must be made from a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) Napa Valley grapes and must be labeled Napa Valley or be a subappellation of the Napa Valley. The permit requires a Type 02 ABC license. Food may be provided if it is at no cost to the consumer, is made off premises and the facilities are approved by Napa County environmental management;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the CB district pursuant to procedures in Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of eating and drinking establishments within such establishments as listed in the regulated food and beverage establishments inventory. This inventory may be amended by action of the city council.

**    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city to those existing or approved on September 28, 1993, as listed in the hotel, motel, and B&B inventory. This inventory may be amended by action of the city council.

(Ord. 18-7 § 4 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 15-2 § 9: Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 04-8 § 3: Ord. 02-6 § 7: prior code § 27.72)

17.48.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions (including, but not limited to, change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.73)

17.48.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the CB district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Small recycling centers (not more than five hundred (500) square feet) including mobile recycling units, nonprofit drop-off facilities, and reverse vending machines, subject to design review approval by the planning director;

C.    On-site storage facilities accessory to the primary use subject to design review approval by the planning commission. On-site storage shall not be located within required parking areas. Design review will include, but not be limited to, location, length of time for the storage facility and size of the storage facility;

D.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

E.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional use pursuant to procedures in Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 10: Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.75)

17.48.060 Prohibited uses.
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the CB district:

A.    Formula restaurant. “Formula restaurant” means a restaurant devoted to the preparation and offering of food and beverage for sale to the public for consumption either on or off the premises and which is required by contractual or other arrangement to offer any of the following: standardized menus, ingredients, food preparation, decor, uniforms, architecture, or similar standardized features;

B.    Outlet stores, discount stores, or stores devoting commercial area, gross sales or inventory to the sale of second quality, irregular or discontinued merchandise or to the liquidation of merchant’s or manufacturer’s stock;

C.    Souvenir shops;

D.    T-shirt shops;

E.    Time-share projects, programs or occupancies. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.75)

17.48.070 Development standards.*
The following requirements shall be observed in the CB district, excluding the area within the specific plan area as defined in the general plan, and except as otherwise provided in this title:

A. Maximum Standards.

1. Height of building/structures**

35 feet

2. Building floor area

***

3. Use floor area

****

4. Floor area ratio

2.0 (requires off-site parking)

B. Minimum Standards.

1. Lot area

5,000 square feet

2. Front setback

0 feet

3. Side setback

0 feet

4. Side yard**

0 feet

5. Rear yard**

0 feet

*    Development standards for the CB district area included in the specific plan area of the general plan shall be determined in conjunction with a site development plan for the parcel(s) at the time of project review. Variations from the adopted development standards may be allowed in the specific plan area if findings of consistency with general plan policies are made by the city during review of the development application.

**    Yards abutting a property designated residential shall have a minimum of ten (10) foot setback and a maximum building height of thirty (30) feet.

***    Building floor area in the CB district shall be governed by the provisions of subsection C of this section.

****    Use floor area in the CB district shall be governed by the provisions of subsection D of this section.

C.    Building Floor Area.

1.    Buildings Existing Prior to 1993 Which Exceed Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet. Buildings which existed prior to 1993 and exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet may increase the allowable floor area upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the expansion consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the CB district. When a use permit is considered for expansion of floor area the following criteria shall be considered in addition to the use permit findings included in Sections 17.168.050 and 17.48.100:

a.    Expanded floor area shall only be allowed for office, storage, or other nonretail uses determined by the planning commission.

b.    The proposed increase in floor area shall not result in an expansion of the footprint or building coverage of the existing building.

c.    The floor area ratio shall not be exceeded.

2.    Buildings Constructed After 1993. Each building on a legal parcel of record is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building floor area. Multiple buildings may be constructed on a legal parcel of record, provided the individual buildings do not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building floor area and the maximum floor area ratio on the parcel is not exceeded.

Floor area of a single building may exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the increased building floor area consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the CB district. When a use permit is considered for increased building floor area the following criteria shall be considered in addition to the findings included in Sections 17.168.050 and 17.48.100:

a.    Increased floor area shall only be allowed for office, storage, or other nonretail uses determined by the planning commission.

b.    The building footprint for each building shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

c.    The allowed floor area ratio shall not be exceeded.

D.    Use Floor Area.

1.    Minimum Floor Area. All uses in the CB district within existing and newly constructed buildings shall have a minimum floor area of two hundred (200) square feet unless a use permit is approved by the planning commission to allow a reduction in floor area below two hundred (200) square feet.

2.    Maximum Floor Area. All uses in the CB district within existing and newly constructed buildings shall be limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. Tenant spaces in existence on November 1, 1999, may increase the existing floor area by no more than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area. Modification of tenant spaces existing on November 1, 1999, resulting in more than a ten percent (10%) increase in floor area may be allowed upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Increase of tenant space floor area shall not result in the tenant space exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet except as provided by subsection C of this section. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.76)

17.48.080 Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.
A.    All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building except for:

1.    Bus depots and transit stations;

2.    Farmers’ markets;

3.    Outdoor dining, in conjunction with a use permit approved for restaurant use;

4.    Parking and loading areas;

5.    Portable shoeshine stands when the business is conducted in conjunction with an approved use, provided the shoeshine stand conducts business during the same business hours as the approved primary use;

6.    Seasonal sales (Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.);

7.    Service stations;

8.    Taxi stands;

9.    Such other uses which, in the opinion of the planning director, require outside display or storage.

B.    Provided the use is allowed (either as a permitted or conditional use) by the zoning district regulations for the district in which the property is located, the following provisions shall apply to the incidental placement, storage, display, sale, or offer for sale of any merchandise out-of-doors or outside any completely enclosed building:

1.    Screening. The merchandise shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public or private street, any off-street parking facility, or any common area in an integrated commercial center; or

2.    Use Permit. A use permit approved by the planning commission shall be required for the outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise except for the following:

a.    Fruits and vegetables,

b.    Plants and other growing vegetation, with the limitation in subsection (B)(3)(f) of this section not applicable to nurseries,

c.    Cut flowers (planter boxes subject to the standards specified in subsection (B)(3)(g) of this section),

d.    Gasoline pumps, oil racks and accessory items when located on pump islands,

e.    Vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers and recreational vehicles, with the limitation in subsection (B)(3)(f) of this section not applicable,

f.    Areas within a completely roofed street alcove or entryway; provided, that the merchandise is inside the line of the building face,

g.    Parking lot and sidewalk sales and other promotional events that involve retail sales, as long as they do not exceed twelve (12) days total during any twelve (12) month period with no more than three days being consecutive, regardless of the number of businesses located on the property, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

h.    Nonpromotional events conducted by or for recognized nonprofit or charitable community groups, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(a), (e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

i.    Garage and yard sales, as long as they are conducted on property used for residential purposes by a resident and do not exceed three days during any six-month period, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(a), (e) and (g) of this section not applicable,

j.    Merchandise associated with hardware stores and building supply stores,

k.    Activities similar to the above, as determined by the planning commission.

3.    Standards. The placement or location of the merchandise must comply with the following:

a.    The merchandise or activity is incidental and adjacent to any lawfully established business that normally sells the merchandise inside the building.

b.    The merchandise or activity does not present a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.

c.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy the space formed by extending the width of any required or existing building exit, whichever is wider, to the public right-of-way.

d.    The display of merchandise shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

e.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy any required parking spaces.

f.    The storage, display or sales area is limited to two hundred (200) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the business, whichever is less.

g.    Along Main Street, between Mitchell Street and Pine Street on the west side, and Pope Street to Pine Street on the east side, planter boxes and plants shall encroach no more than twelve (12) inches into the public right-of-way, shall have a maximum height of four feet zero inches, and six feet of sidewalk shall be kept clear for pedestrian use. These standards shall apply elsewhere in the central business district outside of the area designated; however, the city council shall be empowered to waive the standards on a case-by-case basis.

4.    Use of Street or Sidewalk. Nothing in this section shall authorize the placement, storage, display, sale or offer for sale of any merchandise on any street or on any sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way, with the exception of sidewalk sales permitted by subsection (B)(2)(g) of this section. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 06-9 § 2 (part); prior code § 27.77)

17.48.090 Other standards and uses.
A.    Catering. Food catering shall be permitted when accessory to an approved use.

B.    Music/Entertainment. Music/entertainment shall be allowed when accessory to an approved use and noise is not audible beyond the confines of the building.

C.    Food and Beverage Establishments. Establishments serving food or beverage with seating are limited to thirty (30), as listed on the regulated food and beverage establishments inventory. Such establishments shall be subject to the following regulations:

1.    The type of use shall be as listed on the inventory and/or conditions imposed during city review.

2.    All regulated uses shall be subject to use permit review by the planning commission prior to change in use or expansion of use. Change in use or expansion of use shall include increase in seating; increase in floor area; change to a restaurant with a complete kitchen capable of providing full menu service of food prepared on premises; or change in services which may result in an increase in water, sewer, traffic, noise, or parking/circulation impacts. Change in use shall not include minor changes to hours of operation or change in hours to the food service unless such hours are regulated by an existing use permit.

3.    If approvals expire for an establishment listed in the inventory or if an establishment ceases operation and may not be reestablished under Chapter 17.140 regulating nonconforming establishments, Section 17.08.120 regulating use permits, or other provisions of this title, another restaurant may be established at a new location as follows:

a.    Use permit approval is required for a new establishment at any location within the city.

b.    The total number of establishments shall not be increased beyond thirty (30).

c.    The total number of seats in the proposed restaurant shall not exceed two hundred (200).

d.    Use permit applications for the establishment of new restaurants shall be considered in the order of applications received, except that priority will be given to an existing business which is being relocated if the following conditions are met:

i.    The existing business notifies the planning director in writing no later than ten (10) days after the business ceases operation of its intention to relocate and of the date it will or did cease operation; and

ii.    A completed use permit application is filed before the food or beverage use at the original location becomes null and void pursuant to Section 17.140.020, 17.08.120, or other provisions of this title.

e.    No use permit application will be accepted for processing until an establishment on the inventory (or an approved replacement establishment) has ceased operation or the property owner has notified the planning director in writing that the use will not be reestablished at the previous location. The use permit application shall not be scheduled for hearing by the planning commission until the time period for reestablishing of the use at the location where the use has ceased, has expired or written notice has been given by the property owner that the use will not be reestablished at the previous location.

4.    When an existing business is modifying its operation the use permit shall be reviewed for compliance with the following:

a.    That if the regulated use is considered a legal nonconforming business, the reasons for nonconformity shall be stated in the findings;

b.    That the plans submitted with the application indicate that any existing nonconformities will not be increased by the issuance of the permit;

c.    The total seating capacity authorized by the use permit and fire code occupancy shall be posted on the premises;

d.    That all trash and recycling areas are screened from view.

5.    A use permit or use permit amendment is required to expand the number of seats at a restaurant listed on the regulated food and beverage establishments inventory or to enclose approved outdoor seating for use as indoor seating.

a.    The total number of restaurant seats, including indoor and outdoor seating, shall not exceed two hundred (200). Restaurants with more than two hundred (200) seats that were legally approved prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to reduce their seating to comply with this regulation.

b.    Seating shall be in compliance with the maximum fire code occupancy as determined by the fire marshal.

c.    A building expansion to enclose outdoor seating to indoor seating shall be considered an expansion of seating for purposes of determining required parking.

6.    Outdoor Seating. Administrative approval of a sidewalk dining permit is required to establish outdoor seating for dining at restaurants with an approved use permit. Use permit amendment is required for an increase in the number of seats. The sidewalk dining permit application shall include a plan showing the number of tables and chairs and the area where the dining will be allowed.

a.    Outdoor dining for seating that results in an increase in the number of seats shall be reviewed by the planning department for compliance with parking standards and by Napa County environmental management for compliance with regulations pertaining to food storage, health and safety.

b.    For those restaurants that wish to serve alcohol outside, the licensee must obtain approval for premises expansion from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

c.    All entrances and emergency exits shall be kept free of obstructions to ingress and egress.

d.    For those restaurants that wish to establish outdoor seating for dining on a sidewalk, the following will be required:

i.    A one-and-one-half-foot “recovery zone” from the edge of curb that must be kept free of obstructions (CalTrans requirement).

ii.    A four-foot clear path of travel, which clearly maintains ADA compliance along the sidewalk, must be maintained to provide disabled access.

iii.    Tables and chairs must be brought indoors when the restaurant is closed.

iv.    Entertainment shall not be allowed on the sidewalk as part of the restaurant service.

v.    An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city of St. Helena. Application must include documentation of required liability insurance. The city of St. Helena maintains the preeminent right to use the sidewalk and suspend the right to encroach whenever the city needs use of the sidewalk for other public use or for repair.

vi.    Sidewalk dining permits are revocable at the will of the city, and such revocations do not result in a taking of the owner’s property (i.e., a taking of the restaurant).

vii.    No more than twenty percent (20%) of total restaurant seating may be located on the sidewalk or other public property.

e.    For those restaurants wishing to allow patrons to bring dogs to the outdoor dining area, the following regulations shall be enforced:

i.    Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens or any other items involved with food service operations.

ii.    Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under control.

iii.    Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables, or other furnishings.

iv.    All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized between seating of patrons.

v.    Dog waste shall be removed immediately and the area immediately cleaned and sanitized with an appropriate product.

vi.    Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor portions of the public food service establishment.

D.    Landscaping Requirements.

1.    Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping and Shade Trees. All required frontage yards, off-street parking areas, and all other open areas (other than screened storage areas) shall be permanently maintained by the property owner with the installation of shade trees, planters, and landscaped areas to cover a minimum of five percent of the total site in accordance with the following standards:

a.    Parking Lot Trees. All trees in parking lots shall be fifteen (15) gallon can size and shall conform to the National Association of Nurserymen’s adopted standards for growth, condition and development of nursery-supplied materials. Modification of these standards for equivalent quality of tree or shade plant may be permitted depending on species and quality of stock. The following minimum number of trees shall be required in any parking lot:

Parking Lot Size

Number of Trees

15 spaces or less

1 tree/4 spaces (minimum of 2 trees)

16 spaces or more

20 trees/acre if canopy is 40 feet or greater

24 trees/acre if canopy is less than 40 feet

b.    Planters. Where a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, there shall be provided a landscaped planter contiguous to and parallel to such right-of-way.

c.    Variety and Distribution. Shade trees shall be of a variety approved by the city that will, under ordinary circumstances and growing conditions, provide shade upon reaching maturity. Distribution of trees shall generally be in a grid or similar pattern within off-street parking lots, required yards, and other open spaces and landscaped areas so as to fulfill the intent of this title to shade expanses of pavement and other open space.

d.    Curbing. Landscaping and shade trees shall be contained in planters and tree wells bordered by a six-inch high concrete curb or equivalent barrier approved by the city.

e.    Width and Protection. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter or under the conditions of an approved permit, planters and tree wells shall have a width of not less than five feet and shall be protected from automobile overhang where necessary through the provision of barriers, tire stops or additional width.

f.    Maintenance. Landscaped areas and planters shall be served by an irrigation system approved by the city and shall be kept in a weed-free condition.

E.    Wastewater Generation. Each and every use allowed in the CB district shall be restricted such that all such uses on any single “lot of record,” as defined by Section 13.24.090(C) of this code do not in the aggregate generate wastewater in excess of the following standards:

1.    Six hundred (600) gallons per day, without a use permit which regulates wastewater generation;

2.    Two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day, upon grant of a use permit regulating wastewater generation; provided the city council approves a use permit with conditions ensuring that all reasonable water conservation measures are implemented, and finds that approval is in the best interest of the city; or

3.    For all uses lawfully in effect on any lot of record on December 8, 1981, which generated in aggregate more than six hundred (600) gallons of wastewater per day, such uses may be altered, reconstructed or changed; provided, that the resultant uses on any such lot of record do not in the aggregate generate wastewater exceeding the aggregate wastewater gallonage per day for all uses existing on such lot of record on December 8, 1981.

F.    Demolition Permit Required. Except when required for the emergency protection of public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city manager, no permit authorizing the demolition of any structure within the commercial zoning districts shall be issued until reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 17.92 and the following findings:

1.    That, based on the public record and testimony presented at a public hearing, the structure is determined not to be a significant architectural or historical building. If a structure is determined to be significant by the planning commission, no demolition will be authorized unless the following findings are made by the commission:

a.    That the structure poses a threat to health, safety and general welfare if it is not demolished;

b.    That restoration of the structure is not feasible or practicable using current building codes including, but not limited to, the Historic Building Code provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the state;

c.    That no public or other funding is available for financing renovation or purchase of the structure.

G.    Right to Farm Provision. Property owners within the district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals and creation of dust, noise or fumes. (Ord. 18-51 § 4 (Exh. B (part)); Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 00-2 § 2; prior code § 27.78)

17.48.100 Reserved.
(Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))

1
Code reviser’s note: Section 5 of Ordinance 18-5 provides that its amendments “are enacted for a period of two years and shall terminate on November 8, 2020, unless extended or made permanent by action of the City Council.”


Chapter 17.52
SERVICE COMMERCIAL (SC) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose.

17.52.020    Permitted uses.

17.52.030    Conditional uses.

17.52.040    Design review required.

17.52.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.52.060    Prohibited uses.

17.52.070    Development standards.

17.52.080    Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.

17.52.090    Other standards and uses.

17.52.100    Reserved.

17.52.010 Purpose.
The service commercial district (SC) designation provides for service and retail uses, restaurants, service stations, motels, public and quasi-public uses and similar and compatible uses. The designation is intended primarily for service and retail uses that are automobile-oriented or whose operational characteristics and space needs are not considered appropriate for the central business district. The intent is for the SC district to be primarily local resident-serving in character. Strictly tourist-serving retail uses are prohibited within this designation.

Implementing Policy 2.6.42 of the 1993 general plan states:

Allow only businesses which are primarily local-serving within all commercial areas. Exclude all fast food restaurants, outlet and discount type stores as well as large retail businesses whose consumer base requires a population larger than St. Helena and its vicinity. For purposes of the General Plan, vicinity shall be defined as the surrounding agricultural area for which St. Helena has historically provided goods and services.

Local-serving businesses are considered to be those that derive a significant portion of their revenues from St. Helena residents, and which provide services and products which satisfy local residents’ day-to-day needs. They are those businesses for which a majority of the shoppers are regular repeat customers from the community. Nonlocal-serving or tourist-serving uses are those which would generally not be in St. Helena if it were not for the presence of visitors. Tourist-serving business use is generally characterized by a redundancy in merchandise from store to store with goods sold being substantially similar to such goods sold in other major destination points. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): prior code § 27.80)

17.52.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the SC district within usable floor areas of two hundred (200) square feet or greater:

Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping;

Appliance store;

Audio-visual store;

Auto supply store;

Automatic bank teller;

Bakery;

Bank, credit union or financial institution;

Beauty shop/barber shop, including manicures, pedicures, make-up, facials, waxing, electrolysis, and piercing, when accessory to the primary use of hairstyling;

Boat sales and service;

Bookkeeping services;

Camera and photo supply store;

Catering establishments, no retail sales;

Child care facilities consistent with state law;

Cleaning and janitorial services;

Clothing store, limited to the sale of new clothing and clothing accessories;

Commercial art/photography service;

Computer supply store;

Dance studios and schools;

Emergency shelter;

Engraving services;

Farm supply and feed store;

Florist;

Frame shop;

Fruit and vegetable market;

Furniture stores, new and unfinished;

Glazing businesses;

Graphic design services;

Hardware store;

Health care equipment and services;

Hobby store;

Home furnishings and interior decorating stores, limited to establishments engaged in the retail sale of such items as china, glassware, and metalware for kitchen and table use; bedding and linen; brooms and brushes; lamps and shades; mirrors and pictures; carpets and rugs; and window coverings;

Locksmith;

Luggage store;

Music recording studio;

Nail salon;

Newspaper distribution facilities, no retail sales;

Office use, local-serving business and professional offices; off-site winery offices are permitted with no wine tasting;

Opticians and optometrist shop, including repair;

Paint, glass and wallpaper store;

Painting contractor/services;

Party supplies and service;

Pet store, services, supplies;

Plumbing and contractor/services;

Postal and mail service;

Printing and copy service;

Residential units, upper floor only in conjunction with a mixed use project;

Reupholstery and furniture repair;

Saddle and equestrian store and repair;

Saw, knife and tool sharpening shops;

Security services;

Shoe repair;

Sign maker;

Sporting goods store;

Staffing services;

Supportive housing, upper floor only in conjunction with a mixed use project;

Telephone center, including sales and maintenance;

Transitional housing, upper floor only in conjunction with a mixed use project;

Trophy shop;

Used merchandise stores, including clothing, with no off-hours or exterior drop-off donation areas permitted;

Veterinary services without overnight boarding of animals;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the SC district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 18-7 § 4 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 15-2 § 10: Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 04-8 § 5: prior code § 27.81)

17.52.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses requires approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168. A use permit is also required for a business which consists of two or more of the permitted uses listed in Section 17.52.020. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the use consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the SC zoning district. When a use permit is considered for a use in the SC district the standard use permit findings included in Section 17.168.050 shall be made to determine consistency of the use with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the SC zoning district:

Ambulance services;

Animal boarding facility;

Automobile sales, service and repair;

Automobile, truck, and motorcycle rental;

Bicycle and scooter rental businesses, excluding motorcycles:

1.    Storage or display of rental vehicles shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way, except where the city has jurisdiction over the sidewalks and as may be allowed by use permit with the following conditions in subsection 2 below.

2.    For those vehicle rental businesses that wish to establish storage or display of rental bicycles/scooters on a sidewalk, the following will be required:

a.    One-and-one-half-foot “recovery zone” from the edge of curb that must be kept free of obstructions (CalTrans requirement).

b.    A four-foot clear path of travel along the sidewalk must be maintained to provide disabled access.

c.    Bicycles/scooters must be brought indoors when the business is closed.

d.    An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city of St. Helena. Application must include documentation of required liability insurance. The city of St. Helena maintains the preeminent right to use the sidewalk and suspend the right to encroach whenever the city needs use of the sidewalk for other public use or for repair;

Breweries, including tasting;

Cabinet making shop;

Car wash;

Catalogue office/retail center, including storage of merchandise;

Drinking establishments serving alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic beverages as regulated by Section 17.52.090(D), provided the following are not allowed:

1.    Establishments serving customers within their vehicles on the premises or preparing beverages/food intended for consumption within their vehicles on the premises,

2.    Establishments primarily preparing beverages/food for consumption off the premises,

3.    Music/entertainment which is not accessory to the approved use and/or audible beyond the confines of the building in which such music/entertainment is being performed,

4.    Drive-in or walk-up window for take-out service;

Eating and drinking establishments as regulated by Section 17.52.090(D), provided the following are not allowed:

1.    Establishments serving customers within their automobiles on the premises or preparing food intended for consumption within their automobiles on the premises,

2.    Establishments primarily preparing food for consumption off the premises,

3.    Music/entertainment which is not accessory to the approved use and/or audible beyond the confines of the building in which such music/entertainment is being performed,

4.    The addition of on-site general liquor sales to an existing eating establishment when the operation of the eating place has been in violation of any city ordinance or any conditions of a use permit within the preceding two years and the premises do not conform in all respects with municipal code requirements,

5.    Drive-in or walk-up window for take-out service,

6.    Formula or take-out food establishments;*

Electric and gas utilities;

Equipment rental and leasing;

Farmers’ market;

Food product development;

Formula business. “Formula business” (not including formula restaurants, which are prohibited) means a business which is required by contractual or other arrangement to maintain any of the following: standardized services, decor, uniforms, architecture, signs or other similar features. This shall include, but not be limited to, retail sales and service, visitor accommodations, wholesale and industrial operations;

Grocery stores; limited to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size with retail sales of meat, produce, dairy, baked goods, and groceries with accessory sales of household goods and delicatessen items;

Gunsmith;

Health club and fitness centers;

Hotels and motels;**

Janitorial services;

Laundry, self-serve cleaning and garment services;

Light manufacturing uses;

Liquor stores, retail sales only;

Local passenger transportation and services, includes train depot;

Lumber and other building materials business;

Massage services;

Mortuary and funeral homes;

Motor vehicle sales, new and/or used vehicles;

Nursery, lawn and garden supply stores with retail sales;

Off-site winery offices with nonpublic wine tasting. Tasting of wine may be offered to wine distributors and wine merchants;

Parking facilities, commercial;

Performing arts facility;

Pool and spa supply and sales;

Schools and educational services;

Service station, pursuant to Section 17.136.080;

Small engine and/or equipment repair shops, excluding the repair of heavy equipment;

Tanning salon;

Taxidermist;

Theater, movie and legitimate;

Tobacco/smoke shop, including the sale of tobacco, tobacco and/or nicotine products and equipment for smoking;

Towing services and yards;

Used merchandise stores, including clothing, with off-hours or exterior drop-off donation areas;

Utilities;

Warehouse and wholesale business, excluding retail sales;

Wine shops. “Wine shops” are establishments that sell wines from multiple wineries and distributors. Wines may be made in other counties in California, other states or other countries. Incidental wine tastings may occur in wine shops. Wine shops are not owned by wineries and must possess a Type 20, 21, or 42 license from ABC;

Wineries;

Winery tasting rooms. “Winery tasting rooms” are establishments that sell wines on behalf of one or more wineries and enable consumers to taste wine (with and without charge) as a regular part of the sales process. The wines for tasting and for sale must be made from a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) Napa Valley grapes and must be labeled Napa Valley or be a subappellation of the Napa Valley. The permit requires a Type 02 ABC license. Food may be provided if it is at no cost to the consumer, is made off premises and the facilities are approved by Napa County environmental management;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the SC district pursuant to Chapter 17.08.

*    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of eating and drinking establishments. Such establishments are listed in the regulated food and beverage establishments inventory. This inventory may be amended by action of the city council.

**    Note: The city has established a limit on the number of transient occupancy rooms permitted in the city to those existing or approved on September 28, 1993, as listed in the hotel, motel, and B&B inventory. This inventory may be amended by action of the city council.

(Ord. 18-7 § 4 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 11-5 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): Ord. 10-4 § 5; Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 04-8 § 6; prior code § 27.82)

17.52.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions (including, but not limited to, change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): prior code § 27.83)

17.52.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the SC district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Small recycling centers (not more than five hundred (500) square feet) including mobile recycling units, nonprofit drop-off facilities, and reverse vending machines, subject to design review approval by the planning director;

C.    On-site storage facilities accessory to the primary use are subject to design review approval by the planning commission. On-site storage shall not be located within required parking areas. Design review will include, but not be limited to, location, length of time for the storage facility, and size of the storage facility;

D.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

E.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional use pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 11: Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): prior code § 27.84)

17.52.060 Prohibited uses.
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the SC district:

A.    Formula restaurant. “Formula restaurant” means a restaurant devoted to the preparation and offering of food and beverage for sale to the public for consumption either on or off the premises and which is required by contractual or other arrangement to offer any of the following: standardized menus, ingredients, food preparation, decor, uniforms, architecture, or similar standardized features;

B.    Outlet stores, discount stores, or stores devoting commercial area, gross sales or inventory, to the sale of second quality, irregular or discontinued merchandise or to the liquidation of merchant’s or manufacturer’s stock;

C.    Souvenir shops;

D.    T-shirt shops;

E.    Time-share projects, programs or occupancies. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): prior code § 27.85)

17.52.070 Development standards.*
The following requirements shall be observed in the SC district, excluding the area within the specific plan area as defined in the general plan, and except as otherwise provided in this title:

A. Maximum Standards.

1. Height of building/structures

35 feet

2. Building floor area

**

3. Use floor area

***

B. Minimum Standards.

1. Lot area

10,000 square feet

2. Front setback

****

3. Side setback

25 feet

4. Side yard

10 feet/floor

5. Rear yard****

15 feet*****

*    Development standards for the SC district area included in the specific plan area of the general plan shall be determined in conjunction with a site development plan for the parcel(s) at the time of project review. Variations from the adopted development standards may be allowed in the specific plan area if findings of consistency with general plan policies are made by the city during review of the development application.

**    Building floor area in the SC district shall be governed by the provisions of subsection C of this section.

***    Use floor area in the SC district shall be governed by the provisions of subsection D of this section.

****    Fifteen percent (15%) of lot depth shall be the average front building setback along Main Street, but in no case shall the setback be less than thirty-five (35) feet. The first thirty-five (35) feet of the front setback shall be devoted to landscaping exclusive of driveway access with the balance, if any, of the required front setback devoted to parking or landscaping as determined by design review. Lot depth is the depth of the parcel or portion thereof which is zoned commercial.

*****    Yards abutting a property designated residential shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

C.    Building Floor Area.

1.    Buildings Existing Prior to 1993 Which Exceed Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet. Buildings which existed prior to 1993 and exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet may increase the allowable floor area upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the expansion consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the SC district. When a use permit is considered for expansion of floor area the following criteria shall be considered in addition to the use permit findings included in Sections 17.168.050 and 17.52.100:

a.    Expanded floor area shall only be allowed for office, winery, storage, or other nonretail uses determined by the planning commission.

b.    The proposed increase in floor area shall not result in an expansion of the footprint or building coverage of the existing building.

c.    The floor area ratio shall not be exceeded.

2.    Buildings Constructed After 1993. Each building on a legal parcel of record is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building floor area. Multiple buildings may be constructed on a legal parcel of record provided the individual buildings do not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building floor area and the maximum floor area ratio on the parcel is not exceeded.

Floor area of a single building may exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Approval of a use permit is subject to finding the increased building floor area consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purpose of the SC district. When a use permit is considered for increased building floor area the following criteria shall be considered in addition to the findings included in Sections 17.168.050 and 17.52.100:

a.    Increased floor area shall only be allowed for office, winery, storage, or other nonretail uses determined by the planning commission.

b.    The building footprint for each building shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

c.    The allowed floor area ratio shall not be exceeded.

D.    Use Floor Area.

1.    Minimum Floor Area. All uses in the SC district within existing and newly constructed buildings shall have a minimum floor area of two hundred (200) square feet unless a use permit is approved by the planning commission to allow a reduction in floor area below two hundred (200) square feet.

2.    Maximum Floor Area. All uses in the SC district within existing and newly constructed buildings shall be limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. Tenant spaces in existence on November 1, 1999, may modify the existing floor area by no more than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area. Modification of tenant spaces existing on November 1, 1999, resulting in more than a ten percent (10%) increase in floor area may be allowed upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission. Increase of tenant space floor area shall not result in the tenant space exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet except as provided by subsection C of this section. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): prior code § 27.86)

17.52.080 Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.
A.    All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building except for:

1.    Auto dealers;

2.    Bus depots and transit stations;

3.    Farmers’ markets;

4.    Parking and loading areas;

5.    Plant nurseries;

6.    Restaurants, outdoor dining in conjunction with a use permit approved for restaurant use;

7.    Seasonal sales (Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.);

8.    Service stations;

9.    Storage of building materials and supplies accessory to an approved use;

10.    Taxi stands;

11.    Such other uses which, in the opinion of the planning director, require outside display or storage.

B.    Provided the use is allowed (either as a permitted or conditional use) by the zoning district regulations for the district in which the property is located, the following provisions shall apply to the incidental placement, storage, display, sale, or offer for sale of any merchandise out-of-doors or outside any completely enclosed building:

1.    Screening. The merchandise shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public or private street, any off-street parking facility, or any common area in an integrated commercial center; or

2.    Use Permit. A use permit approved by the planning commission shall be required for the outdoor storage display or sale of merchandise except for the following:

a.    Fruits and vegetables,

b.    Plants and other growing vegetation, with the limitation in subsection (B)(3)(f) of this section not applicable to nurseries,

c.    Cut flowers,

d.    Gasoline pumps, oil racks and accessory items when located on pump islands,

e.    Vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers and recreational vehicles, with the limitation in subsection (B)(3)(f) of this section not applicable,

f.    Areas within a completely roofed street alcove or entryway; provided, that the merchandise is inside the line of the building face,

g.    Parking lot and sidewalk sales and other promotional events that involve retail sales, as long as they do not exceed twelve (12) days total during any twelve (12) month period with no more than three days being consecutive, regardless of the number of businesses located on the property, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

h.    Nonpromotional events conducted by or for recognized nonprofit or charitable community groups, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(a), (e), and (f) of this section not applicable,

i.    Garage and yard sales, as long as they are conducted on property used for residential purposes by a resident and do not exceed three days during any six-month period, with the limitations in subsection (B)(3)(a), (e), and (f) of this section not applicable,

j.    Merchandise associated with hardware stores and building supply stores,

k.    Activities similar to the above, as determined by the planning director.

3.    Standards. The placement or location of the merchandise must comply with the following:

a.    The merchandise or activity is incidental and adjacent to any lawfully established business that normally sells the merchandise inside the building.

b.    The merchandise or activity does not present a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.

c.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy the space formed by extending the width of any required or existing building exit, whichever is wider, to the public right-of-way.

d.    The display of merchandise shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

e.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy any required parking spaces.

f.    The storage, display or sales area is limited to two hundred (200) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the business, whichever is less.

4.    Public Right-of-Way. Nothing in this section shall authorize the placement, storage, display, sale or offer for sale of any merchandise on any street or on any sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way, with the exception of sidewalk sales permitted by subsection (B)(2)(g) of this section. (Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): Ord. 06-9 § 2 (part); prior code § 27.87)

17.52.090 Other standards and uses.
A.    Catering. Food catering shall be permitted when accessory to an approved use.

B.    Music/Entertainment. Music/entertainment shall be allowed when accessory to an approved use and noise is not audible beyond the confines of the building.

C.    Hazardous/Toxic Substances. Uses reporting excessive amounts of hazardous/toxic substances shall require a use permit.

D.    Food and Beverage Establishments. Establishments serving food or beverage with seating are limited to thirty (30), as listed on the regulated food and beverage establishment inventory. Such establishments shall be subject to the following regulations:

1.    The type of use shall be as listed on the inventory and/or conditions imposed during city review.

2.    All regulated uses shall be subject to use permit review by the planning commission prior to change in use or expansion of use. Change in use or expansion of use shall include increase in seating; increase in floor area; change to a restaurant with a complete kitchen capable of providing full menu service of food prepared on premises; or change in services which may result in an increase in water, sewer, traffic, noise, or parking/circulation impacts. Change in use shall not include minor changes to hours of operation or change in hours to the food service unless such hours are regulated by an existing use permit.

3.    If approvals expire for an establishment listed in the inventory or if an establishment ceases operation and may not be reestablished under Chapter 17.140 regulating nonconforming establishments, Section 17.08.120 regulating use permits, or other provisions of this title, another restaurant may be established at a new location as follows:

a.    Use permit approval is required for a new establishment at any location within the city.

b.    The total number of establishments shall not be increased beyond thirty (30).

c.    The total number of seats at the proposed restaurant shall not exceed two hundred (200).

d.    Use permit applications for the establishment of new restaurants shall be considered in the order of applications received, except that priority will be given to an existing business which is being relocated if the following conditions are met:

i.    The existing business notifies the planning director in writing no later than ten (10) days after the business ceases operation of its intention to relocate and of the date it will or did cease operation; and

ii.    A completed use permit application is filed before the food or beverage use at the original location becomes null and void pursuant to Sections 17.08.120, 17.140.020, or other provisions of this title.

e.    No use permit application will be accepted for processing until an establishment on the inventory (or an approved replacement establishment) has ceased operation or the property owner has notified the planning director in writing that the use will not be reestablished at the previous location. The use permit application shall not be scheduled for hearing by the planning commission until the time period for reestablishing of the use at the location where the use has ceased has expired or written notice has been given by the property owner that the use will not be reestablished at the previous location.

4.    When an existing business is modifying its operation the use permit shall be reviewed for compliance with the following:

a.    That if the regulated use is considered a legal nonconforming business, the reasons for nonconformity shall be stated in the findings;

b.    That the plans submitted with the application indicate that any existing nonconformities will not be increased by the issuance of the permit;

c.    The total seating capacity authorized by the use permit and fire code occupancy shall be posted on the premises;

d.    That all trash and recycling areas are screened from view.

5.    A use permit or use permit amendment is required to expand the number of seats at a restaurant listed on the regulated food and beverage establishments inventory or to enclose approved outdoor seating for use as indoor seating.

a.    The total number of restaurant seats, including indoor and outdoor seating, shall not exceed two hundred (200). Restaurants with more than two hundred (200) seats that were legally approved prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to reduce their seating to comply with this limitation.

b.    Seating shall be in compliance with the maximum fire code occupancy as determined by the fire marshal.

c.    A building expansion to enclose outdoor seating to indoor seating shall be considered an expansion of seating for purposes of determining required parking.

6.    Outdoor Seating. Administrative approval of a sidewalk dining permit is required to establish outdoor seating for dining at restaurants with an approved use permit. Use permit amendment is required for an increase in the number of seats. The sidewalk dining permit application shall include a plan showing the number of tables and chairs and the area where the dining will be allowed.

a.    Outdoor dining for seating that results in an increase in the number of seats shall be reviewed by the planning department for compliance with parking standards and by Napa County environmental management for compliance with regulations pertaining to food storage, health and safety.

b.    For those restaurants that wish to serve alcohol outside, the licensee must obtain approval for premises expansion from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

c.    All entrances and emergency exits shall be kept free of obstructions to ingress and egress.

d.    For those restaurants that wish to establish outdoor seating for dining on a sidewalk, the following will be required:

i.    A one-and-one-half-foot “recovery zone” from the edge of curb that must be kept free of obstructions (CalTrans requirement).

ii.    A four-foot clear path of travel, which clearly maintains ADA compliance along the sidewalk, must be maintained to provide disabled access.

iii.    Tables and chairs must be brought indoors when the restaurant is closed.

iv.    Entertainment shall not be allowed on the sidewalk as part of the restaurant service.

v.    An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city of St. Helena. Application must include documentation of required liability insurance. The city of St. Helena maintains the preeminent right to use the sidewalk and suspend the right to encroach whenever the city needs use of the sidewalk for other public use or for repair.

vi.    Sidewalk dining permits are revocable at the will of the city, and such revocations do not result in a taking of the owner’s property (i.e., a taking of the restaurant).

vii.    No more than twenty percent (20%) of total restaurant seating may be located on the sidewalk or other public property.

e.    For those restaurants wishing to allow patrons to bring dogs to the outdoor dining area, the following regulations shall be enforced:

i.    Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens or any other items involved with food service operations.

ii.    Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under control.

iii.    Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables, or other furnishings.

iv.    All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized between seating of patrons.

v.    Dog waste shall be removed immediately and the area immediately cleaned and sanitized with an appropriate product.

vi.    Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor portions of the public food service establishment.

E.    Landscaping Requirements.

1.    Twenty percent (20%) of the site shall be landscaped.

2.    Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping and Shade Trees. All required frontage yards, off-street parking areas, and all other open areas, other than screened storage areas, shall be improved and shall be permanently maintained by the property owner with the installation of shade trees and landscaped areas and planters in accordance with the following standards:

a.    Parking Lot Trees. All trees in parking lots shall be fifteen (15) gallons in size and shall conform to the National Association of Nurserymen’s adopted standards for growth, condition and development of nursery-supplied materials. Modification of these standards for equivalent quality of tree or shade plant may be permitted depending on species and quality of stock. The following minimum number of trees shall be required in any parking lot:

Parking Lot Size

Number of Trees

15 spaces or less

1 tree/4 spaces (minimum of 2 trees)

16 spaces or more

20 trees/acre if canopy is 40 feet or greater

24 trees/acre if canopy is less than 40 feet

b.    Planters. Where a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, there shall be provided a landscaped planter contiguous to and parallel to such right-of-way.

c.    Variety and Distribution. Shade trees shall be of a variety approved by the city that will, under ordinary circumstances and growing conditions, provide shade upon reaching maturity. Distribution of trees shall generally be in a grid or similar pattern within off-street parking lots, required yards, and other open spaces and landscaped areas so as to fulfill the intent of this title to shade expanses of pavement and other open space.

d.    Curbing. Landscaping and shade trees shall be contained in planters and tree wells bordered by a six-inch high concrete curb or equivalent barrier approved by the city.

e.    Width and Protection of Planters. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter or under the conditions of an approved permit, planters and tree wells shall have a width of not less than five feet and shall be protected from automobile overhang where necessary through the provision of barriers, tire stops or additional width.

f.    Maintenance. Landscaped areas and planters shall be served by an irrigation system approved by the city and shall be kept in a weed-free condition.

F.    Wastewater Generation. Each and every use allowed in the SC district shall be restricted such that all such uses on any single “lot of record,” as defined by Section 13.24.090(C) of this code, do not in the aggregate generate wastewater in excess of the following standards:

1.    Six hundred (600) gallons per day, without a use permit which regulates wastewater generation;

2.    Two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day, upon grant of a use permit regulating wastewater generation; provided the city council approves a use permit with conditions ensuring that all reasonable water conservation measures are implemented, and finds that approval is in the best interest of the city; or

3.    For all uses lawfully in effect on any lot of record on December 8, 1981, which generated in aggregate more than six hundred (600) gallons of wastewater per day, such uses may be altered, reconstructed or changed; provided, that the resultant uses on any such lot of record do not in the aggregate generate wastewater exceeding the aggregate wastewater gallonage per day for all uses existing on such lot of record on December 8, 1981.

G.    Demolition Permit Required. Except when required for the emergency protection of public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city manager, no permit authorizing the demolition of any structure within the commercial zone districts shall be issued until reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 17.92 and the following findings:

1.    That, based on the public record and testimony presented at a public hearing, the structure is determined not to be a significant architectural or historical building;

2.    If a structure is determined to be significant by the planning commission, no demolition will be authorized unless the following findings are made by the commission:

a.    That the structure poses a threat to health, safety and general welfare if it is not demolished,

b.    That restoration of the structure is not feasible or practicable using current building codes including, but not limited to, the Historic Building Code provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the state,

c.    That no public or other funding is available for financing renovation or purchase of the structure.

H.    Right to Farm Provision. Property owners within the district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise or fumes.

I.    Hotel and Motel Management. A manager or other responsible person shall reside upon the premises and shall have charge of every hotel or motel in which there are twelve (12) or more guest rooms, in the event that the owner of any such hotel or motel does not reside upon the premises. The requirements of this section are intended to be declarative of, and consistent with, state law. (Ord. 18-51 § 4 (Exh. B (part)); Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)): Ord. 00-2 § 3; prior code § 27.88)

17.52.100 Reserved.
(Ord. 10-8 § 2 (Exh. B (part)))

1
Code reviser’s note: Section 5 of Ordinance 18-5 provides that its amendments “are enacted for a period of two years and shall terminate on November 8, 2020, unless extended or made permanent by action of the City Council.”


Chapter 17.56
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (BPO) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.56.010    Purpose.

17.56.020    Permitted uses.

17.56.030    Conditional uses.

17.56.040    Design review required.

17.56.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.56.060    Prohibited uses.

17.56.070    Development standards.

17.56.080    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.56.010 Purpose.
The business and professional office district (BPO) designation provides for professional and administrative offices, medical and dental offices, laboratories, financial institutions, public and quasi-public uses and similar and compatible uses. Residential uses in this designation can be considered for upper floor areas. (Prior code § 27.90)

17.56.020 Permitted uses.
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;

Advertising agencies;

Business credit institutions;

Commercial and stock savings banks;

Computer and data processing services;

Contractors’ offices and showrooms, excluding storage yards;

Dental offices;

Engineering, architectural and surveying services;

Holding and investment offices;

Home health care equipment;

Home health care services;

Insurance agents, brokers and service;

Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography services, stenographers for advertisers;

Management, consulting and public relation services;

Massage offices;

Media representatives;

Medical offices;

Miscellaneous health care, including outpatient care;

Mortgage bankers and brokers;

Office use, local-serving business, professional and medical offices; off-site winery offices are permitted with no wine tasting;

Personal and business credit institutions;

Physicians;

Real estate agents and managers;

Savings and loan associations;

Security and commodity brokers;

Title abstract offices;

Trust companies;

Wholesale offices, excluding storage or on-site shipping and receiving of products;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the BPO district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.91)

17.56.030 Conditional uses.
The following list of uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

Child care services;

Electric and gas utilities;

Health club and fitness centers;

Nursing and personal care facilities;

Off-site winery offices with nonpublic wine tasting. Tasting of wine may be offered to wine distributors and wine merchants;

Parking facilities when not required to serve an approved use;

Public and quasi-public noncommercial uses (open to the public but privately owned), buildings and facilities of an administrative, educational, religious, cultural, communications or public service nature;

Research and development laboratories;

Residential units, limited to upper floors;

Sanitary services;

Schools and educational services;

Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs when owned and operated by nonprofit organizations;

Supportive housing, limited to upper floors;

Transitional housing, limited to upper floors;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the BPO district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 15-2 § 11: Ord. 09-6 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.92)

17.56.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Prior code § 27.93)

17.56.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the BPO district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Small recycling centers (not more than five hundred (500) square feet) including mobile recycling units, nonprofit drop-off facilities and reverse vending machines, subject to design review approval by the planning director;

C.    On-site storage facilities accessory to the primary use are subject to design review approval by the planning commission. On-site storage shall not be located within required parking areas. Design review will include, but not be limited to, location, length of time for the storage facility, and size of the storage facility;

D.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

E.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional use pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 12: prior code § 27.94)

17.56.060 Prohibited uses.
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the BPO district: (Reserved.) (Prior code § 27.95)

17.56.070 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the BPO district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Maximum Standards.

1.    Height of building/structures

30 feet1

B.    Minimum Standards.

1.    Lot area

7,000 square feet

2.    Front setback

20 feet

3.    Side setback

10 feet

4.    Side yard

10 feet

5.    Rear yard

15 feet

1    No roof pitch shall be less than 4:12.

(Prior code § 27.96)

17.56.080 Other uses, standards and requirements.
A.    Landscaping Requirements.

1.    Fifteen percent (15%) of the site shall be landscaped.

2.    Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping and Shade Trees. All required frontage yards, off-street parking areas, and all other open areas, other than screened storage areas, shall be improved and shall be permanently maintained by the property owner with the installation of shade trees and landscaped areas and planters in accordance with the following standards:

a.    At least two trees shall be installed in any parking lot with a total of one tree per four spaces required in lots of not more than fifteen (15) spaces and twenty (20) trees per acre with forty (40) feet or greater canopies or twenty-four (24) trees per acre with canopies less than forty (40) feet required in all other lots. Such trees generally shall be fifteen (15) gallons can size and shall conform to the National Association of Nurserymen’s adopted standards for growth, condition and development of nursery-supplied materials. Modification of these standards for equivalent quality of tree or shade plant may be permitted depending on species and quality of stock.

b.    Where a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, there shall be provided a landscaped planter contiguous to and parallel to such right-of-way.

c.    Shade trees shall be of a variety approved by the city that will, under ordinary circumstances and growing conditions, provide shade upon reaching maturity. Distribution of trees shall generally be in a grid or similar pattern within off-street parking lots, required yards, and other open spaces and landscaped areas so as to fulfill the intent of the ordinance to shade expanses of pavement and other open space.

d.    Landscaping and shade trees shall be contained in planters and tree wells bordered by a six-inch-high concrete curb or equivalent barrier approved by the city.

e.    Unless otherwise specified in this title or under the conditions of an approved permit, planters and tree wells shall have a width of not less than five feet and shall be protected from automobile overhang where necessary through the provision of barriers, tire stops or additional width.

f.    Landscaped areas and planters shall be served by an irrigation system approved by the city and shall be kept in a weed-free condition.

B.    Wastewater Generation. Each and every use allowed in the BPO district shall be restricted such that all said uses on any single “lot of record,” as defined by Section 13.24.090(C) of this code, do not in the aggregate generate wastewater in excess of the following standards:

1.    Six hundred (600) gallons per day, without a use permit which regulates wastewater generation;

2.    Two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day, upon grant of a use permit regulating wastewater generation; provided the city council approves a use permit with conditions ensuring that all reasonable water conservation measures are implemented, and finds that approval is in the best interest of the city; or

3.    For all uses lawfully in effect on any lot of record on December 8, 1981, which generated in aggregate more than six hundred (600) gallons of wastewater per day, such uses may be altered, reconstructed or changed; provided, that the resultant uses on any such lot of record do not in the aggregate generate wastewater exceeding the aggregate wastewater gallonage per day for all uses existing on said lot of record on December 8, 1981.

C.    Demolition Permit Required. Except when required for the emergency protection of public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city manager, no permit authorizing the demolition of any structure within the commercial zone districts shall be issued until reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 17.92 and the following findings:

1.    That, based on the public record and testimony presented at a public hearing, the structure is determined not to be a significant architectural or historical building.

2.    If a structure is determined to be significant by the planning commission, no demolition will be authorized unless the following findings are made by the commission:

a.    That the structure poses a threat to health, safety and general welfare if it is not demolished;

b.    That restoration of the structure is not feasible or practicable using current building codes including, but not limited to, the historic building code provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the state;

c.    That no public or other funding is available for financing renovation or purchase of the structure.

D.    Right to Farm Provision. Property owners within the district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Prior code § 27.97)

Chapter 17.60
INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.60.010    Purpose.

17.60.020    Permitted uses.

17.60.030    Conditional uses.

17.60.040    Design review required.

17.60.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.60.060    Prohibited uses.

17.60.070    Development standards.

17.60.080    Other uses, standards and requirements.

17.60.010 Purpose.
The industrial district (I) designation provides for industrial parks, warehouses, light manufacturing, auto and farm-related equipment sales and repairs, viticulture and winery support services and similar and compatible uses. (Prior code § 27.100)

17.60.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted within the district, except that new uses or expansion of existing uses proposed for industrial property that is located adjacent to property zoned for residential use shall require a use permit, as defined in Section 17.60.030.

Building material display rooms;

Carpentry, cabinet and sign shops;

Catering establishments including retail sales of items prepared on the premises;

Commercial laundries, rug cleaners;

Contractors’ offices and yards;

Crop services;

Dry cleaners;

Emergency shelter;

Farm equipment sales and repair;

Feed, grain and farm supplies, including the bulk sale of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;

Laboratories and related facilities for research, experimentation, testing and product development when conducted entirely within an enclosed building and does not involve the use of hazardous substances;

Landscape services;

Machinery repair shops;

Mini-storage facilities;

Printing and copy services;

Rental businesses, including equipment, vehicles and party services;

Reupholstery and furniture repair;

Saddle and equestrian store and repair;

Security services;

Sign shop;

Small equipment repair, including, but not limited to: chain saws, lawn mowers, outboard motors, hedge trimmers and power generators;

Small recycling centers (not more than five hundred (500) square feet) including mobile recycling units, nonprofit drop-off facilities and reverse vending machines;

Technology information services;

Warehouse and wholesale businesses, excluding retail sales;

Welding supply shop;

Well drilling shops;

Wood yards;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the I district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 15-2 § 12: Ord. 07-1 § 2 (part): Ord. 00-7 § 2; prior code § 27.101)

17.60.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses require approval of a use permit as regulated by Chapter 17.168:

All uses or expansion of existing uses proposed for industrial property that is located adjacent to property zoned for residential use. “Adjacent to” shall be defined to include properties with a common property line or properties directly across a street. “Property zoned for residential use” shall be defined as that property zoned LR low density, MR medium density, or HR high density residential;

Ambulance services, including cooking and sleeping facilities for employees on duty only;

Art, dancing, photographic and music studios and schools, including retail sales as an accessory use;

Asphalt batch, cement and concrete plants;

Audio/video recording studio;

Dwelling unit in conjunction with an approved industrial use subject to the following:

1.     Approval of a dwelling unit shall be conditioned to recognize the industrial nature of the area and to provide for the safety of any children who may reside in the unit,

2.     The floor area of the dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred fifty (850) square feet,

3.     One off-street parking space shall be provided,

4.     The dwelling unit shall be the primary residence of the occupant, or of the caretaker or security person;

Fuel yards other than wood;

Health club and fitness centers;

Kennels;

Laboratories and related facilities for research, experimentation, testing and product development when conducted entirely within an enclosed building and involving the use of a hazardous substance;

Livestock services;

Lumber and building materials yards;

Machine, welding, sheet metal, electric motor, pump and heavy equipment repair shops;

Manufacturing, packaging and processing when conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals subject to the provisions of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Section 2710 et seq. of the Public Resources Code);

Mortuary and funeral homes;

Recycling centers, including large recycling centers (five hundred (500) square feet or more);

Towing services;

Truck, bus, taxi, van and limousine terminals and service centers, including truck, trailer, and recreation vehicle rental and storage;

Veterinarian hospitals and clinics;

Wineries, excluding retail sales and tasting;

Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the I district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 07-1 § 2 (part): Ord. 03-4 § 17: Ord. 00-7 § 3; prior code § 27.102)

17.60.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Prior code § 27.103)

17.60.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the I district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    On-site storage facilities accessory to the primary use subject to design review approval by the planning commission. On-site storage shall not be located within required parking areas. Design review will include, but not be limited to, location, length of time for the storage facility, and size of the storage facility;

C.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045;

D.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional use pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Ord. 16-3 § 13: Ord. 07-1 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.104)

17.60.060 Prohibited uses.
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the I district:

A.    Activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point;

B.    Uses constituting or resulting in public or private nuisance because of emission of any smoke, dust, gas, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, radioactive or fissionable material or refuse material;

C.    Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal or dead animals;

D.    Refining of petroleum;

E.    Rendering of animal fats and oils;

F.    Smelting of metallic ores;

G.    Stockyards or slaughterhouses. (Prior code § 27.105)

17.60.070 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the I district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

B.    Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet.

C.    Setbacks.

1.    Twenty (20) foot minimum setback from any street or public right-of-way.

2.    Ten (10) foot to thirty-five (35) foot setback from a railroad right-of-way, to be determined in the use permit.

3.    Minimum three-foot unobstructed clearance between building and property boundaries.

D.    Building Height. Building height maximum is forty-five (45) feet, except as noted below:

1.    Height of buildings adjacent to residential or agricultural districts may only be as tall as their setbacks from those residential or agricultural districts.

E.    Floor Area Ratio Maximum.

1.    Fifty one-hundredths (0.50) for uses including less than ninety percent (90%) warehousing.

2.    Sixty one-hundredths (0.60) for uses including no less than ninety percent (90%) warehousing.

F.    Fencing.

1.    No fence in the front setback shall exceed three feet in height; all other fencing shall not exceed eight feet in height.

2.    Opaque, eight-foot tall, landscaped fence or wall required where I district development adjoins non-I district, which fence or wall need not be on the property boundary.

3.    Opaque, eight-foot tall, soundproofed, landscaped wall required where I district abuts residential district.

G.    Minimum of ten percent (10%) of site shall be landscaped pursuant to standards in Section 17.52.090(E) (SC district standards) and the following:

1.    A minimum fifteen (15) foot landscaped buffer with street trees (generally spaced at one tree per thirty (30) feet of frontage) shall be provided adjacent to public streets.

2.    Trees shall be credited for the estimated area of crown development at five years, provided:

a.    Landscape plans are prepared by a licensed landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor, whose charge is to provide visual buffers between properties, screen industrial development from nonindustrial property and provide useful shade.

b.    Trees are at least fifteen (15) gallon size at time of planting, and the design otherwise conforms to the standards in Section 17.52.090(E).

c.    Ground cover under trees is installed and maintained in accordance with approved plans.

d.    Installation and first year maintenance is performed by a licensed landscape contractor.

3.    Water-conserving designs and irrigation systems shall be used.

H.    Parking shall be regulated by Chapter 17.124, except that:

1.    Office buildings and office floor areas shall provide one parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of office area.

2.    General industrial uses shall provide at least one parking space per six hundred fifty (650) square feet of industrial area.

3.    Except for wine warehouses, warehouses and warehousing space shall provide at least one parking space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of warehousing space. Wine warehouses shall provide parking spaces as set forth in Section 17.124.030(G).

4.    Parking spaces may be paved with all-weather dust-free pervious materials, but travelways must be of concrete or asphalt.

5.    Off-street parking may not be in front yard, but may be anywhere else provided it is not in conflict with subsection C or G of this section.

I.    No loading/unloading may be conducted in a public right-of-way. There shall be at least one off-street loading space per use. Additional loading dock and truck standing requirements shall be based on proposed uses; these requirements shall be specified in each use permit. These requirements shall ensure that trucks will not block traffic or obstruct on-street parking spaces. Upon adoption of a finding by the planning commission that a business is unreasonably blocking traffic or obstructing on-street parking spaces, the planning commission may review and amend that business’s use permit as needed to permit the street to function as it should.

J.    Exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded so as to prevent glare onto any residential property or public roadway.

K.    Trash bin shall not be visible from public right-of-way.

L.    Materials storage shall be screened from public view.

M.    Activities that create significant noise shall be designed and located to minimize noise effects on adjacent property.

N.    Activities that generate odor, fumes, vibration, glare, dust, water or air pollution, fire or explosive hazard and visual impact shall be subject to use permit conditions that ensure that public health, safety and welfare is not compromised.

O.    A rapid entry Knox Box system shall be installed.

P.    Installation of approved interior fire sprinkler system.

Q.    One-hour minimum fire resistant construction on all exterior walls within ten (10) feet of property boundary. Fire resistant construction of interior walls shall be determined by type of occupancy.

R.    A business plan shall be filed annually with the county of Napa hazardous material section of the department of environmental management and a copy of approval shall be submitted to the city planning director. No hazardous or flammable materials shall be stored outside of the building without a proper storage container.

S.    Signs shall be regulated by Chapter 17.148.

T.    Low flow (water restricting) plumbing devices shall be installed.

U.    Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.124. Requirements pertaining to minimum height, setbacks, parking, loading, pollution, landscaping and other pertinent factors shall be as determined by the use permit granted. (Ord. 01-8 § 3 (part); prior code § 27.106)

17.60.080 Other uses, standards and requirements.
A.    Wastewater Generation.

Each and every use allowed in the CB district shall be restricted such that all said uses on any single lot of record, as defined by Section 13.24.090(C) do not in the aggregate generate wastewater in excess of the following standards:

1.    Six hundred (600) gallons per day, without a use permit which regulates wastewater generation;

2.    Two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day, upon grant of a use permit regulating wastewater generation; provided the city council approves a use permit with conditions ensuring that all reasonable water conservation measures are implemented, and finds that approval is in the best interest of the city; or

3.    For all uses lawfully in effect on any lot of record on December 8, 1981, which generated in aggregate more than six hundred (600) gallons of wastewater per day, such uses may be altered, reconstructed or changed; provided, that the resultant uses on any such lot of record do not in the aggregate generate wastewater exceeding the aggregate wastewater gallonage per day for all uses existing on the lot of record on December 8, 1981.

B.    Right to Farm Provision. Property owners within the district shall recognize that there exists a right to farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Prior code § 27.107)

Chapter 17.64
WOODLANDS AND WATERSHED (WW) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.64.010    Purpose.

17.64.020    Permitted uses.

17.64.030    Conditional uses.

17.64.040    Design review required.

17.64.050    Development standards.

17.64.060    Alternate development standards.

17.64.070    Miscellaneous provisions.

17.64.010 Purpose.
This district is intended to:

A.    Implement the policies applicable to areas designated woodlands and watershed in the general plan;

B.    Minimize the potential for erosion and land movement in steeply sloping areas;

C.    Minimize long-term cost for constructing and maintaining roads, water systems and sewer systems;

D.    Minimize the downstream effects of siltation and sedimentation in water courses;

E.    Maintain or enhance the natural ability of watershed areas to absorb and retain rainfall, both for replenishment of groundwater and moderation of downstream flooding;

F.    Minimize the public and private cost of providing adequate fire protection services in high fire hazard areas;

G.    Minimize the long-term risk to, or loss of, life and property resulting from wildfire in high fire hazard areas;

H.    Minimize the long-term cost to the community for providing services (water, sewer, fire, police, schools) in remote areas;

I.    Minimize future demands on the city’s water supply system;

J.    Minimize the city’s long-term liability for public protection in remote/hazardous areas;

K.    Preserve community open space, especially for public protection in remote/hazardous areas and protection of views and ridgelines;

L.    Preserve wildlife habitat;

M.    Encourage land planning which carefully considers the community-wide implications of natural conditions noted above;

N.    Allow development which is sensitive to the intrinsic suitability of the land and its varying capability for residential development. (Prior code § 27.110)

17.64.020 Permitted uses.
A.    Uses that were legally established prior to the effective date hereof;

B.    The following uses, subject to design review and the standards of Section 17.64.060:

1.    One single-family dwelling,

2.    One accessory building or structure without plumbing,

3.    Noncommercial horticulture and gardening,

4.    Supportive housing,

5.    Transitional housing,

6.    Agricultural employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees;

C.    One accessory dwelling unit, consistent with the provisions of Section 17.116.030 and the following design and development standards:

1.    The building must be located within the building envelope approved for the main residence;

2.    The building may not be located on a slope greater than ten percent (10%);

3.    No trees may be removed. The applicant must submit a tree survey map with the building permit application;

4.    The building may not be located within fifty (50) feet of a class III stream, within seventy-five (75) feet of a class II stream, or within one hundred (100) feet of a class I stream. The applicant must submit a stream classification study, completed by a qualified professional, with the building permit application;

5.    The applicant must submit a biological survey, completed by a qualified professional, to insure that no rare or endangered plant or animal species are present in or adjacent to the proposed building footprint. This survey must be submitted with the building permit application;

6.    The applicant must submit a grading and drainage plan, completed by a qualified professional, to insure that the location of the building will not create a significant adverse impact on the drainage patterns on the property, as determined by the director of public works. This plan must be submitted with the building permit application;

7.    The applicant must submit documentation to insure that there are adequate septic/sewer facilities and water to serve the accessory unit;

D.    Tree/shrub/scrub trimming/clearing within fifty (50) feet of buildings, as needed to comply with fire safety standards adopted by the city council;

E.    Provided there are no significant impacts on erosion, wildlife habitat and visual character, earth movement activities and trimming or clearing of trees, shrubs or scrub are permitted as approved in advance by the city planner, city engineer or planning commission;

F.    Animal husbandry, except horses and cattle provided:

1.    The noise created by the animals does not raise the ambient sound level at the property boundary by five dBA,

2.    The animals’ care and keeping does not create any “nuisance” or “health hazard,” as defined by the Napa County department of environmental health;

G.    Cottage food operations subject to the provisions of Section 17.116.045. (Ord. 17-2 § 8 (part); Ord. 16-3 § 14; Ord. 15-2 § 13: Ord. 03-4 § 18: prior code § 27.111)

17.64.030 Conditional uses.
A.    Agriculture or commercial agriculture;

B.    “Home occupations” as defined in Section 17.116.040;

C.    “Wineries” (without tours and tastings) defined as follows: Wineries which shall include a laboratory for the testing of grapes and wine; facilities for the crushing of grapes; the processing and fermenting of grape juice to make wine; the aging of wine; the bottling of wine; and the warehousing and shipping of wine. A winery includes offices; equipment maintenance shops; employees’ eating facilities; cooperage repair shops; wine storage tanks; scales; employee parking; and winery waste treatment and/or disposal facilities. A winery shall not include the retail sales on the premises of wine or any other products; public visitor facilities or activities to include tours and tasting; public assembly events; eating and drinking places or catering; picnic facilities, farm labor or other employee housing,

D.    Flag lot development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112. (Ord. 17-2 § 8 (part); Ord. 03-4 § 19: prior code § 27.112)

17.64.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all subdivisions, signs, grading, removal of vegetation and new structures and buildings (except for one accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions set forth in Section 17.64.020(C)) for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 17-2 § 8 (part); Ord. 03-4 § 20: prior code § 27.113)

17.64.050 Development standards.
A.    Lot area: five to forty (40) acres; depending on physical features, the city’s ability to provide public services and community impacts of subdivision design considerations.

B.    Lot width: twenty (20) to two hundred (200) feet; depending on necessary clearing and earthmoving, and the effect on safety and privacy considerations.

C.    Setbacks: twenty (20) to fifty (50) feet or ten (10) percent of the width (sideyards) and ten percent (10%) of the depth (front and rear yards); depending on the effect on safety and privacy considerations.

D.    Maximum building and structural coverage: the lesser of ten percent (10%) of the lot area, or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

E.    Building height limit: no part of a building or structure may be more than thirty-five (35) feet above the natural grade, except that the planning commission may grant a variance to this height limitation subject to adoption of findings in Section 17.172.050, plus the finding that the design at hand and existing screening vegetation reduces potential negative visual impact on the community to levels of insignificance.

F.    Variations to the development standards in this district may be allowed as part of design review approval upon application by the property owner or initiated by the city to provide for clustering of building sites to minimize grading, vegetation removal and view impacts. Clustering of building sites shall not result in more than one primary unit on each parcel or a reduction in minimum parcel area. (Prior code § 27.114)

17.64.060 Alternate development standards.
The minimum lot size, setbacks and use restrictions shall be determined as specified in Sections 17.64.020, 17.64.030 and 17.64.050, provided the following have been documented to the city’s satisfaction:

A.    All clearing and earthmoving shall be conducted in compliance with an erosion control plan as prepared by a registered civil engineer and approved by the city engineer.

B.    There will be no disturbance of definite or suspected landslides or soil creep areas, as identified on maps produced by United States Geological Survey (USGS) or on any other more detailed study prepared by properly credentialed professionals and reviewed by the city’s geotechnical consultant.

C.    There will be no disturbance of riparian areas within one hundred (100) feet of intermittent or perennial streams noted on USGS maps.

D.    There will be no earth movement on slopes in excess of thirty percent (30%). Exceptions to this rule may be granted by the city engineer for minor trenching and backfilling for the installation of utilities and for temporary, nongraded access for construction purposes where no trees or substantial vegetation will be removed and where the surface will be recontoured to previous condition and revegetated according to the erosion control plan. Applications for an exception to the rule shall include submittal of a construction plan for the equipment to be installed, a plan for the maintenance of that equipment, a soils and slope stability analysis prepared by a geotechnical engineer, an erosion control plan pursuant to subsection A of this section, and a revegetation plan, utilizing native plant species, for the area that will be disturbed by the earth movement. Prior to granting an exception, the city engineer must find that the project does not have potential for creating significant erosion problems. A performance bond shall be required and held by the city for one year after completion of the project to insure that the recontouring and revegetation were properly installed.

E.    There will be no buildings (other than water tanks, which shall be screened) constructed within one hundred (100) feet of the primary ridgeline on any parcel. The intent of this section is to reduce the visual impact of buildings that would obscure public views of the most prominent ridgeline on each property, without precluding the opportunity of the property owner to site a building that could attain a view. In implementing this section, the commission shall adopt a finding that the approved plan balances the owner’s interest in attaining a view against the city’s interest in preventing the obstruction of scenic views.

F.    The natural ability of the site to retain rainwater and allow its percolation into underground reserves shall not be diminished by more than ten percent (10%).

G.    Water and sewer systems will be constructed and maintained, at the applicants expense, to meet such standard as may be adopted by ordinance of the city council, or in the absence of such to the satisfaction of the city engineer. If individual and/or private water and/or sewage systems are proposed, prior approval must be obtained from the Napa County department of environmental management.

H.    The proposed subdivision shall have a gravity-flow emergency water supply system sufficient to provide (simultaneously per possible dwelling site in the application at hand) two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons (within twenty (20) minutes), or such greater quantity as may be required by ordinance adopted by the city council.

I.    The fuel loading within fifty (50) feet of the building or building envelope shall be maintained at a level not to exceed such standard as may be adopted by ordinance of the city council.

J.    New roads/common drives/driveways shall be maintained so as to guarantee all of the following:

1.    Safe two-way year-round passage of emergency vehicles, as defined in St. Helena Access Road Standards, as adopted by ordinance of the city council.

2.    Erosion from road cuts/fills shall not exceed such standard as specified in an erosion control plan approved by Napa County resource conservation district, pursuant to ordinance adopted by the city council, or in the absence of such, to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

3.    Dust creation shall be minimized and shall not exceed such standard as may be adopted by ordinance of the city council.

4.    Earth movement shall not obstruct or obliterate circulation improvements.

5.    Grading shall occur between April 1st and October 15th unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.

K.    Emergency vehicle access shall be constructed and maintained, at the applicants expense, to allow interconnection with nearby roads. (Ord. 01-13 § 3; prior code § 27.115)

17.64.070 Miscellaneous provisions.
A.    Automobile Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.124.

B.    Fire-Resistive Construction. Roofing materials shall be noncombustible. All residences shall have interior and exterior sprinklers. All other structures shall have exterior sprinklers. All parcels shall have two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons of water storage situated adjacent to or at a higher elevation than the main structure on the parcel. (Prior code § 27.116)

Chapter 17.68
PUBLIC AND QUASI- PUBLIC (PQP) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.68.010    Purpose.

17.68.020    Conditional uses.

17.68.030    Design review required.

17.68.040    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.68.050    Development standards.

17.68.060    Other standards and requirements.

17.68.010 Purpose.
A.    It is the purpose of the PQP public and quasi-public district to provide for government-owned facilities, public and private schools and quasi-public uses such as churches and cemeteries. The PQP district occurs throughout the city, and includes City Hall, the city library, all of the public schools, all of the churches, emergency transportation service, the cemetery and the wastewater treatment plant.

B.    The city’s authority to regulated the land use activities of other governments depends upon the level of government and a variety of other factors. The federal government, for example, is generally immune from local regulation, although Congress has indicated that most federal agencies should make every effort to comply with local zoning and building codes (40 USC 531-535). The state is also immune from local regulation except when it specifically consents to such regulation. Similarly, the county and city are mutually exempt from each other’s development regulations, although the Government Code, Sections 65401 and 65402 may require planning commission review of certain county projects for general plan conformity. All state, county and city projects are subject to the California Environmental Quality Act. With several notable exceptions, other local agencies including school districts are subject to local zoning regulation and general plan review of their land use activities. As a result, the applicability of the PQP district can only be established on a case-by-case basis.

C.    Because of the wide variety of possible public and quasi-public uses and legal relationships involved it is not possible to fully implement the traditional list of uses with fixed development standards. As a result all public and quasi-public uses in the PQP district shall require a use permit, public hearing and review. Requirements for landscaping and screening are also incorporated into the PQP district. (Prior code § 27.120)

17.68.020 Conditional uses.
The following are the conditional uses in the PQP district and require a use permit:

A.    Uses, building, structures, facilities and activities owned, leased or operated by public and/or quasi-public entities, including but not limited to: the city, county, St. Helena Unified School District, Napa Valley College, state and the Government of the United States to the extent that such uses and/or entities are subject to the zoning authority of the city of Napa;

B.    Churches, private schools, cemeteries;

C.    Mortuaries;

D.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the PQP district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.121)

17.68.030 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Prior code § 27.122)

17.68.040 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the PQP district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

C.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.123)

17.68.050 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the PQP district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    Maximum Standards.*

 

1.    Height

**

B.    Minimum standards.

 

1.    Lot area

N/A

2.    Lot width

N/A

3.    Lot frontage

N/A

4.    Front setback

**

5.    Side setback

**

6.    Rear yard

**

7.    Side yard

**

(N/A) Not applicable

*    See also Chapter 17.116 for accessory building and structure standards.

**    To be established in conjunction with use permit review.

(Prior code § 27.124)

17.68.060 Other standards and requirements.
The following additional standards and requirements shall apply in the PQP district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    On-site parking and loading shall be provided in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.124.

B.    All planting strips, yards, setbacks and other required open space areas shall be landscaped in accord with a landscaping plan approved by the design review process. The landscaping shall generally be planned and developed in accord with the city’s standards for landscaping as specified in Chapter 17.112.

C.    Street trees installed pursuant to the city’s standards may be required by the park and recreation director. Curb, gutter, sidewalks and street improvements installed pursuant to the city’s standards may be required by the public works director.

D.    Unless specifically waived by the design review process, all projects shall have a trash enclosure constructed of such materials as to be opaque and of sufficient size to permit the storage, removal and replacement of standard commercial size trash bins. No collection, storage or stacking of garbage, trash and refuse is permitted outside the trash enclosure. This requirement does not preclude the placement of individual trash containers within the area designated PQP.

E.    All equipment and open material storage areas shall be screened from the public right-of-way by fences and/or landscaping pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.120.

F.    All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded so as to prevent glare onto any public roadways and properties of a residential character.

G.    Areas of significant potential noise generation shall be so designed and located that adjacent properties, particularly those of a residential character, will not be adversely affected by noise.

H.    Property owners within this district shall recognize that there exists right-to-farm properties within the district and in the vicinity of the district. There is a good faith expectation that no complaints will occur regarding legal normal agricultural activities on properties in the district or in the vicinity of the district. Such activities may include day or night disbursement of chemicals, and creation of dust, noise, or fumes. (Prior code § 27.125)

Chapter 17.72
PARKS AND RECREATION (PR) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.72.010    Purpose.

17.72.020    Permitted uses.

17.72.030    Conditional uses.

17.72.040    Design review required.

17.72.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.72.060    Development standards.

17.72.070    Other standards and requirements.

17.72.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the PR parks and recreation district to provide for public parklands primarily designed for public recreation. The PR designation is applied to existing public parks, ranging from active sports parks like Crane Park to more passive, open space-oriented parks such as Stonebridge Park, and to proposed park sites. Proposed park sites include the Lower Reservoir and three sites along Sulphur Creek: (1) along the west side of Main Street at the Sulphur Springs Bridge; (2) between the creek and Pope Street north of the intersection with Mariposa Lane; and (3) along the Napa River south of Pope Street. Other sites may be established after public hearings. (Prior code § 27.130)

17.72.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the PR district:

A.    Wildlife sanctuaries, botanical gardens, outdoor nature areas and other similar facilities and uses for passive use;

B.    Public parks, playgrounds, play lots and tot lots for passive use (no active recreational facilities);

C.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the PR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.131)

17.72.030 Conditional uses.
The following are the conditional uses in the PR district and require a use permit:

A.    Active recreational facilities such as public or private play fields, athletic fields and facilities, including, but not limited to, baseball/softball diamonds, basketball courts, volleyball courts, tennis courts, golf courses, bicycle courses, roller-blade and skateboard courses, swimming pools and boating/fishing facilities;

B.    Public or private community centers, stadiums, arenas, auditoriums and civic theaters;

C.    Private facilities accessory to a permitted public use;

D.    Public and quasi-public noncommercial uses (open to the public but privately owned), buildings and facilities of an administrative, educational, religious, cultural, communications or public service nature, including corporation yards and warehouses;

E.    Caretaker or watchman’s residence;

F.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the PR district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.132)

17.72.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs and new construction for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Prior code § 27.133)

17.72.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the PR district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

C.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.134)

17.72.060 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the PR district, except as otherwise provided:

A.    Maximum standards.*

 

1.    Height

**

B.    Minimum standards.

 

1.    Lot area

N/A

2.    Lot width

N/A

3.    Lot frontage

N/A

4.    Front setback

**

5.    Side setback

**

6.    Rear yard

**

7.    Side yard

**

(N/A) Not applicable

*    See also Chapter 17.116 for accessory building and structure standards.

**    To be established in conjunction with use permit review.

(Prior code § 27.135)

17.72.070 Other standards and requirements.
The following additional standards and requirements shall apply in the PR district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    On-site parking and loading shall be provided in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.124.

B.    All planting strips, yards, setbacks and other required open space areas shall be landscaped in accord with a landscaping plan approved by the design review process. The landscaping shall generally be planned and developed in accord with the city’s standards for landscaping as specified in Chapter 17.112.

C.    Street trees installed pursuant to the city’s standards may be required by the park and recreation director. Curb, gutter, sidewalks and street improvements installed pursuant to the city’s standards may be required by the director of public works.

D.    Unless specifically waived by the design review process, all projects shall have a trash enclosure constructed of such materials as to be opaque and of sufficient size to permit the storage, removal and replacement of standard commercial size trash bins. No collection, storage or stacking of garbage, trash and refuse is permitted outside the trash enclosure. This requirement does not preclude the placement of individual trash containers within the area designated PR.

E.    All equipment and open material storage areas shall be screened from the public right-of-way by fences and/or landscaping pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.120.

F.    All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded so as to prevent glare onto any public roadways and properties of a residential character.

G.    Areas of significant potential noise generation shall be so designed and located that adjacent properties, particularly those of a residential character, will not be adversely affected by noise. (Prior code § 27.136)

Chapter 17.76
OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.76.010    Purpose.

17.76.020    Permitted uses.

17.76.030    Conditional uses.

17.76.040    Design review required.

17.76.050    Accessory uses, buildings and structures.

17.76.060    Development standards.

17.76.070    Other standards and requirements.

17.76.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the OS open space district to provide for natural open space areas that are devoted to the preservation of natural resources, the managed production of resources, outdoor recreation or public health and safety. Areas designated for open space are all associated with stream corridors that pass through or adjacent to the city including: the Napa River, Sulphur Springs Creek, York Creek and Spring Creek. (Prior code § 27.140)

17.76.020 Permitted uses.
The following are the permitted uses in the OS district:

A.    Wildlife sanctuaries, outdoor nature areas and other similar facilities and uses for passive use;

B.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the OS district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.141)

17.76.030 Conditional uses.
The following are the conditional uses in the OS district and require a use permit:

A.    Public access trails including but not limited to bicycle, hiking, horse and other nonmotorized types of use;

B.    Passive view and picnic areas;

C.    Gravel mining operations approved by the city prior to October 1, 1993, as long as such operations are productive and economically viable;

D.    Limited development as specified in Policy 6.2.4 of the general plan will be permitted on open space-designated parcels along Sulphur Springs Creek west of the Crane Avenue Bridge. Development potential on open space-designated parcels will be determined in accordance with standards governing parcels designated agriculture in the general plan and zoned A-20. All development must be outside the stream corridor and structures must be setback from the creek’s edge consistent with California Department of Fish and Game standards;

E.    Other similar uses found consistent with the general plan and the OS district pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.142)

17.76.040 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164 all signs and new construction for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Prior code § 27.143)

17.76.050 Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
The following are the accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the PR district:

A.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.148;

B.    Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120;

C.    Other uses and structures which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted and conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 17.08. (Prior code § 27.144)

17.76.060 Development standards.
The following requirements shall be observed in the OS district, except as otherwise provided (i.e., properties governed by Policy 6.2.4 of the general plan, etc.):

A.    Maximum Standards.*

 

1.    Height

**

B.    Minimum Standards.

 

1.    Lot area

N/A

2.    Lot width

N/A

3.    Lot frontage

N/A

4.    Front setback

**

5.    Side setback

**

6.    Rear yard

**

7.    Side yard

**

(N/A) No applicable

*    See also Chapter 17.116 for accessory building and structure standards.

**    To be established in conjunction with use permit review.

(Prior code § 27.145)

17.76.070 Other standards and requirements.
The following additional standards and requirements shall apply in the OS district, except as otherwise provided in this title:

A.    On-site parking and loading shall be provided in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.124.

B.    Unless specifically waived by the design review process, all projects shall have a trash enclosure constructed of such materials as to be opaque and of sufficient size to permit the storage, removal and replacement of standard commercial size trash bins. No collection, storage or stacking of garbage, trash and refuse is permitted outside the trash enclosure. This requirement does not preclude the placement of individual trash containers within the area designated OS.

C.    All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded so as to prevent glare onto any public roadways and properties of a residential character.

D.    Areas of significant potential noise generation shall be so designed and located that adjacent properties, particularly those of a residential character, will not be adversely affected by noise. (Prior code § 27.146)

Chapter 17.80
RURAL-RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY (RR) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.80.010    Purpose.

17.80.020    Development standards.

17.80.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the RR rural-residential overlay district to identify those parcels within the city which are not serviced by city water or sewer and which have the ability to subdivide into additional parcels. Minimum lot sizes which are larger than the minimum lot sizes established for the underlying zoning district are required for parcels which do not have city water or sewer services. (Prior code § 27.150)

17.80.020 Development standards.
The following regulations shall apply in all districts with which are combined RR district. The only uses permitted shall be those uses permitted in the district with which the RR district is combined; provided, however, where water is available from a private well, the land may not be subdivided into less than one acre or if water is available from a mutual or utility company the land may be subdivided into parcels of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater as determined by the health officer of the city; or if sanitation and public water are available the land may be subdivided into parcels not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. “Health officer of the city” as used in this section, is defined to mean the official or officials of the city charged with the duty of enforcing the health ordinances of the city and the official or officials of any other governmental agency with whom the city has contracted for the enforcement of such ordinances. (Prior code § 27.151)

Chapter 17.84
SPECIFIC PLAN OVERLAY (SP) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.84.010    Purpose.

17.84.020    Specific plan required.

17.84.030    Pre-application review required.

17.84.040    Procedure for the review and adoption of specific plans or site development plans.

17.84.050    Adoption of regulations and standards through specific plans.

17.84.060    Administration of specific plans.

17.84.070    Administration of site development plans.

17.84.010 Purpose.
A.    It is the purpose of the SP specific plan overlay district to facilitate the general plan provisions for the preparation, adoption and implementation of specific plans pursuant to Section 65450 et seq., of the Government Code. Specific plans include detailed regulations, conditions, programs and proposed legislation necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of the general plan. The SP district is established to implement the policies of the general plan which call for the preparation and adoption of specific plans in certain areas of the community described in the general plan. In addition, the SP district is established to provide the city with the ability to require and/or to implement specific plans when the city council finds it necessary and appropriate. When applied to properties in advance of the adoption of a specific plan, the SP district serves to alert individuals to the requirement for a specific plan. When applied to properties after the adoption of a specific plan it serves to alert individuals to the policies and regulations of a specific plan.

B.    The city recognizes that within designated specific plan areas it may be difficult to coordinate development plans with all affected properties given the timing of future development. To assist those property owners who desire to proceed immediately with development of property located within a specific plan area the city may allow processing of a site development plan for the property proposed for development provided infrastructure improvements as determined during review of a pre-application pursuant to Section 17.84.030 are addressed in conjunction with the site development plan.

C.    As described in the Government Code, specific plans can address a wide variety of situations including but not limited to: large-scale projects, projects proposed on sites that have multiple development constraints, projects which require significant coordination among a number of properties, projects in which the phasing or timing is critical, projects which will generate significant infrastructure needs and projects which have important and broadly based community-wide implications.

D.    The SP district is intended to implement the general plan’s policies which require the preparation of a specific plan or site development plan for certain properties and is not intended to preclude or prevent the preparation of a specific plan on any other property in the city regardless of the applicable zoning. (Prior code § 27.155)

17.84.020 Specific plan required.
No new development will be approved within the specific plan areas designated in the general plan until a specific plan meeting the requirements of Section 65451 of the Government Code, has been adopted by the city. The city council may determine that a site development plan for a specific property may be prepared in-lieu of a specific plan for the entire specific plan area. The site development plan shall be prepared and adopted prior to approval of new development. The site development plan shall include an analysis of infrastructure improvements as determined during review of a pre-application pursuant to Section 17.84.030. (Prior code § 27.156)

17.84.030 Pre-application review required.
Prior to preparation of a specific plan or site development plan a pre-application review is required. A letter of intent and a sketch plan showing the general arrangement and design of the land uses and major elements of the proposed development shall be submitted to the planning department for review. The purpose of the pre-application review is to determine which goals, policies and programs of the general plan are applicable and need to be reflected in the proposed specific plan or site development plan. The planning director shall forward the pre-application to the city council for a determination of which goals, policies and programs of the general plan are applicable and need to be reflected in the proposed specific plan or site development plan. The city council shall also determine the scope of the infrastructure improvements to be analyzed in conjunction with the specific plan or site development plan. The scope of infrastructure to be analyzed shall be based on a review of the project impacts and a nexus of improvements necessitated by the project. (Prior code § 27.157)

17.84.040 Procedure for the review and adoption of specific plans or site development plans.
Based on the pre-application review, the city council shall determine the scope of the proposed specific plan or site development plan. The proposed specific plan or site development plan and associated documents shall be prepared under the supervision of the city with all costs paid by the property owners unless the city determines that all or a portion of the costs will be paid by the city. The proposed specific plan or site development plan and associated documents shall contain enough information to clearly demonstrate how the proposed specific plan or site development plan will implement the applicable general plan goals, policies and programs. The procedure for the review and adoption of specific plans or site development plans required in the SP district shall be that described in Chapter 17.12. In general this procedure requires a public hearing and recommendation from the planning commission and a public hearing and decision from the city council. (Prior code § 27.158)

17.84.050 Adoption of regulations and standards through specific plans.
Regulations and standards may be adopted by resolution or ordinance as a part of a specific plan. The following procedures shall be used to identify and alert individuals to the applicable regulations and standards of an adopted specific plan:

The regulations and standards for the specific plan are utilized in-lieu of adopted zoning regulations and standards (to be used instead of existing zoning districts contained in the zoning ordinance) and the specific plan shall govern the use and development of any properties included in an adopted specific plan without regard to any adopted zoning regulations and standards (unless the specific plan contains specific provisions designed to rely on the zoning ordinance in certain situations not covered in the specific plan). Under these circumstances the properties included in the specific plan shall be indicated on the zoning map with the file number of the specific plan. (Prior code § 27.159)

17.84.060 Administration of specific plans.
Unless alternative procedures are specifically incorporated in an adopted specific plan, the following provisions shall apply to the administration of specific plans and lots zoned SP:

The approval of a site development plan by the planning director shall be required prior to any development or the issuance of any building permit. The planning director’s review shall be limited to the proposed development’s conformity to the adopted specific plan. Design review shall be required for any proposed development to the extent that such development is subject to the design review requirement. (Prior code § 27.160)

17.84.070 Administration of site development plans.
When a site development plan is adopted for a property within a specific plan area in-lieu of a specific plan for the entire area, the following provisions shall apply to the administration of the site development plan:

A.    The site development plan shall establish the land use, circulation, landscaping, parking, utilities and design criteria for the property within the specific plan area proposed for development.

B.    Approval of a site development plan shall include analysis of infrastructure requirements as determined during review of a pre-application as specified in Section 17.84.030. The analysis shall include both on- and off-site improvements required to mitigate impacts resulting from the site development plan and improvements pursuant to the general plan.

C.    Prior to any development or the issuance of any building permit within an area on which a site development plan has been approved design review shall be required for any proposed development to the extent that such development is subject to the design review requirement. (Prior code § 27.161)

Chapter 17.88
FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY (FP) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.88.010    Purpose.

17.88.020    Building permits.

17.88.030    Subdivisions.

17.88.040    Utilities.

17.88.050    FEMA requirement.

17.88.010 Purpose.
In any district with which is combined an FLP District, the regulations of this chapter shall apply in addition to those hereinbefore specified for such district; provided, that if any conflict in these regulations occurs with other provisions of this title including the amending ordinances thereto, or with this code or any other ordinances or resolution of the city, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. (Prior code § 27.165)

17.88.020 Building permits.
A.    No person shall commence nor authorize nor cause to be commenced any erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, improvising, moving or demolishing of any building or structure without first obtaining a separate building permit for each building or structure from the building inspector.

B.    All building permit applications for major repairs shall be reviewed by the building inspector to determine that the proposed repair: (1) uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and (2) uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.

C.    All building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements shall be reviewed by the building inspector to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and mobilehomes): (1) is protected against flood damage; (2) is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (3) uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and (4) uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. (Prior code § 27.166)

17.88.030 Subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments shall be reviewed by the city engineer to assure that: (1) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and (3) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Prior code § 27.167)

17.88.040 Utilities.
New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (Prior code § 27.168)

17.88.050 FEMA requirement.
New construction or replacement of existing construction shall be in conformance with the standards and regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (Prior code § 27.169)

Chapter 17.92
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY (HP) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.92.010    Establishment of district.

17.92.020    Purpose.

17.92.030    Boundaries.

17.92.040    Recommendations for designating HP district properties.

17.92.050    Preservation of structures within the HP district.

17.92.060    Restoration of structures.

17.92.070    Incentives for preservation.

17.92.010 Establishment of district.
There is established a historic preservation district (HP). This district is an overlay district which, through ordinance enacted by the city council, may be combined with any of the zones and districts listed in the municipal code. The regulations of this chapter shall apply to properties within this district in addition to the regulations of any underlying zone or district with which the HP district is overlaid. Where the regulations established for this district are in conflict with other zoning or district regulations, the more restrictive shall apply, except as otherwise specified in Section 17.92.060. (Prior code § 27.175)

17.92.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the HP overlay district regulations is to preserve the unique architectural character of those certain specific structures which have contributed to the city’s historic development. (Prior code § 27.176)

17.92.030 Boundaries.
The boundaries of the HP district shall be designated herein as they become established through ordinance adopted by the city council. (Prior code § 27.177)

17.92.040 Recommendations for designating HP district properties.
A.    All properties considered for inclusion in the HP overlay district shall be reviewed by the planning commission. In reviewing such properties, the commission shall consider all information contained in the public record and all relevant testimony received at a public hearing regarding the historic and/or architectural significance of structures on the property. Upon consideration of the evidence, the planning commission shall make a determination of the significance of the structures. Upon making a determination that said structures are significant, the planning commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council for establishing a new HP district boundary to protect those structures determined to be significant.

B.    Property owners may request the inclusion of their property within the historic preservation district by filing an application with the planning department. Such applications shall include all plans, sketches, photographs and other information deemed necessary by the planning commission to determine whether structures on the property are significant buildings in conformance with subsection A of this section.

C.    All planning commission recommendations for designating new HP district boundaries shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing. Upon consideration of the evidence presented at the public hearing, the council shall make a final determination on the significance of the structures within the proposed boundaries. The council shall adopt new HP district boundaries as necessary to protect all structures determined by the council to be significant. (Prior code § 27.178)

17.92.050 Preservation of structures within the HP district.
No permits for remodeling or demolition shall be issued for properties within the HP district which would result in exterior changes to building facades, structures, or to passage ways providing inter-accessibility within a block, unless such change is approved by the planning commission in accordance with the following findings:

A.    Findings required for approval of exterior alterations:

1.    That the alteration is compatible with the architectural style of the existing structures;

2.    That the alteration does not eliminate elements that are required to maintain the essential form and character of the structure;

3.    That the alternation is compatible with adjoining structures and the use of such structures.

B.    Findings required for approval of demolitions:

1.    That the structure is unsound and presents a clear danger to public safety;

2.    That reconstruction or restoration is not feasible or practicable using current building codes, including but not limited to the Historic Building Code provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 27.179)

17.92.060 Restoration of structures.
A structure within the HP district may be restored to its original appearance if damage to the structure has occurred due to fire, collapse, deterioration, acts of God or other causes. Plans for such restoration shall require approval by the planning commission through the design review process. In approving such restoration, the planning commission may waive current design requirements within the zoning district in which the HP overlay district is combined. If such requirements are in conflict with the original design of the building when all of the following findings can be made:

A.    That the building official has determined reconstruction or restoration to be feasible and practicable, using current building codes, including but not limited to the Historic Building Code provisions of the state of California and the Uniform Building Code;

B.    That the construction would faithfully restore the original appearance of the structure insofar as available materials and current standards of construction permit;

C.    That the design of the structure is compatible with the design of neighboring structures and would not be injurious to public health, safety or welfare. (Prior code § 27.180)

17.92.070 Incentives for preservation.
When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning commission and city council that preservation and/or restoration of designated properties cannot and is not economically viable, the city may grant certain incentives in the form of relaxation of certain provisions of this chapter only when it can be shown that such relaxation makes preservation or restoration economically feasible. (Prior code § 27.181)

Chapter 17.96
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (PD) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.96.010    Purpose.

17.96.020    Required application.

17.96.030    Uses permitted.

17.96.040    Development standards.

17.96.050    Parking requirements.

17.96.060    Findings required—Project approval.

17.96.070    Revocation.

17.96.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the PD planned development overlay district to encourage high quality, innovative and creative development in the city. The PD planned development overlay district is intended to provide for the consideration and approval of development plans which serve public objectives more fully than development permitted under conventional zoning regulations. Planned development overlay districts are typically characterized by (in whole or in part): significant variations from the standards of the zoning ordinance, mixed land uses, a variety of housing types, the assembly of small parcels of land into a larger more effective unit, the preservation of open space, natural features or historical structures and structures with diverse building setbacks, lot sizes and building heights. The PD planned development overlay district may be combined with any existing zoning district provided both design and the proposed uses including density for residential land use designations can be found consistent with the policies of the general plan. (Prior code § 27.185)

17.96.020 Required application.
Application for the establishment of a PD planned development overlay district shall include an application and approval of a rezoning and use permit for all development within the district prior to establishment of the combining district. Such application for a rezoning and use permit shall be pursuant to Chapters 17.08, 17.12, 17.168 and 17.172 and shall include but not be limited to the following:

A.    A map or maps showing:

1.    Topography of the land, contour intervals as required by the city,

2.    Proposed street system and lot design,

3.    Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings and other such areas,

4.    Areas proposed for commercial uses, off-street parking,

5.    Proposed location of buildings on the land;

B.    General elevations or perspective drawing of all proposed buildings and structures;

C.    Other data and information which may be deemed necessary by the city for proper consideration of the application. (Prior code § 27.186)

17.96.030 Uses permitted.
Uses permitted within the zoning district with which the planned development district is being combined shall be permitted upon approval of a use permit. (Prior code § 27.187)

17.96.040 Development standards.
Development standards applicable to the zoning district which the planned development district is being combined shall be required unless modified in conjunction with approval of the planned development overlay district. The city shall address issues related to landscaping, parking, site design, ingress and egress, signage, lighting, relationship to adjoining properties and land uses, setbacks and yards and any other items toward achieving an integrated and compatible project within the city and environs. (Prior code § 27.188)

17.96.050 Parking requirements.
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.124. (Prior code § 27.189)

17.96.060 Findings required—Project approval.
The planning commission in recommending the approval of a planned development overlay district to the city council and the city council in approving a planned development combining district must make the following findings:

A.    The proposed project is in all aspects superior to a similar project designed to meet the standards of this section and the district in which it is located;

B.    Any variations from the standards of this section and the district in which the project is located are justified by the high quality design of the proposed development when taken together as a whole;

C.    Each phase (if any) of the development, as well as the development as a whole, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability;

D.    The proposed project is planned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the existing and planned uses in the surrounding area;

E.    The proposed use or structure is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans;

F.    That any additional conditions stipulated as necessary in the public interest have been imposed; and

G.    The proposed use or structure will not be detrimental to the public, health, safety and welfare of the community. (Prior code § 27.190)

17.96.070 Revocation.
In the event that the use permit granted for the planned development overlay district shall be revoked or become null and void under Chapters 17.08, 17.12, 17.168 and 17.172, the land shall immediately revert to its former land use classification prior to establishment of the planned development overlay district. (Prior code § 27.191)

Chapter 17.100
MOBILEHOME PARK OVERLAY (MHP) DISTRICT*
Sections:

17.100.010    Purpose.

17.100.020    Enforcement.

17.100.030    Definitions.

17.100.040    Zone change and use permit approval.

17.100.050    Uses permitted.

17.100.060    Conditional uses.

17.100.070    Development standards.

*    Prior history: Prior code §§ 27.195—27.203.

17.100.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the MHP mobilehome park overlay district is to provide, when combined with an underlying residential zoning district, a place which allows the establishment and operation of mobilehome parks. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.020 Enforcement.
A.    The city of St. Helena’s MHP mobilehome park regulations are intended to complement and be subordinate to state law. The state law governing mobilehome parks is entitled the “Mobilehome Parks Act” and may be found in Division 13, Parts 2.1 and 2.3 of the California Health and Safety Code. Mobilehome park regulations are contained in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapters 2 and 2.2. The city of St. Helena does not assume responsibility for the enforcement of the regulations contained therein and all mobilehome parks within the city remain subject to the jurisdiction of the California Housing and Community Development Department in its role as the enforcement agency for the above described state laws. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate, void or minimize such other pertinent regulations and all pertinent state and city regulations concerning the development and operation of mobilehome parks shall be observed.

B.    Mobilehomes located within areas of special flood hazard are required to be in compliance with Chapter 15.52, Flood Damage Prevention. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.030 Definitions.
“Lot,” as defined by Section 18210 of the Health and Safety Code, means any area or tract of land or portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one manufactured home, mobilehome, or recreational vehicle.

“Mobilehome” means:

1.    A mobilehome, as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code; or

2.    A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Mobilehome” does not mean:

1.    A recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 799.24 of the Civil Code and Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code;

2.    A commercial coach; or

3.    Factory-built housing, as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Mobilehome park,” as defined in Section 18214 of the Health and Safety Code, means an area of land where two or more lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes or mobilehomes. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.040 Zone change and use permit approval.
A.    An application for a zoning map amendment (rezoning) to combine the MHP mobilehome park overlay and a residential zoning district and for use permit approval for the mobilehome park shall be filed simultaneously with the planning department. The zoning map amendment and the use permit shall be considered simultaneously.

B.    The application for the use permit shall include, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.168, the following:

1.    A site sketch indicating the location of the proposed park in relation to the surrounding area or region.

2.    The park name, date, north point, scale and sufficient boundaries to define the proposed acreage of the site.

3.    The number of proposed mobilehome spaces.

4.    Names and addresses of record owner, engineer or surveyor.

5.    Location, names, and present width and grades of adjacent or abutting streets.

6.    Existing topography and proposed changes, including trees, rock formations and other unusual features of the site, and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundaries. Individual trees with a diameter of more than eight inches, measured twenty-four (24) inches above existing grade, shall be identified by type, circumference, and dripline. Any trees proposed for removal shall also be indicated.

Contour lines shall have the following intervals:

One-foot contour intervals for ground slope between 0% – 5%;

Two-foot contour intervals for ground slope between 5% – 10%;

Five-foot contour intervals for ground slope >10%.

7.    Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation of storm water overflow, and location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses.

8.    Approximate width and location of all existing easements.

9.    Approximate dimensions of all mobilehome spaces, radii of all curves and central angles.

10.    Location of all existing structures identified by type and indicating which are proposed to be removed and which will remain.

11.    Location of building setback line from each stream or river on the site, if applicable.

12.    Location of existing overhead utility lines and poles on site and on peripheral streets. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.050 Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in a mobilehome park:

A.    The installation of mobilehomes constructed and/or purchased after October 1976 and certified under the National Mobilehome Construction of Safety Standard Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code.

B.    Accessory structures per California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, Article 9. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.060 Conditional uses.
The following uses within mobilehome parks require use permit approval subject to Chapter 17.168, Use Permits:

A.    Management office and maintenance equipment storage;

B.    Coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning facilities, for residents only;

C.    Vending machines, for residents only;

D.    Noncommercial recreation halls, meeting halls and club houses;

E.    Storage facilities, for residents only;

F.    Chapel;

G.    Car washing facilities, for residents only;

H.    Retail sale of mobilehomes and accessories; provided, that each mobilehome and accessories offered for sale are located upon individual mobilehome space; provided, no signs other than on the mobilehome being sold shall be permitted to advertise the sale of mobilehomes and accessories. Any other use which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of using a mobilehome as a residence;

I.    Utility/communication transmission equipment. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

17.100.070 Development standards.
A.    Mobilehome park development within the city of St. Helena shall comply with all applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, including Division 13, Parts 2.1 and 2.3, known as the “Mobilehome Parks Act”; the mobilehome park regulations as contained and from time to time amended in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapters 2 and 2.2 relating to the maintenance, use and occupancy of mobilehomes, seismic bracing, and the construction and operation of mobilehome parks; and all other applicable state and local regulations.

B.    Adequate screening acceptable to the city shall enclose the mobilehome park at its street side setback lines and shall be located along all other property lines.

C.    Mobilehome park identification signs shall be allowed per Chapter 17.148, Signs, for multifamily residential developments: one sign with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) square feet.

D.    Vehicle parking and access shall be consistent with Chapter 17.124, Parking and Loading Requirements.

E.    All setbacks shall be suitably landscaped with plant materials, equipped with sprinklers and adequately maintained. (Ord. 06-2 § 2 (part))

Chapter 17.104
PARKING IMPACT OVERLAY (PI) DISTRICT
Sections:

17.104.010    Purpose.

17.104.020    Parking standards.

17.104.030    In-lieu fee provisions.

17.104.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the parking impact overlay district to establish parking standards for portions of the city generally located within the central business district. That area so designated on the zoning map of the city is found and declared to be an area impacted by the inadequacy in the amount of off-street parking because the buildings and structures therein were constructed in the early history of the city when automobiles were not a predominant feature in the community and are of historic and unique character and should be preserved. (Prior code § 27.205)

17.104.020 Parking standards.
Within the parking impact overlay area, notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.124 as to business and commercial buildings, the following shall apply:

A.    The basic parking requirement for buildings existing as of February 1, 1980, shall be at least one space for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of ground floor area and one space for each two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet floor area of basement or upper floors (floor area to include exterior measurements).

B.    The parking requirement for additional occupancies, or additions to a structure existing as of February 1, 1980, or a new structure shall be as required in Chapter 17.124.

1.    The parking requirement for buildings which are being converted to create additional occupancies not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area shall be one space per six hundred (600) square feet.

2.    The parking requirement for buildings which are being converted to additional occupancies less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area shall be one space per three hundred (300) square feet.

C.    Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary in this section, parking requirements for change in category of uses in the parking impact area shall equal the difference between what would require for the new use, minus what Chapter 17.124 would require for the previous use.

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.140, an existing building may be substantially remodeled for purposes of historical preservation or restoration without the provision of additional off-street parking, provided:

1.    There is no increase in floor area;

2.    Any existing off-street parking is maintained;

3.    There is no increase in occupancy defined as follows:

For purposes of this section, change or increase in occupancy shall also include the following:

a.    Change from a nonconforming use to a permitted use;

b.    Change in “group occupancy” as defined in the 1976 Uniform Building Code;

c.    Change between uses requiring parking specified in Chapter 17.124;

d.    Increase in the number of leaseholders, tenant spaces, or commercial spaces owned, franchised, rented or leased above that existing on April 14, 1981. (Prior code § 27.206)

17.104.030 In-lieu fee provisions.
For any new use, structure, or building on a site which, due to the size or location of the parcel, cannot be provided with required off-street parking, or in a case where it is found by the city to be in the public interest to not require off-street parking on a site, parking requirements may be satisfied by payment of an in-lieu fee upon approval of a use permit by the planning commission as follows:

A.    The property on which the use is proposed must be located within a parking impact overlay district.

B.    The amount of the in-lieu parking fee shall be established by city resolution.

C.    Approval of a use permit to allow payment of an in-lieu fee shall include the finding that the properties and land uses surrounding the project will not be significantly impacted by waiving the required off-street parking. (Prior code § 27.207)

Chapter 17.108
DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT BENEFIT ZONE
Sections:

17.108.010    Establishment of benefit zone.

17.108.020    Imposition of drainage fee.

17.108.030    Definition of development.

17.108.040    Use of fee.

17.108.050    Limitation on fee.

17.108.010 Establishment of benefit zone.
There is established the South St. Helena drainage improvement benefit zone. The boundaries are described in that map entitled “South St. Helena Drainage Improvement Benefit Zone” on file in the office of the director of public works. (Prior code § 24.1)

17.108.020 Imposition of drainage fee.
A drainage fee shall be charged upon issuance of a grading or building permit for development in the South St. Helena drainage improvement benefit zone. The amount of the fee shall be fixed by city council resolution. The director of public works shall determine if the development lies within the benefit zone and the fee to be charged in accordance with the city council resolution. (Prior code § 24.2)

17.108.030 Definition of development.
As used in this chapter, “development” means:

A.    Original construction of commercial, industrial, public or residential improvements, including, but not limited to, primary structures, accessory structures, garages, driveways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and swimming pools;

B.    The addition of ground coverage to existing improvements, including, but not limited to, room additions or expansions, patios, decks, driveways, sidewalks and awnings;

C.    Replacement of existing improvements, including, but not limited to, reroofing. “Development” shall not include interior repairs or remodeling. (Prior code § 24.3)

17.108.040 Use of fee.
There is established the South St. Helena drainage fund. The revenues raised by payment of the drainage fee shall be placed in the fund and shall be used solely to pay the city for establishing and administering the benefit zone and to reimburse James and Cecilia Lider pursuant to the terms of that subdivision reimbursement agreement entered into between the city and the Liders. (Prior code § 24.4)

17.108.050 Limitation on fee.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no drainage fee shall be charged for development which covers square footage for which a drainage fee has already been paid. (Prior code § 24.5)

Chapter 17.112
GENERAL SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*
Sections:

17.112.010    Minimum building site.

17.112.020    Frontage requirement.

17.112.030    Front of lot/setbacks and yards in unusual situations.

17.112.040    Design and improvements for lots.

17.112.050    Special street setback requirements.

17.112.060    Projections into required yards and setbacks.

17.112.070    Projections over easements and sidewalks.

17.112.080    Height limit modifications.

17.112.090    Small lot development standards.

17.112.100    Flag lot standards.

17.112.110    Requirements for residential condominium and townhouse dwelling projects.

17.112.130    Time-sharing uses prohibited.

17.112.140    Water efficient landscaping.

17.112.150    Fractional ownership hotel development and operation standards.

*    Prior history: Prior code §§ 27.210—27.216, 27.218—27.224 and Ord. 00-5.

17.112.010 Minimum building site.
Each building site in each zoning district shall be planned and arranged so as to occupy only that portion of a lot not otherwise required as a yard, setback, easement, right-of-way, or other required open space; except that, where all other provisions of this title are met, a building site may be established in airspace when created through an approval of a condominium project. In determining the size of a lot, the following shall apply:

A.    For the purpose of measuring and calculating lot size and area, the gross area of the lot (including any public or private easements contained within the lot lines) shall be used.

B.    For the purpose of this title, any building or structure located so as to cross two or more lot lines of lots under the same ownership shall cause such lots to be treated as one lot unless such construction is authorized by the approval of a condominium project.

C.    In any zoning district where no public sanitary sewer is accessible, no lot shall have any area less than that prescribed by Chapter 17.80 of this title. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.020 Frontage requirement.
Any lot of record existing prior to January 28, 1956, or thereafter legally created pursuant to the State Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance shall be considered a legal building site. Lots approved after April 11, 1994, shall front on a public or private street, except as otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.030 Front of lot/setbacks and yards in unusual situations.
A.    Normally, the front of a lot shall be the narrow dimension which abuts a public or private right-of-way opposite the rear of a lot. In unusual cases, however, where the location and relationship of the lot to abutting public or private right-of-way (i.e., double frontage, narrow dimension located on local street while wide dimension located on arterial or collector, flag lot, etc.) make it difficult to establish the front of the lot, the planning director shall make a determination as to the front of the lot. The planning director’s decision shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

B.    All required setbacks and yards shall be determined by their relationship to the front of a lot. However, in unusual cases (i.e., a rear lot line of one lot abuts a side lot line of an adjoining lot), the planning director shall have the authority to establish the location of the setback and yard standards in relation to any existing or proposed buildings or structures. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.040 Design and improvements for lots.
No lot shall be created, altered in size or shape or in any way reconfigured unless:

A.    It is demonstrated that each resulting lot has legal access which meets the width and other design criteria set forth in the “City of St. Helena Standard Specifications for Public Improvements”; and

B.    Sufficient land has been dedicated for public street rights-of-way and the street frontage has been improved with curb, gutter, sidewalk, street paving, drainage, street trees and other improvements, all of which meet the criteria set forth in the “City of St. Helena Standard Specifications for Public Improvements.”

In the case of an alteration or reconfiguration of existing lots which meet code requirements, the existing public street frontage shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by the zoning ordinance. In the case of an alteration or reconfiguration of existing lots which are nonconforming with respect to required frontage or other required dimensions or area, each resulting lot shall not increase the degree of nonconformity. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.050 Special street setback requirements.
Building setback lines, establishing a special setback for the construction, establishment or maintenance of buildings, structures or improvements shall be as follows:

A.    Front Yard or Setback on Pratt Avenue. A front yard or setback of thirty-six (36) feet shall be required on the northwesterly side of Pratt Avenue from the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks to the Napa River, and a front yard or setback of twenty-four (24) feet shall be required on the southeasterly side of Pratt Avenue from the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks to the Napa River.

B.    Adams Avenue Setback. There is established a nine-foot setback on the northerly side of Adams Avenue between Main Street and Oak Avenue at such places along Adams Avenue where the street width is fifty (50) feet. No buildings or other structures shall be placed within the setback area between the property line along the street and the setback line.

C.    Money Alley Setback. There is established a four-foot setback on the westerly side of Money Alley and a twenty-four (24) foot setback on the easterly side of Money Alley between Adams Avenue and Spring Street. Money Alley is the public alley located between Main Street and Oak Avenue and running approximately parallel thereto. No buildings or other structures shall be placed within the setback area between the property line and the setback line.

D.    Pine Street Setback. There is established a five-foot setback on both sides of Pine Street between Main Street and Oak Avenue. No buildings or other structures shall be placed within the setback area between the property line and the setback line. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.060 Projections into required yards and setbacks.
Projections may be permitted into required yards and setbacks in accord with the following:

A.    Architectural features (bay windows, eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, sills, etc.) less than fifteen (15) feet in length may extend into any required yard or setback for a distance of not more than two feet.

B.    Open floor space areas (open decks, unenclosed porches, unenclosed balconies, fire escapes, landings, steps) may extend into any required front setback or side setback for a distance of not more than six feet. Open floor space areas not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in height may extend into the required yard for a distance of not more than one-half the width of the yard required by the zoning district requirements. These limitations shall not apply to patios, walks, or other similar types of surfaced areas when constructed at grade. Ramps, railings, lifts and other similar open floor space areas or facilities used for handicapped access shall be exempt from the regulations of this subsection when approved by the planning director.

C.    Landscape features and structures such as ornamental gate archways having a height of not more than eight feet, planters, light standards, windbreaks, sun screens, outdoor fireplaces, ponds, ornamental fixtures, flagpoles, arbors, trellises/pergolas less than eight feet tall or covering less than sixty (60) square feet, trees, shrubs, and similar features shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter except where such features are determined by either the city building inspector or planning director to be dividing instrumentalities, buildings or structures.

D.    Fences, hedges, walks, landscaping (see Chapter 17.120), landings, steps and signs when constructed or installed in compliance with the provisions of this title are permitted in required yards or setbacks.

E.    The height of patios, decks, walls, fences and other landscape structures shall be measured from natural grade. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.070 Projections over easements and sidewalks.
Projections may be permitted over public utility easements and sidewalks in accord with the following:

A.    No building, structure or projection thereof may extend into or over a public utility easement except when specifically authorized by the public works director.

B.    Awnings, canopies, and marquees with a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet and attached to a structure may be allowed to extend over a public sidewalk. Design and installation of an awning or canopy shall be reviewed as a component of the building permit process required to erect such an awning or canopy. All awnings, canopies and marquees shall be maintained in good repair and shall be removed when noticeably worn. (Ord. 18-5 § 41 (Exh. B (part)); Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.080 Height limit modifications.
The following general provisions shall apply to the modification of the height limitations of this title.

A.    The height limitations specified in this title shall not be exceeded by more than five feet for the following types of buildings and structures:

1.    Church spires, belfries, domes and flagpoles, television and radio receiving antennae, excluding “satellite antennas” as defined by Chapter 17.136;

2.    Water tanks and towers, chimneys, aids to navigation;

3.    Cupolas, or other roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning, or similar equipment used solely to operate and maintain a building.

B.    With the approval of a use permit by the planning commission, the height limitations specified in this title for principal zoning districts may be exceeded for the following types of buildings and structures:

1.    Smoke stacks and monuments;

2.    Radio and television transmitting antennas pursuant to Section 17.136.020, excluding “satellite antennas” as defined by Section 17.136.010;

3.    Electric power transmission and distribution lines, poles and towers;

4.    Other buildings and structures which, in the opinion of the planning commission, are similar to the above types of buildings and structures. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.090 Small lot development standards.
The following standards shall be observed in small lot developments:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet.

B.    The minimum lot width shall be forty-two (42) feet except that the lot width may be reduced to not less than thirty-five (35) feet for attached zero lot line dwellings. A lot width greater than the minimum may be required when the lot fronts on an arterial or collector as designated in the circulation element of the general plan.

C.    Not less than eighteen (18) feet of continuous full height curb shall be provided along the public street in front of each lot, with the length established by an extension of the side lot lines to the curb. This provision is intended to provide additional parking between driveways. A curb length greater than the minimum may be required when the lot fronts on an arterial or collector as designated in the circulation element of the general plan.

D.    A front and side setback of fifteen (15) feet shall be observed for one story and twenty (20) feet for two or more stories (see Chapter 17.120 of this title for driveway standards: generally twenty-four (24) feet in length) except for the interior, common lot line of an attached zero lot line dwelling.

E.    Side yards shall have a minimum width of five feet, except for a zero lot line dwelling which may be located immediately adjacent to the side property line; provided, however, that a minimum separation of ten (10) feet (at all points) be maintained between dwellings.

F.    On a lot with a zero lot line dwelling, any side yard opposite any zero side yard shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. To insure light and air and to improve its overall design and appearance, the height of the wall, parapet wall or roof eaves on the side property line shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet at any point; above this point, the building shall not encroach into a 1:1 building plane starting eighteen (18) feet above the zero side yard.

G.    Conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&R’s) permitting access for inspection, maintenance or repair to any zero lot line wall and insuring that the side yard opposite a zero side yard remain essentially open (e.g., prohibiting parking, storage, accessory buildings, etc.) which meet the following requirements shall be required:

1.    The CC&R’s must address any side yard ten (10) feet the required distance between any zero lot line wall located on the common side lot line of one lot and any nonzero lot line side of a dwelling located on an adjoining lot required opposite of any zero side yard. The CC&R’s shall indicate that the city shall not be responsible for the enforcement of the CC&R’s including any such provisions required by this code or other city requirement arising from the review and approval of a project containing zero lot line dwellings. In addition, the CC&R’s for each zero lot line lot or any other lots affected by the provisions and/or requirement for zero lot line development shall be recorded so as to disclose their contents and provisions to any subsequent purchaser of a zero lot line lot.

2.    Buildings shall be prohibited within the ten (10) foot side area, and only minor structures (limited to items such as trellises, patio coverings, swimming pools and children’s play equipment) shall be permitted in that portion of the required ten (10) foot side yard outside of the required access easement area described below.

3.    An access and maintenance easement with a minimum width of five feet for that portion of the side yard which adjoins the common lot line shall be required and shown on the tentative and final subdivision map. This easement shall provide for maintenance access to the zero lot line wall on the adjoining lot and shall be maintained open and free of structures. Parking and storage shall be prohibited within this easement area. Landscaping which interferes with access for maintenance or constitutes a fire hazard shall also be prohibited.

4.    The required five-foot access easement shall serve as a substitute property line or benchmark for the administration of the Uniform Building Code for such matters as roof drainage and eave overhangs, which shall be specifically addressed in the CC&R’s and reflected in the design of zero lot line units.

a.    Roof drainage from a zero lot line dwelling shall be collected, carried in pipes and deposited on the lot on which the dwelling is located or directly to the street.

b.    The eave of a zero lot line dwelling including any gutter or similar roof drainage conveyance may overhang the access easement area for a distance of not more than one-third of the width of the access easement.

5.    Fences designed and constructed to meet all applicable codes may connect zero lot line dwellings and enclose yards and setback areas.

6.    All applicable Uniform Building Code requirements shall be observed including fire walls and fire-resistant roof construction in the common wall of attached zero lot line dwellings.

H.    On-site parking shall be provided in accord with the parking and loading requirements contained in Chapter 17.124 of this title.

I.    Except as provided above, all other regulations of the underlying district and this title shall apply to small lot developments.

J.    A fence or hedge of up to six feet in height which meets the requirements for visibility at driveways or intersections may be located within ten (10) feet of the property line in the required front or side setback with design review approval. Such approval may be sought at the initial time of approval of a small lot development or by individual homeowners after the establishment of a small lot development if such fences or hedges were not installed in conjunction with the initial establishment of a small lot development. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.100 Flag lot standards.
Many residential properties with the potential for additional dwelling units are difficult to develop under conventional zoning standards. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the review and approval of flag lots for residential use in the city as an alternative when conventional zoning standards prevent the effective utilization of the property. The following standards shall be observed in conjunction with the creation and development of flag lots:

A.    Flag lots shall only be allowed if specifically permitted within the zoning district in which a property is located. Review of flag lots will be subject to use permit approval as well as the provisions of the St. Helena subdivision ordinance.

B.    The density and development standards of the zoning district in which a property is located shall apply to a flag lot development with the following exceptions:

1.    The narrow strip of land (or panhandle portion of the lot) connecting the lot with a public or private street shall have a minimum width and frontage of twenty (20) feet (sixteen (16) foot access drive plus four feet for landscaping). The minimum width and requirement may be increased in higher density situations that permit multiple units to be constructed on a flag lot, or where an additional landscape buffer may be necessary to increase the privacy of adjoining parcels.

2.    A panhandle may provide access to two lots.

3.    The panhandle portion of the lot connecting with a public or private street shall be included when calculating residential densities but shall be excluded when determining the compliance with minimum lot width and lot size standards.

4.    The location of the required setbacks and yards shall be determined by the planning commission which shall be guided by the relationship of the lot to surrounding lots, buildings and structures. The panhandle portion of the lot shall be excluded when determining the required setbacks and yards. Location of setbacks and yards shall be recorded with the final map.

5.    A grading and drainage plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission to determine the impacts of the flag lot on adjacent properties. Finished building pad elevations shall not be significantly different from those of adjoining properties.

6.    New development on the flag lot shall be subject to design review by the planning commission who shall look at the relationship of the construction to surrounding lots, buildings and structures. Building height and window locations may be modified to compensate for loss of privacy to adjoining properties.

7.    The planning commission may waive the minimum yard requirements of existing units after review of the location of the proposed panhandle, the width of the landscape area and the location of buildings in the vicinity.

C.    The standards for residential driveways or access drives as set forth in Section 17.124.070 of this title shall be observed in the provision of access to a flag lot. The access drive to the flag lot shall be inspected annually by the fire marshal to ensure that landscaping or other obstructions do not hinder emergency vehicle access.

D.    The provision of gates, turnarounds, clearance, road grades, and distance to fire hydrants shall be reviewed and approved by the fire chief. The site address of each flag lot shall be placed on a sign in the panhandle of the lot so as to be clearly visible to police, fire and other emergency services personnel from the public or private street.

E.    On-site parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 17.124.030 of this title. Additional on-site parking spaces for guests may be required, if the on-street parking provided in the area of the proposed flag lot is inadequate.

F.    Landscaping in the panhandle portion of a flag lot alongside the driveway shall be required. Improvements such as curb and gutter may also be required by the public works director for an access drive in the panhandle portion of a flag lot depending upon such factors as the number of homes served, drainage characteristics, terrain, and soil conditions.

G.    Fences which meet the standards of Section 17.120.010 of this title may be placed in the panhandle portion of the lot connecting the lot with a public or private street; provided, that the fence height shall not exceed three and one-half feet in that portion of the panhandle within the front or side setback established for a lot with normal width and frontage.

H.    Easements across adjoining property may not be used to provide the panhandle portion of the lot, unless the lots were lots of record existing prior to January 28, 1956, or legally created pursuant to the State Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance of the city prior to April 11, 1994.

I.    In approving a use permit for a flag lot, the planning commission must make the following findings:

1.    The creation of a flag lot is consistent with neighborhood character and density.

2.    Development upon the flag lot will not result in a significant loss of privacy for adjoining residential units.

3.    Development on the flag lot will not result in excessive noise, traffic and parking congestion. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.110 Requirements for residential condominium and townhouse dwelling projects.
The following requirements shall be observed for residential condominium and townhouse dwelling projects:

A.    A homeowner’s association or other similar property owner’s organization shall be established to maintain all open space and other improvements which are in common ownership.

B.    All commonly owned open space areas shall be landscaped in accord with the landscaping plan subject to design review approval. The landscaping shall generally be planned and developed in accord with the “City of St. Helena Standards for Landscaping,” adopted by resolution.

C.    On-site parking shall be provided in accord with the parking and loading requirements contained in Chapter 17.124 of this title.

D.    Each unit shall have its own gas and electric meter. Access to meters and heaters shall not require entry through another unit. A water shutoff valve shall be provided for each unit or for each plumbing fixture. Individual exposed antennas shall not be permitted.

E.    There shall be provided a minimum covered storage area of sixty (60) cubic feet (minimum height of six feet eight inches and a depth or width of not less than two feet) for each dwelling unit with two or fewer bedrooms for storage of bicycles, patio furniture, garden tools, etc. An additional twenty (20) cubic feet of storage with the same minimum dimensions shall be provided for each bedroom in excess of two.

F.    Each unit shall have a laundry area for washer and dryer.

G.    All boats and travel trailers shall be stored only within areas specifically designated for such storage on the approved plans.

H.    Project identification signs shall comply with adopted sign regulations.

I.    The project shall contain a directory sign indicating the location and house number of units which do not front on public streets.

J.    There shall be no single building containing more than one residential unit with a length greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet unless approval as a part of design review finds that the design of the building mitigates any adverse effect of such length.

K.    All utilities shall be installed underground. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.130 Time-sharing uses prohibited.
The creation of a time-share project as a means of ownership of any single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling or any apartment house shall be prohibited within the city.

A.    Findings and Purpose.

1.    There is a critical shortage of affordable housing in the city for long-term occupancies (more than six months annually), and the availability of additional residential dwelling units is substantially restricted by the growth management system.

2.    The conversion of residential dwelling units within the city to time-sharing projects eliminates residential dwelling units otherwise available for long-term occupancies (more than six months annually) in the city.

3.    Time-sharing projects have the same character as commercial hotels, motels and other transient occupancy uses due to their transient nature and to the multiple short-term (less than six months annually) occupancies by those participating in time-sharing projects.

4.    Such commercial or quasi-commercial like use is inappropriate in residential areas due to the increased traffic generation and multiple occupancies disturbing the peace and quiet of residential neighborhoods.

5.    The city council finds and determines that this section is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.

B.    Definitions.

“Offering” means any offer to sell, solicitation, inducement or advertisement, whether by radio, television, newspaper, magazine or by mail, whereby a person is given an opportunity to acquire a time-share interval of a residence within the city.

“Time-share estate” means an ownership or leasehold estate in property devoted to a time-share fee (tenants in common, time span ownership, interval ownership) or a time-share lease.

“Time-share interval” means a time-share estate or a time-share use.

“Time-share program” means any arrangement for time-share intervals in a time-sharing project whereby the use, occupancy or possession of real property has been made subject to either a time-share estate or time-share use whereby such use, occupancy or possession circulates among purchasers of the time-share intervals according to a fixed or floating time schedule on a periodic basis for a specific period of time during any given year, but not necessarily for consecutive years.

“Time-share use” means any contractual right of exclusive occupancy which does not fall within the definition of a time-share estate, including, without limitation, a vacation license, prepaid hotel reservation, club membership, limited partnership or vacation bond.

“Time-sharing project” means any real property that is subject to a time-share program.

C.    Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-4 § 3 (Exh. B): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.140 Water efficient landscaping.
A.    Purpose. The city adheres to the state of California’s Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO) or successor regulations. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the provision, installation and maintenance of landscape areas by the following means:

1.    Water conservation through xeriscape principles: promote the conservation of potable and nonpotable water by encouraging the preservation of existing plant communities, encouraging the planting of natural or uncultivated areas, encouraging the use of site-specific plant materials, and establishing techniques for the installation and maintenance of landscape materials and irrigation systems.

2.    Aesthetics: improve the appearance of all areas through the incorporation of open space into development in ways that harmonize and enhance the natural and built environment.

3.    Environmental quality: improve environmental quality by recognizing the numerous beneficial effects of landscaping upon the environment, including:

a.    Improving air and water quality through such natural processes as photosynthesis and mineral uptake;

b.    Maintaining permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge;

c.    Reducing and reversing air, noise, heat and chemical pollution through the biological filtering capabilities of trees and other vegetation;

d.    Promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas;

e.    Reducing the temperature of the microclimate through the process of evapotranspiration;

f.    Encouraging the conservation of limited fresh resources through the use of site-specific plants and various planting and maintenance techniques.

4.    Land values: maintain and increase the value of land by requiring landscaping to be incorporated into development, thus becoming by itself a valuable capital asset.

5.    Human values: provide direct and important physical and psychological benefits to human beings through the use of landscaping to reduce heat and glare, and to break up the monotony and soften the harsher aspects of urban development.

6.    Preservation of vegetation: preserve existing natural vegetation and the incorporation of native plants, plant communities, and ecosystems into landscape design, where possible.

7.    Improved design: promote innovative and cost-conscious approaches to the design, installation and maintenance of landscaping, encouraging water and energy conservation.

8.    Improved administration and enforcement: establish procedures and standards for the administration and enforcement of this section.

B.    Xeriscape Principles. It is the intent of this section to assist the city in achieving water conservation through proper plant selection, installation, and maintenance practices. The following xeriscape principles serve as the primary means of achieving water conservation:

1.    Design of the landscape by dividing it into high-, moderate- and low-water use zones and by taking advantage of microclimates caused by the different conditions of sun, slope, moisture and air movement (hydrozones);

2.    Efficient irrigation systems;

3.    The use of soil amendments to improve the water-holding capacity of the soil;

4.    Limiting turf to locations where it provides functional benefits;

5.    The use of mulches, where appropriate;

6.    Selection of appropriate plants;

7.    Maintaining the landscape appropriately (monitor the irrigation system and water according to needs).

C.    Applicability of Section. The requirements of this section shall apply to all projects that fall under the State MWELO guidelines.

D.    Landscape Documentation Package. For any project subject to this section, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to, reviewed by, and approved by the planning department prior to the issuance of any building permit or the replacement of landscaping. The landscape documentation package shall include all required information as established in the State MWELO guidelines or successor regulations.

E.    Amendment of Approved Plan. Any significant change of plant material or design from that contained in an approved landscaping plan shall require the approval of a revised landscaping plan reviewed in the same manner as the original plan.

F.    Regulations and Procedures. The city council is authorized and directed to adopt by resolution regulations and procedures for the implementation of this section and a schedule of fees. (Ord. 16-13 § 5 (Att. 6 (part)): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.112.150 Fractional ownership hotel development and operation standards.
A.    Findings and Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the standards, regulations and circumstances under which fractional ownership of hotels may be established. Due to the mixed method of operation, hybrid ownership, the potential generation of large numbers of people and vehicles, and the potential impact on tourism-related facilities in the city, special development criteria are warranted.

B.    Definitions.

“Fractional ownership hotel” means a hotel of forty (40) rooms or more in which seventy-five percent (75%) of the rooms of the hotel may be made available to individuals as “time-share estates,” which is defined as a time-share interest, which is the right to occupy a time-share property, coupled with a freehold estate or an estate for years with a future interest in a time-share property or a specified portion thereof, pursuant to Section 11212(x)1 of the California Business and Professions Code, and subject to obtaining permission required to do so obtained from the California Department of Real Estate.

“Fractional ownership interval” means the period or length of time of occupancy of a fractional unit.

“Fractional ownership unit” mean each portion of the real property or real property improvement in a hotel that is divided into fractional intervals.

“Fractional ownership use” means a license or contractual or membership right of occupancy in a fractional hotel.

C.    Permitted Projects and Zoning Districts. A fractional ownership hotel shall be conditionally permitted in the service commercial (SC) zoning district, Highway 29 specific plan district, and only if and when a conditional use permit has been obtained from the planning commission.

D.    Application Process. Approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provision of Chapter 17.52, Service Commercial (SC) District, is required. In addition to the application requirements contained in Chapter 17.52, an application for a fractional ownership hotel shall be accompanied by the following document which shall be subject to the approval of the planning director:

1.    Sales Plan. A sales plan shall address the times, areas and methods that will be used to sell the fractional ownership hotel. Factors to be defined in the plan shall include but not be limited to the location, length, and marketing methods that will be used; distinguishing on-site and off-site marketing and signage; and an estimate of the potential numbers of individuals and automobiles expected during various stages of the sales effort. The plan also shall describe measures that will be implemented to reduce traffic during peak hours.

2.    Management Plan. A management plan shall describe the methods employed by the applicant to guarantee the future adequacy, stability, and continuity of a satisfactory level of management and maintenance of a fractional ownership hotel.

3.    Contingency Plan. A contingency plan shall address the actions to be taken by the applicant if the fractional ownership facility is an economic failure or fails to sell seventy-five percent (75%) of the fractional units or uses within two years of receiving a permit to occupy the first unit. The contingency plan may be waived if the applicant agrees to and/or bonds for the completion of the hotel whether or not the fractional units are sold.

4.    Application Requirements. In addition to any application requirements established by this section and any other applicable requirements of this code, the following information shall be submitted as part of any application to develop or establish a fractional ownership hotel:

a.    Typical floor plans for each fractional ownership unit.

b.    The phasing of the construction of the fractional ownership use.

c.    The type of fractional ownership method to be used (e.g., fee simple, leasehold, tenancy-in-common, license, membership) and how such use may be created.

d.    The identification of fractional ownership intervals and the number of intervals per unit.

e.    Identification of which units are in the fractional ownership program, the use of the units not included in the program, and the method whereby other units may be added, deleted or substituted.

f.    A description of any ancillary uses which are proposed in conjunction with the fractional ownership hotel.

g.    A description of the availability of the fractional ownership hotel and ancillary facilities to the general public.

h.    A description of the method of management of the hotel and indication of a contact person or party responsible for the day-to-day operation of the hotel.

i.    The formula, fraction or percentage of the common expenses and the voting rights assigned to each fractional unit and, where applicable, to each unit within the hotel which unit is not subject to the fractional ownership program.

j.    Any restrictions on the use, occupancy, alteration, or alienation of fractional units.

k.    Copies of enabling documentation, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation, bylaws, declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions, and membership of license agreements.

l.    Copies of all State Department of Real Estate applications and permits, including any public report issued.

m.    A description of the method to be used in collecting and transmitting the transient occupancy tax to the city.

n.    Any other information or documentation the applicant, city staff or commission deems reasonably necessary to the consideration of the hotel, including any required environmental documents.

E.    Development Agreement. The city and the operator of any fractional ownership hotel shall enter into a development agreement under the provisions of Chapter 17.156, relating to the method of calculating and the amount of tax payable to the city by any fractional owner for the right of occupancy of any fractional unit. In addition, the development agreement shall reference appropriate development standards listed below, such as occupancy restrictions and rental requirements.

1.    Units occupied as traditional hotel/motel rentals shall have a transient occupancy tax (TOT) levied on the rent paid. Units occupied on a fractional basis shall also be subject to the TOT in accordance with Section 3.28.010 as follows:

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy.

2.    Fractional owners shall not be permitted to occupy the hotel unit for periods of time greater than thirty (30) days. The fractional units shall have a tax levied on the basis of the equivalent rent which would be charged for that particular unit if it were to be rented as a traditional hotel/motel rental unit. The management of the fractional ownership hotel shall provide sufficient data to the city to justify the equivalent rental rate used in calculating the transient occupancy tax or other similar and equal agreed upon payment.

F.    Development Standards and Operational Requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following conditions must be met by any fractional ownership hotel in any conditionally permitted zone. Additional requirements may be attached to a conditional use permit or development agreement if found to be necessary to assure that the hotel meets the intent of this chapter:

1.    Density. Fractional ownership facilities developed in commercial zones shall not exceed the density permitted in such zone for general commercial projects.

2.    Development Standards. The fractional ownership hotel shall comply with all development standards for the zone in which it is located.

3.    Maintenance. All maintenance agreements and conditions, covenants and restrictions must be approved by the city.

4.    Management. The management of a fractional ownership hotel shall be in accordance with the requirements established by the State Department of Real Estate for fractional uses.

5.    Rental. An on-site rental agency to manage rental of units shall be provided. A designated number of units shall be made available for rent to the general public and will not be offered for fractional use or all units shall be available for rent to the general public for a designated number of weeks each year.

6.    Occupancy. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the units shall be made available for the general public at all times. All units of the hotel shall be available to paying guests whenever owners of fractional units have not reserved time for their units to ensure that a vacant fractional unit will always be available for paying guests.

7.    Parking. Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per unit.

8.    Required Amenities. Fractional facilities shall be developed with substantial recreational amenities or in close proximity to recreational amenities. Such amenities include, but are not limited to, tennis courts and swimming pools.

9.    Signs. A sign program shall be included for all signs and be approved by the planning commission.

10.    Modification or Waiver of Standards. The planning commission may modify or waive one or more of the regulations contained in this section if it determines that strict compliance is not necessary to achieve the purpose and intent of this section.

G.    Conversions to Fractional Uses Prohibited. The conversion of existing hotels to fractional use shall be prohibited.

H.    Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-4 § 2 (Exh. A))

1
Code reviser’s note: Section 5 of Ordinance 18-5 provides that its amendments “are enacted for a period of two years and shall terminate on November 8, 2020, unless extended or made permanent by action of the City Council.”


Chapter 17.116
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, DWELLINGS AND USES
Sections:

17.116.010    Accessory buildings and structures.

17.116.030    Accessory dwelling units.

17.116.040    Home occupations.

17.116.045    Cottage food operations.

17.116.050    Requirements for small recycling centers.

17.116.010 Accessory buildings and structures.
The location of an accessory building or structure that does not have toilet plumbing or cooking facilities shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    An accessory building or structure shall not be located in any required setback fronting a public or private street nor in that portion of a required side yard adjacent to the main building on the adjacent parcel(s);

B.    No fences over three and one-half (3.5) feet in height or more than one accessory building or structure shall be located in front of the most forward portion of the front elevation of the main house. The intent of this provision is to discourage the construction of walls and accessory buildings or structures that obscure the visibility of the main house from the street;

C.    An accessory building or structure may be located in a required rear yard and that portion of a side yard not adjacent to the main building on the adjacent parcel(s) subject to the following provisions:

1.    The maximum coverage of a required yard shall not exceed fifty percent (50%);

2.    The maximum height shall be that allowed for an accessory building or structure by the zoning district in which the accessory building or structure is located;

3.    A minimum three feet distance shall be provided from the property line to the accessory building or structure;

D.    An accessory building or structure shall be separated from a principal building on the same lot subject to the following provisions:

1.    The minimum separation shall be eight feet if any portion of an accessory building or structure is located within a required yard;

2.    If no portion of an accessory building or structure is located within a required yard there may be no minimum separation subject to the following conditions:

a.    Drainage and fire containment are addressed to the satisfaction of the public works director;

b.    If the chief building official determines that the separation between an accessory building or structure that is habitable as defined by this code and a principal building may be reduced to zero feet, then the accessory building or structure shall be connected to the principal building by a doorway providing direct access between the accessory building or structure and the principal building;

c.    If the chief building official determines that the separation between an accessory building or structure that is habitable as defined by this code and a principal building may be reduced to less than three feet but more than zero feet, then approval of a use permit shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 03-4 § 21: Ord. 00-5 § 6: prior code § 27.230)

17.116.030 Accessory dwelling units.
A.    An accessory dwelling unit shall meet the design and development criteria described below:

1.    Accessory dwelling units are allowed in any zoning district that allows residential uses insofar as there is an existing single-family residence on the lot;

2.    Each accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements for building height, setbacks, yards and lot coverage for principal buildings of the zoning district in which it is located, except that a detached accessory dwelling unit may exhibit a minimum side yard and rear yard setback of five feet. However, detached ADUs, not meeting the setback requirements of the primary dwelling, are limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, unless built above an existing garage or resulting from the conversion of an existing structure which is taller than fifteen (15) feet in height;

3.    The design of the accessory dwelling unit shall employ a design compatible with the principal dwelling and shall be consistent with the principal dwelling in terms of form, massing, scale, and level of articulation;

4.    Any window or door on a second story shall be located and designed utilizing techniques that lessen the impacts on the privacy of adjacent properties. These techniques may include use of obscured glazing, window placement above eye level, windows and doors located toward the existing on-site residence or screening treatments;

5.    Accessory dwelling units are required to follow the same building and safety requirements as the principal dwelling;

6.    Accessory dwelling units are required to provide fire sprinklers only insofar as they are required for the principal dwelling;

7.    There shall be a minimum five-foot separation between a detached accessory dwelling and any adjacent structure or building;

8.    No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit;

9.    The introduction of an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to review and approval by the local health officer where a private sewage disposal system is proposed;

10.    Accessory dwelling units located on property listed on the City of St. Helena Historic Resources Master List and/or the California Register of Historic Resources (CRHR) and/or the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) shall exhibit compliance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties for Rehabilitation and shall further be subject to the standards enumerated in Chapter 17.92, if applicable. At the determination of the planning director, any application for an accessory dwelling unit located on a property listed in the City of St. Helena Historic Resources Master List, identified as potentially eligible for listing or previously listed in the CRHR or NRHP (except for those contained entirely within an existing structure) may be required to provide a historic resource evaluation and/or consistency analysis prepared by a qualified architectural historian to determine compliance with applicable standards.

B.    In addition to the standards noted in subsection A of this section, accessory dwelling units shall also conform to the following design and development standards:

1.    The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing living area up to a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. The total floor area of a detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. The property owner shall occupy either the principal dwelling or the accessory dwelling unit;

2.    The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separate from the principal dwelling and shall not be rented, leased or let for periods of time less than thirty (30) days;

3.    There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot;

4.    An accessory dwelling unit is exempt from the density limits of this title and the General Plan;

5.    An attached accessory dwelling unit shall have independent exterior access from the existing residence with direct access from the front or side setback area;

6.    No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage;

7.    Accessory dwelling units completely contained within an existing footprint are not considered new residential uses for the purpose of calculating local agency connection fees or capacity charges for utilities including water and sewer service, and therefore are not subject to such fees;

8.    The city may require a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility for separate detached structures constructed as, or converted into, an ADU. The connection may be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge that shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit, based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, upon the water or sewer system. This fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service;

9.    In addition to the required parking for the primary residence, one parking space, covered or uncovered, shall be provided on site for each accessory dwelling, with the exception that no parking shall be required for a new accessory dwelling in the following instances:

a.    The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit;

b.    The accessory dwelling unit is located within a historic district;

c.    The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing principal residence or an existing accessory structure;

d.    When on-street parking permits are required, but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit;

e.    When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling and that is available for use by the occupant(s) of said dwelling;

10.    Off-street parking shall be permitted through tandem parking or in setback areas, unless it is determined that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional, topographical, or fire and life safety conditions;

11.    When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, those off-street parking spaces shall be replaced. The replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit including but not limited to, covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, one accessory dwelling unit per property shall be ministerially approved if all of the following apply:

1.    The unit is located in a zoning district which allows residential uses;

2.    It is contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or existing accessory structure; and

3.    It has independent exterior access; and

4.    The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.

D.    Accessory dwelling units shall be ministerially approved or disapproved in compliance with this section and within one hundred twenty (120) days of application. The planning director shall issue a building permit or zoning certificate to establish an accessory dwelling unit in compliance with this section if all applicable requirements are met.

E.    Accessory buildings or structures which do not meet the definition of an ADU may not be rented or leased as a separate unit. (Ord. 17-2 § 9: Ord. 03-4 § 23: prior code § 27.232)

17.116.040 Home occupations.
A home occupation is an accessory use of a residential property for gainful employment by the resident of a dwelling, customarily carried on within the living area or accessory building on a residential property or its adjacent swimming pool, which does not change the residential character of the dwelling unit. A business may be conducted at locations other than the site of the home occupation, as long as that part of the business conducted at the site of the home occupation complies with subsection A or B of this section. A site plan, floor plan and written consent of the property owner shall be submitted as part of the home occupation permit application. A home occupation permit issued by the planning director shall be required prior to the establishment of a home occupation. A home occupation permit is required whenever a business license is required and the home is the principal place of business.

A.    Home occupations meeting the following standards are permitted in conjunction with a residential use of a dwelling and shall be issued a home occupation permit:

1.    Is confined to a cumulative area of not more than six hundred (600) square feet in the principal dwelling, attached garage and/or detached accessory buildings. An attached or detached garage may be used for storage or work space as long as one garage parking space is maintained at all times for the dwelling and as long as sufficient parking spaces are available on the property to meet the current code requirements;

2.    Does not occupy any open space, yard or setback;

3.    Is carried on by the resident members of the household and one employee;

4.    Does not generate customer or client traffic, deliveries by commercial vehicles other than pickup trucks or panel delivery trucks, or have any customers or clients coming to the premises as a place of business, with the following exceptions:

a.    Delivery to the customer or client of merchandise produced on the premises,

b.    No more than two clients may visit the premises on any one day,

c.    Swimming lessons to no more than two persons at any one lesson with no more than six lessons in any one week,

d.    Other uses which in the opinion of the planning director are similar to the above uses with the same or similar restrictions listed in this section;

5.    Creates no noise, odor, glare, dust, vibrations, fumes or smoke readily discernible at the exterior boundaries of the parcel on which the home occupation is situated;

6.    Produces no advertising or evidence of its existence except for a post office box, a telephone listing and signs limited to a total of four square feet permanently affixed to a vehicle. No advertising, telephone listing, signs or printed material may list the street address of the dwelling;

7.    Involves the on-site parking or storage of no more than one commercial vehicle, as long as the commercial vehicle parks inside the garage or covered parking at all times.

B.    Exceptions to the above standards may be granted by the planning commission with the approval of a use permit for an expanded type of home occupation. In approving a use permit for an expanded home occupation the planning commission must make the following findings:

1.    The establishment of an expanded home occupation is compatible with and will not be detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood and surrounding uses;

2.    The establishment of an expanded home occupation will not result in or contribute to an unacceptable concentration of nonresidential uses in the neighborhood where it has been proposed; and

3.    The establishment of an expanded home occupation will not result in excessive noise, traffic and parking congestion. (Ord. 09-5 § 2 (Exh. A): prior code § 27.233)

17.116.045 Cottage food operations.
A.    Purpose. The purposes of this section are to: implement requirements of Assembly Bill 1616 which amended state law to require municipalities to allow for cottage food operation within residences; establish reasonable standards allowed by state law to provide that cottage food operations within residences do not create unreasonable impacts or endanger public health, safety or welfare; and ensure compatibility of cottage food operations with the residential character of the neighborhoods in which cottage food operations are located.

B.    Definition. A cottage food operation is an enterprise within the registered or permitted area of a dwelling unit where the cottage food operator, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, resides and where cottage food products pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113758 are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sale to consumers.

C.    Applicability. A cottage food operation is an accessory use permitted in any legally established dwelling, subject to standards in subsections D and E of this section, and is a distinct use from a home occupation. This section only applies to cottage food operations and is not applicable to home occupations as defined in Section 17.116.040.

D.    Standards. Cottage food operations are permitted accessory uses to residences provided that all of the following standards are met:

1.    The use shall be conducted within the kitchen of the subject dwelling unit except for attached rooms within the dwelling that are used exclusively for storage or bookkeeping. No greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling may be used for the cottage food operations, and it shall not be conducted within an accessory building.

2.    The use is carried on only by a family member or household member occupying the dwelling, with no other person employed.

3.    The cottage food operation shall not invite customers to the residence and the operation shall not transact business with customers at the residence.

4.    No signage or advertisement identifying the cottage food operation shall be permitted at the premises.

5.    There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling unit or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such cottage food operation.

6.    Except for vehicle parking, no outdoor portions of the premises shall be utilized for cottage food operation.

7.    Vehicles displaying advertising or signs must be parked inside a garage at all times while at the premises.

8.    The cottage food operation shall be registered or permitted by the Napa County Environmental Health Officer in accordance with Section 114365 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food operations shall comply with all California Health and Safety Code requirements.

9.    The cottage food operator shall furnish to the city evidence of the application for or issuance of the necessary permits and/or registration of cottage food operations from the county of Napa.

E.    Expanded Cottage Food Operations. Exceptions to the standards established in subsections (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this section may be granted with the approval of an administrative permit for an expanded cottage food operation; provided, that all of the following standards are met:

1.    The applicant for the cottage food operation permit shall be the individual who conducts the cottage food operation from his or her private dwelling unit and is the owner of the cottage food operation. The permit shall not be transferable to another operator, nor transferable to another site.

2.    The use shall be conducted within the kitchen of the subject dwelling unit except for attached rooms within the dwelling that are used exclusively for storage or bookkeeping. No greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling may be used for the cottage food operations, and it shall not be conducted within an accessory building.

3.    One cottage food employee, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b)(1), is permitted to be employed by the cottage food operation in addition any family member or household member occupying the dwelling.

4.    One sign affixed near the entrance of the dwelling and no greater than one square foot in size may be permitted.

5.    Except for vehicle parking, no outdoor portions of the premises shall be utilized for cottage food operation including outdoor sales and visitation.

6.    Direct sales of products from the site of the cottage food operation shall be conducted by prior appointment only, and shall not exceed more than ten (10) visitors in any single day. No customers of the cottage food operation shall be permitted to dine at the premises.

7.    No greater than one visitor’s vehicle and one non-resident employee’s vehicle shall be parked on site at any time.

8.    Vehicles displaying advertising or signs must be parked inside a garage at all times while at the premises.

9.    Direct sales and cottage food operation related deliveries shall not occur between the hours of six p.m. and eight a.m.

10.    The cottage food operation shall be registered or permitted by the Napa County Environmental Health Officer in accordance with Section 114365 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food operations shall comply with all California Health and Safety Code requirements.

11.    The applicant shall furnish to the city evidence of the application for or issuance of the necessary permits and/or registration of cottage food operations from the county of Napa.

12.    A business license is required for all cottage food operators.

13.    All property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the cottage food operation shall be notified upon permit issuance. (Ord. 16-3 § 2)

17.116.050 Requirements for small recycling centers.
The planning director, or at his or her discretion the planning commission, shall issue a permit for the establishment of a small recycling center which shall be conditioned upon compliance with the following requirements:

A.    Only glass, metals, plastic containers and paper may be accepted at a small recycling center. Motor oil may not be collected for recycling at a small recycling center.

B.    No power-driven processing equipment may be used except for reverse vending machines.

C.    Containers used for the collection and storage of recyclable materials shall be constructed of a durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected between collection schedules.

D.    The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be picked up and cleaned on a daily basis.

E.    A small recycling center shall not be located in any required setback or yard, and shall be screened from the public right-of-way by landscaping (fences or walls fence may be used if located outside a required setback). The landscaping shall generally be planned and installed in accordance with the city’s Standards for Landscaping, adopted by resolution. Any impairment of existing landscaping or landscaping required pursuant to this title shall be mitigated by installing a similar amount of landscaping.

F.    Attended facilities located within one hundred (100) feet of property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m. Containers for the twenty-four (24) hour donation of materials shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is acoustical shielding between the containers and residential use. In no event shall the containers for the twenty-four (24) hour donation of materials be located less than thirty (30) feet from property zoned for residential use.

G.    Containers shall be clearly marked to: (1) identify the type of material which may be deposited in each container; (2) the name and telephone number of the operator and hours of operation; and (3) shall display a notice stating that no material is to be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers.

H.    Signs shall comply with the following:

1.    A recycling facility may have identification signs with a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent per side or nine square feet (whichever is smaller) per container with a total area of forty (40) square feet for all containers. These may be in addition to the informational signs required by subsection G of this section. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container;

2.    On-site directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planning director if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; and

3.    Any signs installed must be consistent with the character of the buildings, structures and signs of the property on which it is located.

4.    These regulations are in-lieu of and shall act as a substitute for Chapter 17.140 the provision of which shall not apply to a recycling facility.

I.    No additional parking spaces shall be required for a small recycling center, over and above those required for the principal use. Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours mobile unit is to be present.

J.    Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the principal use unless the facility is located in a convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation.

K.    The permit for a small recycling center shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed five years. After which time it may be reviewed for another five years. If at any time the small recycling center is not in use for six months or more, it shall be immediately removed from the site and the planning director notified.

L.    Applicants seeking approval for a small recycling center shall submit plans and other information sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the above requirements including the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the daily maintenances and periodic collection of recyclable materials and written approval from the property owner.

M.    The above requirements may be waived or modified by the planning director if the result is to improve the overall function, site operation or appearance of the small recycling center; or that the design and/or location of the small recycling center makes the above unnecessary. (Prior code § 27.234)

Chapter 17.120
WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES
Sections:

17.120.010    Regulations.

17.120.010 Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to the installation, construction and placement of walls, fences and hedges within the Urban Limit Line as defined in the 1993 General Plan:

A.    Except as specifically authorized in this title the following height limitations shall apply to the height of walls and fences:

1.    Three and one-half feet when located in a required front or side setback except that a six-foot fence is allowed in a side setback when the fence is no closer than fifty (50) feet from the face of the front street curb and twenty (20) feet from the face of the side street curb; is located on private property; and does not encroach into a public right-of-way. In those situations where the street is not finished with curb, a six-foot fence is allowed in a side setback when the fence is no closer than forty (40) feet from the front property line and ten (10) feet from the side property line; is located on private property; and does not encroach into a public right-of-way;

2.    Six feet when located in a rear yard, side yard or other portion of a lot excluding a front or side setback. A two-foot open lattice extension is permitted on a six-foot fence with the issuance of a building permit.

B.    When located in a rear or side yard, walls and fences up to eight feet in height or up to twelve (12) feet for tennis courts may be permitted with the approval of a use permit by the planning commission.

C.    Fences, hedges or dense planting in the form of a hedge shall not exceed two feet in height when located in the visibility triangle. Trees located in the visibility triangle (as defined in Chapter 17.04) shall be maintained so as to provide a clearance of seven and one-half feet from the ground to the lowest branches.

D.    With the approval of the public works director, temporary security fences may be erected around construction sites during the time a valid building permit is in effect for construction on the premises. Temporary security fences need not comply with the above regulations and must be immediately removed upon completion of the construction authorized by the building permit.

E.    No fences over 3.5 feet in height or more than one accessory building shall be located in front of the most forward portion of the front elevation of the main house. The intent of this provision is to discourage the construction of walls and accessory buildings that obscure the visibility of the main house from the street.

F.    The height of patios, decks, and fences shall be measured from natural grade. (Ord. 00-5 § 7: prior code § 27.240)

Chapter 17.124
PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

17.124.010    Purpose.

17.124.020    Definitions.

17.124.030    Minimum on-site parking requirements.

17.124.040    Exceptions.

17.124.050    General requirements.

17.124.060    Parking lot design and improvement.

17.124.070    Standards for driveways and access drives.

17.124.010 Purpose.
In all zoning districts, where required in connection with any agricultural, industrial, commercial, residential, institutional, recreational or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or changed from a nonconforming use in the district in which it is located to a permitted use, off-street parking, loading and access shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and installed in accordance with the standards of the city. For purposes of this section, “building” or “structure” shall include the use of open land for the purpose stated. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.245)

17.124.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Access drive” means a paved way located outside of the public right-of-way that provides vehicular access between the public street and the required parking for more than one lot, or for one lot if necessary for emergency vehicle access. Within a parking lot, that portion providing access other than aisles.

“Aisle” means that portion of a parking lot which is contiguous to a parking space and provides direct access thereto.

“Off-street loading space” means a parking space or portion of a parking lot marked and designated for temporary parking for purposes of on and off loading.

“On-site parking” means a space designated for parking a vehicle on the same property as the use as it is required to serve.

“Parking lot” means a site or a portion of a site devoted to on-site parking of vehicles including parking spaces, aisles, access driveways and landscaped areas, and other areas providing ingress and egress to parking spaces.

“Parking space” means land or space privately owned, covered or uncovered, including space in a private garage, laid out for, surfaced, and used or designated to be used for temporary storage, loading, or unloading by a standing motor vehicle and permanently maintained as such. “Parking space” does not include access driveways, aisles and other areas used for ingress and egress to parking spaces.

“Residential driveway” means a drive which provides direct vehicular access from a public street, or a private street developed to city standards, to the required parking for an individual dwelling unit and accessory structures. That portion which connects a residential driveway to the street is a driveway approach and is typically located in the right-of-way. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 8: prior code § 27.246)

17.124.030 Minimum on-site parking requirements.
The total number of spaces shall be not less than the following (Note: Any requirement of total spaces including a fractional space of one-half or more shall be rounded off to require one additional space for the fractional space):

A.    Residential.

1.    One- and two-family dwelling units: two spaces for each dwelling unit, one of which shall be contained within a garage or carport which complies with all building, yard and/or setback requirements.

2.    Three or more dwelling units:

a.    Studio and one bedroom dwelling units: one covered space for each dwelling unit plus one-half space for each dwelling unit which need not be covered.

b.    Two or more bedroom dwelling units: one covered space for each dwelling unit plus one space for each dwelling unit which need not be covered.

3.    Rooming, boarding, or lodging house: two spaces for the resident owner plus one space for each guest room.

4.    Hotel, motel, apartment hotel, and club: one space for each individual guest room, suite, or sleeping or living unit. Additional parking shall also be required for ancillary uses such as restaurants.

5.    Mobilehome parks: two spaces shall be provided for each mobilehome space, with at least one on the mobilehome space and the second within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the mobilehome space. Guest parking in a separate designated area shall be provided at the ratio of one space for every four mobilehome spaces.

6.    Rest homes, convalescent hospitals, residential care and similar group care facilities: one space for each four beds.

7.    Parking standards may vary for residential development projects receiving a density bonus pursuant to

Chapter 17.144 of this title and California Government Code Section 65915(p).

B.    Assembly Uses (Churches, Chapels, Funeral Homes, Theatres, Auditoriums, Stadiums and Similar Places of Assembly).

1.    Assembly areas with fixed seating: one space for each four seats.

2.    Assembly areas without fixed seating: one space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area.

C.    Institutional Uses.

1.    Public and private schools: three parking spaces for each classroom and each other room used by students. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet devoted to office or administrative uses.

2.    Technical and adult education (business, beauty, barber, trade, technical, vocational schools and other similar uses): one parking space shall be required for each forty (40) square feet of classroom space.

3.    Hospitals: one space for every four beds or as required by the planning commission.

4.    Public libraries, art galleries, museums, and other nonrecreational public facilities: one parking space shall be required for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area open to the public.

D.    Commercial and Office Uses.

1.    General commercial and office: one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of building floor area. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for each building or tenant space.

2.    Establishments with seating for service of food and/or drinks: one space for each four seats.

E.    Industrial Uses. Parking shall be as specified in Section 17.60.070.

F.    Wineries. Parking needs shall be determined by the planning commission dependent upon winery capacity, number of employees (including seasonal employees) and accessory uses (visitors, assembly and entertainment areas, and retail sales area).

G.    Wine Warehouses. Wine warehouses shall provide at least one parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of office floor area and parking spaces for warehouse floor area as follows:

1.    For warehouses up to twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in size: one parking space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of warehouse floor area.

2.    For warehouses in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet: five parking spaces plus one parking space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of warehouse floor area, in excess of twenty-five (25,000) square feet. Total parking spaces required for warehouse floor area under this section shall not exceed fifteen (15) spaces.

H.    Unlisted Uses. The planning commission shall determine the parking requirements for uses not specifically listed. In determining such requirements, the planning commission shall use the above requirements as a general rule and guide. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 9; Ord. 01-8 § 3; prior code § 27.247)

17.124.040 Exceptions.
A.    Senior Citizen Housing. Subject to use permit approval, off-street parking requirements may be reduced for senior citizen housing designated for occupancy by low or moderate income residents which are subsidized wholly or partially by the United States or state governments. Any use permit so issued shall immediately terminate upon use of any part of the premises for any use other than senior citizen housing. The additional parking space necessary to comply with Section 17.124.030 shall be promptly provided after termination of the use permit.

B.    Parking Impact Area. Parking impact areas as regulated in Chapter 17.104. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.248)

17.124.050 General requirements.
A.    Change of Use, Expansion, Increased Occupancy, etc. Subject to other provisions of this chapter, an existing structure or land use may be changed with respect to the number of dwelling or sleeping units, floor area, or substantial increase in occupancy, provided that additional parking space shall be provided in the extent of the change as required in Sections 17.124.030 and 17.124.040. For purposes of this section, change or increase in occupancy shall also include the following:

1.    Change from a nonconforming use to a permitted use;

2.    Change in “group occupancy” as defined in the 1976 Uniform Building Code;

3.    Change between uses requiring parking specified in Section 17.124.030;

4.    Increase in the number of leaseholders, tenant spaces or commercial spaces owned, franchised, rented or leased above that existing on April 14, 1981.

B.    Decrease in Required Parking. The number of required parking spaces in any commercial, industrial or office parking lot where a change of use would allow the provision of less parking may not be permanently reduced in size to less than one space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.

C.    Location of Required Parking Off-Site.

1.    Required parking shall be on the same lot with the use, building or structure or located off-site not more than three hundred (300) feet therefrom, in a zoning district which allows such parking.

2.    To ensure the perpetuation of required parking located off-site the owner(s) of the lot(s) on which the parking space(s) are located shall execute a declaration of restrictions and covenants covering the lot(s) on forms prescribed by the city setting aside the required space(s) for parking only, together with ingress and egress. Such restrictions and covenants may be waived only with the written consent of the city council.

D.    Tandem. Parking in tandem shall be permitted in residential districts when required parking is less than three spaces. Parking in tandem is permitted in commercial districts on an informal basis provided tandem parking in commercial districts shall not be considered when determining compliance with parking required by provisions of this title. The backing out onto a public street shall be prohibited except in residential districts.

E.    Minimum Dimensions for Residential Garage and Carport. Each residential garage or carport shall have the following minimum unobstructed interior dimensions:

1.    Single car garage: nine feet by nineteen (19) feet.

2.    Double car garage: nineteen (19) feet by nineteen (19) feet. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.249)

17.124.060 Parking lot design and improvement.
A.    Minimum Standards. The minimum standards for the design and layout of required off-street parking lots shall be as shown in the St. Helena Standard Specifications for Public Improvements and shall be subject to approval by the director of public works.

B.    Compact Spaces. Up to thirty percent (30%) of the required number of off-street parking spaces may be designated for the parking of compact cars only.

C.    Handicap Spaces. Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with standards of the California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24.

D.    Lighting. Any lighting fixture used to illuminate a parking lot shall be affixed to buildings or standards at a height of not more than fifteen (15) feet and shall be directed and/or shielded so as to not cause excessive glare visible on properties in surrounding residential districts.

E.    Screening. Parking lots for more than five vehicles shall be screened, except for necessary driveway openings, by a six-foot high solid board fence, masonry wall, vegetative screen, or screened chain link fence where contiguous to a residential district. Such fence or wall shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon.

F.    Location. Within any zone, except for necessary service or access driveways, no portion of a parking lot shall be located in any required front yard or side yard adjacent to a street. The backing out onto a public street shall be prohibited except in residential districts.

G.    Loading. On-site loading shall be required in accord with the following standards for all nonresidential buildings with a minimum floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail, wholesale or other similar use which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material and merchandise.

Gross Floor Area

Required Loading

Gross Spaces

 

10,000 to 24,999

1

25,000 to 49,000

2

Each additional 50,000 sq. ft.

1

Each loading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet.

The planning commission may waive the requirement or modify the standards if it can be demonstrated that the proposed use does not require loading facilities or that an alternative arrangement satisfies the need for loading facilities.

H.    Bicycle Parking. The planning commission may require the provision of bicycle parking facilities for any use which is required to provide ten (10) or more vehicular parking spaces dependent upon the use, size and location of the property. The required bicycle parking facilities must generally hold a bicycle in a vertical position and permit a typical bicycle lock to be used for security. (Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): prior code § 27.251)

17.124.070 Standards for driveways and access drives.
A.    Residential Driveways. A residential driveway provides direct vehicular access from a public street, or a private street developed to city standards, to the required parking for an individual dwelling unit. That portion which connects a residential driveway to the street is a driveway approach and is typically located in the right-of-way. The intent of these standards is to provide for emergency vehicle and/or fire equipment access:

1.    A residential driveway shall have a minimum length of twenty-four (24) feet (measured from the property line) which may be reduced to not less than twenty (20) feet in length if a roll-up garage door or carport is utilized. A residential driveway shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. The standard residential driveway approach shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and a maximum of twenty (20) feet as shown in the city of St. Helena Street, Storm Drain and Sidewalk Standards.

2.    Residential driveways in the woodlands and watershed zoning district, or elsewhere as deemed necessary by the fire chief/fire code official.

3.    Providing access to a lot which does not have public street frontage or is greater than one hundred (100) feet in length shall meet the standards for an access drive as set forth in Section 15.36.100.

B.    Standards for Access Drives.

1.    An access drive is a way located outside of the public right-of-way that provides vehicular access between the public street and the required parking for more than one lot, or for one lot if the length of the drive is greater than one hundred (100) feet.

2.    The design of all features relating to access drives is subject to review and approval of the public works director and fire chief/fire code official and may require a grading permit. The applicant shall submit a detailed, dimensioned plan with accurate topographic background showing the layout of the proposed access drive, parking and other related features on the site being developed. These features may include curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, pavement structural section, traffic circulation signing and markings. The plan shall also include finished grades. The access drive shall be designed to serve traffic loads as specified in Chapter 15.36. Where the access is determined by the public works director to serve traffic loads equivalent to those typically encountered on public streets, the public works director shall require the design of the access drive to meet public street standards.

a.    All access drives shall be designed for two-way traffic, unless specific approval is obtained from the public works director and fire chief/fire code official to allow one-way access drives.

b.    Access drives in areas as deemed necessary by the fire chief/fire code official shall be paved as noted in Chapter 15.36.

c.    To avoid congestion at the entrance of a property from the street or access drive, no on-site parking space or gate shall be allowed within the initial thirty (30) feet of the edge of pavement of the access drive, drive aisle or property line, or location as determined by the public works director in conjunction with the fire chief.

d.    On-site turnarounds or circulation patterns meeting design criteria set forth in Chapter 15.36 shall be provided that will enable the access drives to function properly for traffic and emergency vehicles. Backing out of access drives shall not be allowed.

e.    The following widths are minimums that will allow for the safe passage of emergency vehicles. Width for required parking areas must be added to the access drives. Widths are also as specified in Chapter 15.36 and are applied based on length of the access drive.

Residential

Minimum Width (Width includes two 2' shoulders)

One-way access drive:

 

1 unit

16' (12' paved)

Two-way access drives:

 

1—2 units

16' (12' paved)

3—10 units

20' (16' paved)

11—60 units

25' (21' paved)

Over 60 units

30' (26' paved)

Nonresidential

Minimum Width (Fully paved width)

One-way access drive

(16' paved)

Two-way access drive

25' (25' paved)

f.    The minimum vertical clearance shall be fourteen (14) feet at all points across the required width of the access drive.

g.    Emergency vehicle turnouts shall be provided per Chapter 15.36.

h.    An adequately sized firefighting operational area shall be provided as required by Chapter 15.36.

i.    Access drives grades shall follow the requirements of Chapter 15.36.

j.    Access drives shall be inspected annually by the fire chief/fire code official to ensure that landscaping or other obstructions do not hinder emergency vehicle access. (Ord. 14-10 § 1: Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 10; prior code § 27.252)

Chapter 17.126
MARIJUANA FACILITIES
Sections:

17.126.010    Purpose.

17.126.020    Definitions.

17.126.030    Prohibitions and limited exceptions.

17.126.040    Enforcement.

17.126.010 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana deliveries, and commercial cannabis activities, as defined below, subject to limited and specified exceptions, within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute marijuana even if for medical purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with marijuana cultivation facilities and medical marijuana dispensaries and in connection with medical marijuana deliveries, which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 17-1 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 16-4 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))

17.126.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:

A.    “Commercial cannabis activity” shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(k).

B.    “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

C.    “Establish” or “operate” a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or commercial cannabis activity means and includes any of the following:

1.    The opening or commencement of the operation of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or commercial cannabis activity;

2.    The conversion of an existing business, facility, use, establishment, or location to a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or commercial cannabis activity;

3.    The addition of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or commercial cannabis activity to any other existing business, facility, use, establishment or location.

D.    “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It includes marijuana infused in foodstuff, and concentrated cannabis and the separated resin, whether crude or petrified, obtained from marijuana. It does not include:

1.    Industrial hemp;

2.    The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product.

E.    “Medical marijuana” is marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (“AIDS”), anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

F.    “Marijuana cultivation facility” means any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where the cultivation of marijuana occurs.

G.    “Medical marijuana dispensary” means any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is sold, made available, delivered and/or distributed by or to three or more people. A “medical marijuana dispensary” does not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. (Ord. 17-1 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 16-4 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))

17.126.030 Prohibitions and limited exceptions.
A.    Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana dispensary. No person may be the lessor of property where a medical marijuana dispensary is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any medical marijuana dispensary in the city.

B.    Marijuana cultivation facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a marijuana cultivation facility. No person may be the lessor of property where a marijuana cultivation facility is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any marijuana cultivation facility in the city.

C.    The prohibition against cultivation facilities set forth in subsection B of this section, however, shall not apply to a qualified patient cultivating marijuana/cannabis pursuant to Section 11362.5 and the Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use promulgated by the California Attorney General or to any individual cultivating marijuana for non-medical use under the following circumstances:

1.    The individual and/or patient maintains no more than six mature or twelve (12) immature marijuana/cannabis plants at a single private residence, or upon the grounds of that residence; and

2.    The individual, patient or primary caregiver cultivates marijuana/cannabis for a patient’s or individual’s personal use and does not sell, distribute, donate, transmit, or provide marijuana/cannabis to any other person or entity; and

3.    The location of all cultivation activities is located indoors, and housed completely within a structure with no external indication of cultivation activities (this limitation shall not preclude the use of a greenhouse for cultivation); and

4.    The property on which an individual is cultivating medical or recreational marijuana/cannabis has no more than one hundred (100) square feet devoted to the cultivation of marijuana/cannabis (the area used to cultivate marijuana/cannabis shall be measured by the aggregate area of vegetative growth of live marijuana plants on the premises).

Notwithstanding this exception, an individual and/or patient cultivating marijuana may not create or cause a nuisance condition and the city may abate, in any manner permitted by law, a nuisance condition created or caused by, associated with, or arising from marijuana cultivation by a qualified patient.

D.    All forms of commercial cannabis activities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city with the exception of delivery services and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a commercial cannabis activity including any and all license classifications set forth in the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 26050, as it may be amended. No person may be the lessor of property where a commercial cannabis activity is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any commercial cannabis activity in the city.

E.    No person and/or entity may deliver or transport medical marijuana from any fixed or mobile location, either inside or outside the city, to any person in the city, except that a person may deliver or transport marijuana to a qualified patient (with an identification card, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, for whom he or she is the primary caregiver within the meaning of Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7(d)) or individual up to the maximum allowable amounts under current state regulations for the transportation of medical and recreational marijuana.

F.    Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. (Ord. 17-1 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 16-4 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))

17.126.040 Enforcement.
The city may enforce this chapter in any manner permitted by law. The violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 17-1 § 2 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 16-4 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))

Chapter 17.128
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
Sections:

17.128.010    Purpose.

17.128.020    Definitions.

17.128.030    Location of adult entertainment facilities.

17.128.040    Signs.

17.128.050    Public display of certain matter prohibited.

17.128.060    Restrictions cumulative.

17.128.010 Purpose.
It is recognized that the operation of the hereinafter specified adult entertainment facilities are among those certain land uses which, because of their nature, may have serious operational characteristics and deleterious effects upon their surroundings, as a result of their location and concentration within the city. Special regulations pertaining to these uses are necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood nor otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare. More specifically, it is recognized that development and proliferation without regulation as to location and concentration may result in the deterioration of residential and business neighborhoods, the attraction of large numbers of transients, an increase in crime, and, in the case of placement near schools and other youth-related facilities, an adverse effect upon the welfare and morals of minors residing within the city. (Prior code § 27.255)

17.128.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of the adult entertainment facilities regulations:

“Adult book store” means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguishing or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to the “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental, or display of such material.

“Adult entertainment facilities” mean and refer to adult newsracks, adult book stores and adult motion picture theaters.

“Adult motion picture theater” means enclosed building or drive-in theater used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to the “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” defined below, for observation by one or more patrons therein.

“Adult newsrack” means any coin-operated machine or device which dispenses material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or relating to the “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” defined below.

“Specified anatomical areas” mean and refer to:

1.    Less than completely and opaquely covered: (1) human genitals, pubic region; (2) buttock; and (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” mean and refer to:

1.    Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

2.    Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;

3.    Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. (Prior code § 27.256)

17.128.030 Location of adult entertainment facilities.
The following provisions shall apply to the location of adult entertainment facilities:

A.    Adult entertainment facilities shall be permitted in the SC service commercial district only, upon approval of use permit.

B.    No adult entertainment facilities shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any area zoned for residential use.

C.    No adult entertainment facility shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other such facility.

D.    No adult entertainment facility shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel or real property on which is located any of the following facilities:

1.    A school primarily attended by minors;

2.    A church which conducts religious education classes for minors;

3.    A public park or public recreation facility frequented by minors.

E.    No adult entertainment facility shall be permitted with direct frontage or visible frontage from Highway 29. (Prior code § 27.257)

17.128.040 Signs.
The following provisions shall apply to signs erected or maintained in connection with an adult book store or an adult motion picture theater:

A.    No off-site signs shall be permitted.

B.    The total “sign area,” as defined in Chapter 17.148, allowed in connection with any such use shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet. The area of signs affixed to or placed within windows which are visible from any public area shall be included for the purposes of this restriction. (Prior code § 27.258)

17.128.050 Public display of certain matter prohibited.
Materials offered for sale from adult newsracks shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view any pictures or illustrations depicting any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. Materials offered for sale or viewing at any adult book store or any adult motion picture theater shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes any depiction of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area to the view of persons outside the building or off the premises on which such store or theater is located. (Prior code § 27.259)

17.128.060 Restrictions cumulative.
The restrictions set forth in this section are in addition to any other applicable provision of this code. In the event of any conflict between any such provisions, the more restrictive shall apply. (Prior code § 27.260)

Chapter 17.132
BED AND BREAKFAST INNS*
Sections:

17.132.010    Purpose.

17.132.020    Establishment of bed and breakfast inns.

17.132.040    Findings required.

*    Prior history: Prior code §§ 27.265—27.268 and Ord. 2-6.

17.132.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the bed and breakfast inn regulations is to establish procedures defining the limits on the number of rooms permitted in bed and breakfast inns based on the date the use was established and to establish criteria by which the operation of the bed and breakfast inns will be regulated. The city has established a limit on the number of bed and breakfast inns to the number, which existed on September 28, 1993 when the 1993 general plan was adopted as listed on the hotel, motel, and B&B inventory dated 9/28/93. (Ord. 04-6 (part))

17.132.020 Establishment of bed and breakfast inns.
Bed and breakfast inns may be established with a use permit and expanded with a use permit amendment in existing buildings or structures subject to the following:

A.    The use shall be conducted only by a person or persons owning the dwelling and residing therein as their principal place of residence;

B.    No meals shall be served to persons other than to guests and residents of the bed and breakfast inn;

C.    Bed and breakfast inns shall be rented for periods of less than thirty (30) days;

D.    A use permit shall not be granted for the rental of more than four rooms;

E.    On-site parking for the underlying residential use shall be provided on-site or in perpetuity on an adjacent parcel in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.124. In addition, one on-site parking space shall be provided for each guest room. On-site parking shall be designed and located so as not to detract from the residential character of the neighborhood and the buildings and structures of the bed and breakfast inn;

F.    Signs for bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to two square feet attached directly to the residential structure;

G.    The use shall, at all times, maintain city business licenses and pay all transient occupancy taxes required;

H.    The use shall be contained entirely within the existing structure;

I.    The number of bed and breakfast inns shall not exceed six. (Ord. 04-6 (part))

17.132.040 Findings required.
In approving a use permit for a bed and breakfast inn the planning commission must make the following findings in addition to the use permit findings contained in Chapter 17.168.

A.    The establishment of a bed and breakfast inn is consistent with the purpose of the general plan, including policies regarding the displacement of rental units in the housing stock.

B.    The establishment of a bed and breakfast inn will not be detrimental to a building, structure or feature of significant aesthetic, cultural, architectural or engineering interest or value of a historical nature.

C.    The establishment of a bed and breakfast inn is compatible with and will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 04-6 (part))

Chapter 17.134
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Sections:

17.134.010    Purpose and findings.

17.134.020    Short-term rental permit required.

17.134.030    Districts in which permitted.

17.134.040    Restrictions and standards.

17.134.050    Procedures for application and public notice.

17.134.060    Permit processing.

17.134.065    Renewals.

17.134.070    Appeals.

17.134.080    Inspections.

17.134.090    Revocation.

17.134.100    Violations, enforcement and civil penalties.

17.134.010 Purpose and findings.
A.    The city council hereby finds that unregulated transient occupancy uses in residential and agricultural district present a threat to the public welfare.

B.    The purposes of this chapter are to establish a permitting process and appropriate restrictions and standards for short-term rental of single-family dwellings; to provide a visitor experience and accommodation as an alternative to the hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast accommodations currently existing in the city; to ensure the collection and payment of transient occupancy taxes; to minimize the negative secondary effects of short-term rental use on surrounding residential neighborhoods; and to retain the character of the neighborhoods in which any such use occurs.

C.    This chapter is not intended to regulate hotels and bed and breakfast inns that do not qualify as short-term rentals.

D.    This chapter is not intended to provide any owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions, covenants and restrictions applicable to the owner’s property that may prohibit the use of such owner’s residential property for short-term rental purposes as defined in this chapter.

E.    The city council hereby finds that the adoption of a comprehensive ordinance regulating the issuance of and operating conditions attached to short-term rental permits is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The purposes of this chapter are: to provide a permit system and to impose operational requirements in order to minimize the potential adverse impacts of transient uses in residential neighborhoods and zoning districts on traffic, noise and density; to ensure the health, safety and welfare of renters and guests patronizing short-term rentals; to impose limitations on the total number of permits issued in order to ensure the long-term availability of the affordable housing stock; and to provide for robust enforcement remedies and penalties to prevent and deter violations of this chapter and unjust enrichment by those who violate this chapter.

F.    The city council hereby finds that the city’s regulation of short-term rental uses in accordance with this chapter, including the establishment of the nontransferability provisions, is a valid exercise of the city’s police power in furtherance of the legitimate governmental interests documented in this chapter. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.020 Short-term rental permit required.
No person shall use or maintain, nor shall any person authorize, aid, facilitate or advertise the use of, any single-family dwelling on any parcel in any zoning district for short-term rental without a short-term rental permit. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.030 Districts in which permitted.
Short-term rentals shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions established in each zoning district and as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.040 Restrictions and standards.
Short-term rentals shall be subject to the following restrictions and standards:

A.    The short-term rental use shall be permitted in no more than one single-family dwelling per lot.

B.    The short-term rental permit shall be in the name of the owner-applicant, who shall be an owner of the real property upon which the short-term rental use is to be permitted. One person may hold no more than one short-term rental permit. The permit shall not be transferable.

C.    Short-term rental uses shall be limited to single-family dwellings existing and constructed as of the date of application for the short-term rental permit.

D.    The total number of permits for short-term rental dwellings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) at any time.

E.    The maximum number of bedrooms used for short-term rental use in the short-term rental dwelling shall be no greater than five. The total number of guests staying in the short-term rental dwelling at any one time shall be no greater than two times the number of bedrooms plus two persons, up to a maximum of twelve (12) persons.

F.    Short-term rental dwellings shall meet all applicable building, health, fire and related safety codes at all times and shall be inspected by the fire department before any short-term rental activity can occur.

G.    A minimum of two on-site parking spaces shall be provided for use by the short-term rental occupants.

H.    The owner-applicant shall keep on file with the city the name, telephone number, cell phone number, and e-mail address of a local contact person who shall be responsible for responding to questions or concerns regarding the operation of the short-term rental. This information shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the short-term rental dwelling. The local contact person shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day to accept telephone calls and respond physically to the short-term rental within thirty (30) minutes when the short-term rental is rented and occupied. The city shall post the name and contact information of the local contact person associated with each short-term rental on the city’s webpage.

I.    The owner-applicant shall post “house policies” within each guest bedroom. The house policies shall be included in the rental agreement, which must be signed by the renter and shall be enforced by the owner-applicant or the owner-applicant’s designated contact person. The house policies at a minimum shall include the following provisions:

1.    Quiet hours shall be maintained from ten p.m. to seven a.m., during which noise within or outside the short-term rental dwelling shall not disturb anyone on a neighboring property.

2.    Amplified sound that is audible beyond the property boundaries of the short-term rental dwelling is prohibited.

3.    Except as permitted by the planning director, vehicles shall be parked in the designated on-site parking area and shall not be parked on the street overnight.

4.    Parties or group gatherings which exceed the maximum number of allowed guests and/or which have the potential to cause traffic, parking, noise or other problems in the neighborhood are prohibited from occurring at the short-term rental property, as a component of short-term rental activities.

J.    Auctions, weddings, commercial functions, and any other similar events which have the potential to cause traffic, parking, noise or other problems in the neighborhood are prohibited from occurring at the short-term rental property, as a component of short-term rental activities.

K.    The owner-applicant shall ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the short-term rental use do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of this code or any state law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs or be subject to fines and penalties levied by the city up to and including revocation of the short-term rental permit.

L.    The owner-applicant, upon notification that occupants and/or guests of his or her short-term rental use have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of this code or state law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, the consumption of alcohol or the use of illegal drugs, shall prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests or be subject to fines and penalties levied by the city up to and including revocation of the short-term rental permit.

M.    All advertising for any short-term rental, including electronic advertising on short-term rental websites, shall include the number of the short-term rental permit granted to the owner-applicant.

N.    The owner-applicant shall maintain city business licenses and pay all transient occupancy taxes in accordance with Chapter 3.28 as required.

O.    Preference for the review and issuance of new short-term rental permits shall be given to current residents of St. Helena over nonresident applicants. Applicants whose primary residence is within the city of St. Helena shall be reviewed and acted on ahead of other nonresident applications to implement the local preference policy for short-term rental permits.

P.    Applicants for short-term rental permits are required to have owned their homes for a minimum of three years prior to applying for and being issued a short-term rental permit.

Q.    Short-term rental permit holders are required to rent their properties on a short-term basis a minimum (average) of sixty (60) days per year. Individual permit holders who do not meet this minimum rental activity may (at the determination of the director) have their renewal denied and/or reviewed by the planning commission at a noticed public hearing. Short-term rental permit holders who utilize their primary residence for short-term rental activities are exempted from this requirement. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.050 Procedures for application and public notice.
A.    Prospective owner-applicants of a short-term rental use shall apply for a permit with the planning director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and on a form provided by the city.

B.    The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be fixed from time to time by resolution to cover the administrative costs of issuing a short-term rental permit and, but not limited to, inspecting the short-term rental dwelling.

C.    The application shall include the following information:

1.    The name, address and phone number of the applicant, and verification that the applicant is the owner of the property.

2.    The assessor’s parcel number of the lot on which the short-term rental use is proposed.

3.    Certification that the permit will be nontransferable.

4.    Certification that the local contact person is available twenty-four (24) hours a day to accept telephone calls and respond physically to the short-term rental within thirty (30) minutes when the short-term rental is rented and occupied.

5.    A site and floor plan identifying the location of parking on the site and the location of any bedrooms to be used for short-term rental use.

6.    A list of the names and addresses of the property owners within a three hundred (300) foot distance from the lot on which the short-term rental use is proposed, and a map, drawn to scale, that clearly identifies the lots and the assessor parcel numbers of the lots identified pursuant to this section.

7.    Acknowledgement of receipt and inspection of a copy of all regulations pertaining to the operation of a short-term rental use.

8.    Additional information as may be requested by the planning director to determine impact and mitigation measures.

D.    Notice of Application.

1.    The planning director shall provide a notice of application for a short-term rental permit to the property owners and residents located within a three hundred (300) foot distance from the lot on which the short-term rental use is proposed.

2.    The notice of application shall contain a description of the proposed short-term rental operation, parking on the site, and number of bedrooms to be used for short-term rental use, together with a location map identifying the short-term rental dwelling lot in relationship to all other lots within a three hundred (300) foot distance.

3.    The notice of application shall state that the noticed owners may file a written protest against the proposed short-term rental use with the planning director; provided, that all protests must be postmarked or received within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of application. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.060 Permit processing.
A.    Short-term rental permit applications shall be submitted to the planning commission at a noticed public hearing pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

The planning commission shall review and either approve or deny the application pursuant to the requirements of this chapter after considering the effects the proposed use would have on surrounding uses and the cumulative impacts within the community. In approving a short-term rental (STR) application, the planning commission must make the following findings:

1.    The establishment of a short-term rental at the subject property is consistent with the purpose of the general plan, including policies regarding the displacement of rental units in the housing stock.

2.    The establishment of a short-term rental at the subject property will not be detrimental to a building, structure or feature of significant aesthetic, cultural, architectural or engineering interest or value of a historical nature.

3.    The establishment of a short-term rental at the project site is compatible with and will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood and surrounding land uses.

4.    The establishment of a short-term rental at the project site will provide an enhanced visitor experience and accommodation as an alternative to the hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast accommodations currently existing in the city and will help to ensure the collection and payment of transient occupancy taxes.

C.    If no short-term rental permits are available pursuant to the limitation on short-term rentals described in Section 17.134.040(D), the planning director shall place interested property owners on a waiting list in the order in which they were received. If a permit becomes available, applications shall be accepted and reviewed in the order that they are listed on the waiting list, subject to the local preference policy established in Section 17.134.040(P).

D.    The planning director or planning commission may impose conditions on the granting of an application for a short-term rental permit to mitigate the impacts of the proposed land use.

E.    Short-term rental permits shall be valid for a period of two years. In reviewing subsequent requests for a short-term rental permit, the planning director shall require evidence of compliance with conditions of the short-term rental permit and this chapter. No subsequent permit shall be approved without written verification of tax payments, and no permit shall be approved if the operation of the short-term rental has created adverse impacts on the neighborhood in which it is situated or has otherwise caused the loss of the character of that neighborhood.

F.    Substantial evidence identifying operation of an unpermitted short-term rental within the city of St. Helena shall prohibit approval and/or issuance of a short-term rental permit to the property owner and/or agent conducting the unpermitted rental activity.

G.    Short-term rental permits shall be subject to any changes to this chapter that the city council may make and conditions that the council may impose subsequent to the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.065 Renewals.
A.    A minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a current short-term rental permit, the permit holder shall submit a short-term rental permit renewal application and pay applicable fees to the city.

B.    Upon receipt of a renewal application, the planning department will confirm with the finance department that the applicant’s business license is current and that all required transient occupancy taxes (TOT) have been reported and paid (see Chapter 5.08 for addressing lack of payment/business license).

C.    The planning department will refer the application to the St. Helena police department to request all police calls for services and/or complaints lodged against the property over the course of the two-year permit.

D.    If the permit holder has a current business license, has rented their property on a short-term basis for an average of sixty (60) days per year (as applicable), has been properly reporting and paying TOT, and has fewer than three STR related complaints filed over the two years, the planning department may administratively approve the renewal which shall be good for an additional two years. If all of these provisions are not met, the renewal shall be referred to the planning commission for action at a public hearing. The planning department also has discretion to refer the renewal application to the planning commission for a decision pursuant to the process and standards set forth in Section 17.134.060.

E.    The planning director may deny the renewal if the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part))

17.134.070 Appeals.
Any person whose application for a short-term rental permit (including a renewal application) has been denied by the planning director, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked by the planning director, may appeal to the city council pursuant to Section 17.08.180. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee, if any, as established by city council resolution. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.080 Inspections.
A.    The planning director or his or her designee shall have the right to enter upon any property at any reasonable time to make inspections and examinations for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq.

B.    The fire department shall annually inspect the short-term rental dwelling.

C.    The planning director shall have the right to inspect any records related to the use and occupancy of the short-term rental to determine that the objectives and conditions of this chapter are being fulfilled. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.090 Revocation.
A.    The planning director may revoke a short-term rental permit pursuant to Section 17.04.140 if the planning director determines that:

1.    The owner-applicant gave false or misleading information during the application process;

2.    There has been a violation of any of the terms, conditions and restrictions on the use of the dwelling unit for short-term rental use;

3.    The owner-applicant has violated any provision of this chapter;

4.    The owner-applicant has failed to timely pay the transient occupancy tax as required by this code.

B.    If an owner-applicant’s short-term rental permit is revoked, the owner-applicant may not reapply for another permit for two years after the date of revocation. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

17.134.100 Violations, enforcement and civil penalties.
A.    Any property owner or responsible person who uses, or allows the use of, or advertises or causes to be printed, published, advertised or disseminated in any way, the availability of residential property in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day in which such residential property is used, or allowed to be used, in violation of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.20. For purposes of this chapter, “responsible person” shall mean and include any manager or other person responsible for allowing property to be used for short-term rental in violation of this chapter.

B.    Short-term rental use, and/or advertisement for use, of a residential property in violation of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety or welfare and is thus declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Any such nuisance may be abated and/or restored by the enforcement official and also may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.12, except that the civil penalty for a violation shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.

C.    Any property owner or responsible person who violates this chapter shall be liable and responsible for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day such violation occurs. The city may recover such civil penalty by either civil action or administrative citation. Such penalty shall be in addition to all other costs incurred by the city, including without limitation the city’s staff time, investigation expenses and attorney’s fees.

1.    Where the city proceeds by civil action, the court shall have discretion to reduce the civil penalty based upon evidence presented by the property owner or responsible person that such a reduction is warranted by mitigating factors including, without limitation, lack of culpability and/or inability to pay. Provided, however, that in exercising its discretion the court should consider the purpose of this chapter to prevent and deter violations and whether the reduction of civil penalties will frustrate that purpose by resulting in the property owner’s or responsible person’s enrichment or profit as a result of the violation of this chapter. In any such civil action the city also may abate and/or enjoin any violation of this chapter.

2.    Where the city proceeds by administrative citation, the city shall provide the property owner or responsible person notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the citation and penalty, and the time for requesting that hearing.

a.    The property owner or responsible person shall have the right to request the administrative hearing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the administrative citation and imposition of the civil penalty. To request such a hearing, the property owner or responsible person shall notify the city clerk in writing within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the citation. The appeal notification shall include all specific facts, circumstances and arguments upon which the appeal is based.

b.    The city manager is hereby authorized to designate a hearing officer to hear such appeal. The city hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within ninety (90) days of the request for the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause. The hearing officer shall only consider those facts, circumstances or arguments that the property owner or responsible person has presented in the appeal notification.

c.    The hearing officer shall render a decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer shall have discretion to reduce the civil penalty based upon evidence presented by the property owner or responsible person that such a reduction is warranted by mitigating factors including, without limitation, lack of culpability and/or inability to pay. Provided, however, that in exercising its discretion the hearing officer should consider the purpose of this chapter to prevent and deter violations and whether the reduction of civil penalties will frustrate that purpose by resulting in the property owner’s or responsible person’s enrichment or profit as a result of the violation of this chapter.

d.    Any aggrieved party to the hearing officer’s decision on the administrative appeal may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the Napa County superior court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4.

e.    If, following an administrative hearing, appeal, or other final determination, the owner of the property is determined to be the responsible person for the civil penalty imposed by this section, such penalty, if unpaid within forty-five (45) days of the notice of the final determination, shall become a lien to be recorded against the property on which the violation occurred pursuant to Chapter 1.12. Such costs shall be collected in the same manner as county taxes, and thereafter the property upon which they are a lien shall be sold in the same manner as property now is sold for delinquent taxes.

D.    Any violation of this chapter may also be abated and/or restored by the enforcement official and also may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.12, except that the civil penalty under Chapter 1.12 for a violation shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

E.    Each day the violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense.

F.    Any property owner who uses, or allows the use of, residential property as a short-term rental without a permit shall be liable for the transit occupancy tax that would have been owed under Chapter 3.28 had the use been legal, including the penalty and interest provisions of Section 3.28.070.

G.    The remedies under this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies available at law and equity. (Ord. 16-9 § 1 (Exh. A) (part): Ord. 12-2 § 8 (part))

Chapter 17.136
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sections:

17.136.010    Satellite antennas.

17.136.020    Radio and television antennas.

17.136.030    Storage of certain items.

17.136.040    Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.

17.136.050    Temporary uses.

17.136.060    Stream bank stabilization.

17.136.070    Commercial place of amusement/entertainment and alcoholic beverages—Considerations.

17.136.080    Service station requirements.

17.136.090    Parking and storage of vehicles.

17.136.010 Satellite antennas.
The following provisions shall govern the placement of satellite antennas on private property in the city:

A.    A satellite antenna may be placed on private property in each and every zoning district in accordance with the following criteria:

1.    The satellite antenna shall be placed in a location that minimizes the visual impact of the antenna from all points surrounding the property on which the antenna is located. In locating the satellite antenna, primary consideration shall be given to minimizing the visual impact from a public or private street. The planning director may require that the satellite antenna be of a specific diameter, color or type of construction and/or that screening be installed and maintained in order to minimize the visual impact of the satellite antenna.

2.    The height of a satellite antenna shall not exceed the maximum height established for the zoning district in which the antenna is located.

B.    No person shall place a satellite antenna on private property without first submitting sufficient information to the planning director, including but not limited to a site plan and elevations, to determine compliance with this section. The planning director may approve, disapprove or modify the proposed placement of the satellite antenna.

C.    A variance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.172 shall be required by any person wishing to vary from the criteria of this section. (Prior code § 27.270)

17.136.020 Radio and television antennas.
Radio and television antennas may be installed, erected and maintained within all land-use zones of the city, but only in accordance with the provisions of this section. The term “antenna,” as used in this section, means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic magnetic waves which system is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. Antennas shall include devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. The height of an antenna shall be the total maximum to which it is capable of being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade adjacent to the structure if ground-mounted or from the peak of the roof if roof-mounted. All antennas shall be subject to the following:

A.    Approval of Antennas.

1.    All antennas shall be subject to the review and approval of the building official for compliance with the Uniform Building Code, Section 507. Exceptions Table SD, Table 23-24 and Section 3602.

2.    The following antennas shall be reviewed and approved by the city planner if in conformity with these development standards:

a.    All roof-mounted antennas where the boom or any active element of the antenna array is longer than fifteen (15) feet.

b.    All ground-mounted antennas forty-five (45) feet or less in height.

3.    “Ground-mounted antennas,” as defined in subsection (B)(5) of this section exceeding forty-five (45) feet in height may be permitted if a use permit is granted in conformity with Chapter 17.168, provided that no antenna shall exceed seventy (70) feet.

B.    Development Standards. All antennas shall be located, designed, constructed, treated and maintained in accordance with the following standards:

1.    Antennas shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the building code.

2.    Antennas that are roof-mounted shall not extend higher than fifteen (15) feet above the peak of the roof: except a single-vertical-pole antenna may extend to twenty (20) feet above the peak of the roof. Roof-mounted dish antennas shall require planning commission approval.

3.    No more than one ground-mounted antenna exceeding forty-five (45) feet in height shall be permitted on each lot.

4.    Antennas shall be erected or maintained to the rear of the main building, except in those instances when the subject property is a cul-de-sac or corner lot where the side yard is larger than the rear yard, in which case the antenna may be located in the side yard. Antenna towers shall not be located in any required setback area. No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines or into any front yard area. Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front yard area but may be attached to the building.

5.    Antennas may be roof-mounted or ground-mounted, freestanding or supported by guy wires, buildings or other structures in compliance with the manufacturer’s structural specification. “Ground-mounted” antennas shall be any antenna with its base mounted directly in the ground, even if such antenna is supported or attached to the wall of a building. Fixed-guyed antenna towers shall be fascia-mounted or guyed according to approved standards. Wire antennas that are not self-supporting shall be supported by objects within the property lines but not within any front yard areas.

6.    The antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets. Antennas should be screened through the addition of architectural features and/or landscaping that harmonize with the elements and characteristics of the property. The materials used in constructing the antenna shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish or reflective.

7.    Antennas shall meet all manufacturer’s specifications. The mast or tower shall be noncombustible and corrosive hardware such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion, shall be protected with a zinc or cadmium coating by either a galvanizing or a sheradizing process after forming. These finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and to protect the elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar metals.

8.    Whenever it is necessary to install an antenna near power lines, or where damage would be caused by its falling, a separate safety wire must be attached to the antenna mast or tower and secured in a direction away from the hazard. No antenna shall be allowed directly under power lines and shall maintain at least ten (10) feet of horizontal clearance from the power lines. (Prior code § 27.271)

17.136.030 Storage of certain items.
As used herein storage means the placement of material objects on a site for any period in excess of seven consecutive days and pertains to the storage of building supplies, discarded or salvaged materials, motor vehicle parts, mechanical equipment or other material objects or equipment except as provided for elsewhere in this code. Storage shall be in conformance with the following regulations:

A.    Storage on Vacant Lots. Storage is not permitted on vacant lots. Storage is permitted as an accessory use to residential units.

B.    Storage of Items. Storage of items shall be prohibited within any front or side setback of any property.

C.    Storage Screened. After October 28, 1995 storage permitted on any residential property shall be screened from the public right of way and abutting lots by fences and/or landscaping as regulated elsewhere in this code.

D.    Exceptions. The regulations set forth in this section shall not be applicable to the following types of storage:

1.    The storage within a dwelling of objects normally found within a home;

2.    The placement upon the premises within any R district of equipment or goods normally found in a yard such as toys, play equipment, yard or lawn furniture, minor yard maintenance tools and equipment and similar objects;

3.    The inventory of any retail or wholesale business, warehouse, parts house, industry, or other commercial activity when such storage is the principal activity of the use or is incidental to the use and enclosed entirely within a building;

4.    The temporary placement of building materials on a site of a city-approved construction project during the time a valid building permit is in effect for construction on the premises. The planning director may approve the placement of a temporary mobile office (designed solely for such use) at an approved construction site for a maximum one-year period or for the duration of the construction, whichever period if shorter;

5.    The storage of vehicles as regulated by Section 17.136.090.

E.    Equipment Screened. All equipment and open storage areas shall be screened from the public right of way and abutting lots by fences and/or landscaping as regulated by this title. (Prior code § 27.272)

17.136.040 Outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.
Provided the use is allowed (either as a permitted or conditional use) by the zoning district regulations for the district in which the property is located, the following provisions shall apply to the incidental placement, storage, display, sale or offer for sale of any merchandise out of doors or outside any completely enclosed building:

A.    The merchandise shall be screened, so as not to be visible from any public or private street, any off-street parking facility or any common area in an integrated commercial center; or

B.    A use permit approved by the planning commission shall be required, unless it is one of the exemptions described in subsection (B)(1) of this section and the placement or location of the merchandise complies with all of the standards set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

1.    Exemptions:

a.    Fruits and vegetables,

b.    Plants and other growing vegetation, with the limitation in subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section not applicable to nurseries,

c.    Cut flowers,

d.    Gasoline pumps, oil racks and accessory items when located on pump islands,

e.    Vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers and recreational vehicles, with the limitation in subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section not applicable,

f.    Areas within a completely roofed street alcove or entry way; provided, that the merchandise is inside the line of the building face,

g.    Parking lot and sidewalk sales and other promotional events that involve retail sales, as long as they do not exceed twelve (12) days total during any twelve (12) month period with no more than three days being consecutive, regardless of the number of businesses located on the property, with the limitations in subsections (B)(2)(e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

h.    Nonpromotional events conducted by or for recognized nonprofit or charitable community groups, with the limitations in subsections (B)(2)(a), (e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

i.    Garage and yard sales, as long as they are conducted on property used for residential purposes by a resident and do not exceed three days during any six month period, with the limitations in subsections (B)(2)(a), (e) and (f) of this section not applicable,

j.    Activities similar to the above, as determined by the planning director.

2.    Standards:

a.    The merchandise or activity is incidental and adjacent to any lawfully established business that normally sells the merchandise inside the building,

b.    The merchandise or activity does not present a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles,

c.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy the space formed by extending the width of any required or existing building exit, whichever is wider, to the public right-of-way,

d.    A minimum of a five-foot-wide pedestrian walkway is maintained at all times,

e.    The merchandise or activity does not occupy any parking spaces,

f.    The storage, display or sales area is limited to two hundred (200) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the business, whichever is less.

C.    Nothing in this section shall authorize the placement, storage, display, sale or offer for sale of any merchandise on any street or on any sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way, with the exception of sidewalk sales permitted by subsection (B)(1)(g) of this section. (Prior code § 27.273)

17.136.050 Temporary uses.
A.     Purpose. This section establishes procedures for the granting of ministerial temporary use permits for short-term activities on privately or publicly owned property with appropriate regulations so that such activities will be compatible with surrounding areas.

B.    Applicability. A temporary use permit allows the short-term activities listed in subsection D of this section (Allowed Temporary Activities) that may not comply with the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature. Temporary use permits are not subject to design review or standard parking requirements otherwise restricted by this code.

C.    Exempt Temporary Activities. The following allowed temporary activities are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit. Activities that do not fall within the categories defined below shall comply with subsection D of this section (Allowed Temporary Activities).

1.    Construction Yards—On-Site. On-site contractors’ storage yards of less than one acre, including a work trailer, only in conjunction with an approved construction project located on the same site. The contractor’s storage yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs.

2.    Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/activities, as determined by the council, city manager or designee.

3.    Location Filming. The temporary use of a specific site for the location filming of commercials, movies, videos, etc., as regulated and approved by the city manager pursuant to Chapter 5.24.

4.    Garage Sales or Similar Sales Activities. The sale of personal goods which are owned by the household, or neighboring households located on residentially zoned property, for up to three consecutive days and three times within a twelve (12) month period.

5.    Public Property. Activities conducted on public properties that are approved by the council.

6.     Nonprofit Special Events. Special events (such as but not limited to carwashes, bake sales, rummage sales or flea markets) conducted by or for a recognized nonprofit or charitable community group may be conducted on the grounds of a religious institution, commercial property, school or other permanent place of public assembly up to three days during any six-month period provided they meet the following standard or provisions:

a.    Event activities do not block a building exit, present a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, reduce the width of a pedestrian walkway to less than required ADA access dimensions, significantly reduce on-site parking or occupy a fire lane.

b.    If the merchandise or activity is proposed for location on any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way, an encroachment permit shall be secured from the public works department.

c.    If any commercial vendors are involved in the event, they shall secure a business license from the finance department pursuant to Title 5.

d.    Nonprofit special events occurring more frequently than three days during any six-month period shall require a use permit or temporary use permit.

D.    Allowed Temporary Activities. The following temporary activities may be allowed within the specified time limits, but in no case for more than twelve (12) months, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit by the planning director. Other temporary or short-term activities that do not fall within the categories defined below shall instead comply with the land use permit requirements and development standards that otherwise apply to the property.

1.    Events. Arts and crafts exhibits, carnivals, concerts, fairs, farm stands, festivals, flea markets, food events, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, and swap meets for up to fourteen (14) consecutive days, or six two-day weekends, within a twelve (12) month period, when conducted on nonresidential properties. Decisions on large scale temporary uses such as concerts or festivals which are intended to draw large numbers of individuals (approximately four hundred (400) plus) to the temporary use in a single day may be elevated to the planning commission at the discretion of the planning director.

2.     Pop-Up Uses. Retail sales, museums, art exhibits, restaurants or cafes for up to twelve (12) months when conducted on nonresidential properties.

3.    Formula Pop-Up Uses. Pop-up uses meeting the definition of a “formula business” are limited to ninety (90) days of operation when conducted on nonresidential properties.

4.    Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales activities (e.g., Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers, on nonresidential properties, for up to thirty (30) days and four times within a twelve (12) month period.

5.    Temporary Structures. A temporary classroom, office, or similar structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved for a maximum of twelve (12) months from the date of approval, to accommodate an existing approved primary or accessory use, or as the first phase of a development project.

6.     Similar Temporary Activities. Similar temporary activities that the director determines are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses.

E.    In reviewing the temporary use permit, the review authority may attach any conditions governing access, hours of operation, parking and circulation, fencing and other temporary structures, drainage, dust control, trash/litter control, public safety and other items as necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding uses and minimize potential adverse effects.

F.    Application Requirements. An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed in compliance with Chapter 17.08 (Administrative Procedures). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for temporary use permit applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection H of this section (Findings and Decision).

G.    Development Criteria. The director shall utilize the following criteria based on the type and duration of the proposed temporary activity, using input from other departments (police, fire, public works, etc.), the requirements and development criteria of the applicable zoning district and use standards as well as Chapter 17.112 (General Site Design and Development Standards) for guidance in the review and approval of temporary uses:

1.    Floor areas, heights, hours of operation, nuisance controls, off-street parking, setbacks, and other structure and property development features;

2.    Measures for removal of the activity and site restoration, to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this zoning code; and

3.    The project’s compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.148, Signs, and the applicable zoning standards pertaining to the outdoor storage, display and/or sale of merchandise.

4.    Limitation on the duration of approved “temporary structures,” to a maximum of twelve (12) months, so that they shall not become permanent or long-term structures.

H.    Findings and Decision. A temporary use permit may be approved by the director only after the director first finds that the requested activity complies with applicable standards, and therefore the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the temporary activity would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed activity.

I.    Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, performance guarantees, and revocation in Chapter 17.08 (Administrative Procedures) shall apply following the approval of a temporary use permit application.

1.    Condition of the Site Following Temporary Activity. Each site occupied by a temporary activity shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary activity upon completion or removal of the activity, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this zoning code. A performance security (including a bond or financial deposit) in a form and amount acceptable to the director may be required before initiation of the activity to ensure cleanup after the activity is finished.

2.    Performance Security for Temporary Structures. Before issuance of a temporary use permit the applicant shall provide performance security in a form and amount acceptable to the director to guarantee removal of all temporary structures within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the temporary use permit.

3.    Extensions of Temporary Use Permits Prohibited. The term of a temporary use permit may not be extended. Applicants for activities that would exceed the allowed terms identified in subsection D of this section (Allowed Temporary Activities) shall file for a use permit, rather than a temporary use permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.168, and all other applicable zoning standards.

4.    Required Lapse of Time for Temporary Use Permits. Except for seasonal sales lots, a minimum of thirty (30) days shall pass between the expiration of a temporary use permit and the issuance of a new and similar temporary use permit for the same property, or the actual removal of the materials and structures associated with the former activity, whichever last occurs. (Ord. 19-5 § 3 (Exh. A): prior code § 27.274)

17.136.060 Stream bank stabilization.
The following provisions shall apply to all lots which are contiguous with or directly adjacent to an intermittent or perennial, stream or river as determined by the public works director at the time an application is made for a building permit, subdivision map or other permit for development:

A.    A building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be observed between a building or structure, except for an accessory building less than five hundred (500) square feet in area, and the top of stream, creek or river bank. “Top of the bank” means the highest elevation of land which confines to their channel waters flowing in an intermittent or perennial, stream or river. Where the average depth of the bank is eight feet or greater, the required setback from the toe of the stream bank shall be two times the depth of the bank plus twenty (20) feet unless special provisions for bank stabilization are installed as approved by the public works director. (Prior code § 27.275)

17.136.070 Commercial place of amusement/entertainment and alcoholic beverages—Considerations.
In evaluating a use permit application for billiard parlors, pool halls, video arcades, card rooms, cocktail lounges, taverns, bars, dance halls, nightclubs, or any similar commercial place of amusement, establishment where liquor is served or commercial place of entertainment the planning commission shall take into consideration the following:

A.    Comments from the police department;

B.    Appropriate hours of operation;

C.    Distance of the proposed establishment from public/private schools;

D.    Appropriateness of automobile and/or bicycle parking;

E.    Potential for loitering;

F.    Distance of the proposed establishment from other establishments;

G.    Distance from areas used and zoned for residential use;

H.    Appropriateness of adequate lighting for security purposes;

I.    Potential for serving alcoholic beverages;

J.    Appropriateness of annual review of use permit.

This list does not represent an exclusive listing of those items which may be considered by the planning commission in evaluating a use permit application for a commercial amusement use. (Prior code § 27.276)

17.136.080 Service station requirements.*
A.    The following provisions shall apply to the establishment and operation of service stations permitted with the approval of a use permit:

1.    Service stations shall be designed to maintain the scale, appearance and character of the surrounding area.

2.    The location of service station islands, pumps, underground and aboveground tanks shall meet the requirements of the city fire department and Uniform Fire Code.

3.    Accessory uses of a service station which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the principal use (i.e., a car wash, motor vehicle and trailer rental, sale of food and beverage items, video cassette rental, motor vehicle fleet maintenance, etc.) may be permitted with the approval of a separate use permit by the planning commission.

B.    The following criteria shall be met prior to approval of a service station:

1.    That the site is not closer than one hundred (100) feet to any R district;

2.    That no block would have more than two service station sites;

3.    That all operations and display of merchandise would be kept within an approved structure, except those directly required for the dispensing of gasoline, water and air, and the replenishment of oil;

4.    That the minimum landscaping requirements established in the zoning district in which the use is located have been incorporated into the design of the proposed use;

5.    That the use does not include the sale of staple grocery items nor does it include a mini market, but may include the sale of snack foods, drinks, and convenience foods. (Ord. 93-16 § 1; prior code § 27.277)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 93-16 is included in the code as of April 2013, having previously been left out due to an oversight during the original 1993 codification.

17.136.090 Parking and storage of vehicles.
The parking and storage of vehicles shall be in conformance with the following subsections. Storage of other items is regulated by Section 17.136.030.

A.    Parking. The parking of a vehicle at the same approximate location for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or less.

1.    Parking on a Public Street. It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a public street for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours.

2.    Parking on Private Property.

a.    Parking of a vehicle (including motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and recreational trailers) is not permitted on a vacant lot, except for vehicles necessary for maintenance or construction activities.

b.    Parking of a vehicle on a residential property is permitted, provided that if it is on the front or side setback it is on a driveway and no portion of the vehicle overhangs the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.

B.    Storage. The parking of a vehicle in the same approximate location for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or more.

1.    The storage of any vehicle is prohibited on a public street or within a public right-of-way.

2.    The storage of vehicles is prohibited on all nonresidential property unless the vehicles are within an approved storage or sales facility.

3.    The storage of vehicles is not permitted on vacant lots. Storage is permitted as an accessory use to a residential unit.

4.    Storage on Private Residential Property.

a.    The storage of vehicles or parts of vehicles is prohibited in the required front or side setback except that a registered and mechanically operable “motor vehicle” (defined as a car, truck or motorcycle) may be stored on that portion of a residential driveway which leads directly to the required covered parking space, provided it does not overhang the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.

b.    After October 28, 1995 the storage of vehicles within the side yard or rear yard must be screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. Elsewhere on the property, except as provided for in subsection (B)(4)(a) of this section, a vehicle must be screened from the public right-of-way.

c.    Screening may be provided by vegetation or a fence at least the height of the vehicle, except that the maximum fence height shall be six feet. An eight-foot high fence may be allowed upon approval of a use permit.

C.    Habitation of Vehicles. The use of a vehicle on a temporary or permanent basis for a dwelling or for overnight sleeping.

1.    The use of any vehicle for habitation is prohibited unless the vehicle is within an approved campground or as provided for in subsection (C)(2) of this section.

2.    Habitation of a self-contained recreational vehicle or trailer is permitted upon issuance of a permit from the planning director. The permit shall state the name of the owner of the vehicle, state the number of the occupants of the vehicle, include the signature and address of the property owner of the property where the vehicle will be parked and the dates of the visit. One copy of the permit shall be given to the police department and one copy shall be displayed on the vehicle so that it is visible from the public right-of-way. Only one permit per property shall be in effect at a time and no more than two permits shall be issued to a property owner within a twelve (12) month period.

a.    A permit may authorize the habitation of a self-contained recreational vehicle or recreational trailer on residential property for periods not to exceed fourteen (14) days, provided that the vehicle is parked on the residential driveway and no portion of the vehicle overhangs the public sidewalk or public right-of-way. The vehicle used for habitation shall not be parked adjacent to the main residential unit on the adjacent property unless authorization from the adjacent property owner is provided at the time the permit is requested from the planning director.

b.    A permit may authorize the habitation of a self-contained recreational vehicle or recreational trailer on the public street fronting the parcel on which the permit is requested for periods not to exceed five days, provided that the vehicle does not block access to the residential driveway nor extend into the street frontage of adjacent parcels. No hookups for water or utilities are allowed to a recreational vehicle located on the public street and no furniture associated with the recreational vehicle shall be located outside the vehicle within the public right-of-way.

c.    A permit may be authorized for the parking and habitation of a recreational vehicle or recreational trailer on land upon which the occupant is constructing a residence for a period not to exceed six months. The permit may be extended for one additional six-month period if the construction is not complete.

D.    Repair of Vehicles. Maintenance and repair of vehicles is permitted for up to seven days on the approved residential driveway provided that no portion of the vehicles overhangs the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.

E.    Construction Trailers. The planning director may approve the placement of a temporary mobile office (designed solely for such use) at an approved construction site for a maximum one year period or for the duration of the construction, whichever period is shorter. (Prior code § 27.278)

Chapter 17.140
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, LOTS AND SIGNS
Sections:

17.140.010    Purpose.

17.140.020    Nonconforming uses.

17.140.030    Nonconforming buildings or structures.

17.140.040    Nonconforming lots.

17.140.050    Illegal nonconforming uses or structures as public nuisance.

17.140.060    Signs.

17.140.010 Purpose.
Legally established existing uses, structures, lots and signs which do not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located are nonconforming. Nonconforming uses, structures, lots and signs shall be subject to these specific regulations in addition to general regulations contained in the zoning ordinance in order to permit the continued operation of such uses, structures, lots and signs while providing for their gradual elimination and/or compliance with the policies of the general plan and zoning ordinance. (Prior code § 27.300)

17.140.020 Nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use is a legally established use of land which is not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, or a use which is permitted by use permit but for which no use permit has been obtained, because the use was established prior to the application of the existing district due to rezoning, annexation or change in the regulations of the zoning ordinance. Legally established nonconforming uses shall be governed by the following regulations:

A.    Nonconforming uses may be continued indefinitely, subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.    No nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand its operation or enlarge its floor area.

C.    A legally established residential use which exceeds the density permitted by the zoning district and/or general plan land use designation in which it is located is a nonconforming use, and the density may not be increased, except as may be permitted as a density bonus pursuant to Chapter 17.144. However, buildings or structures on the lot on which such nonconforming residential use is located may be expanded, enlarged or reconstructed upon the approval of a use permit by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.168.

D.    A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or greater intensity. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the lesser intensity than the previous nonconforming use upon the approval of a use permit by the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.168. The planning commission must make the following findings to approve such a use permit:

1.    The proposed nonconforming use is of lesser intensity than the previous nonconforming use (e.g., fewer employees, reduced storage capacity, reduced demand on public facilities, reduced traffic impacts, less energy consumption or fewer hours of operation); and

2.    The proposed nonconforming use will not be detrimental to any existing or potential permitted use in the area in which the nonconforming use is located.

These findings shall be in addition to those required for the approval of use permits contained in Chapter 17.168. If a nonconforming use is replaced by a use of lesser intensity, the occupancy thereafter may not revert to a use of greater intensity. In granting a use permit to allow a nonconforming use to be replaced with another nonconforming use of lesser intensity, the planning commission shall establish an amortization schedule for the nonconforming use, by setting a date after which the nonconforming use must be discontinued or replaced with a conforming use.

E.    No nonconforming use may be resumed, reestablished, reopened or replaced by any other nonconforming use after it has been abandoned except as provided in subsections F through J of this section. Any subsequent use of the land shall be in conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Abandonment shall mean any giving up, closing, surrender, interruption, termination or discontinuance of the nonconforming use for a period of sixty (60) continuous days, regardless of intent to surrender the nonconforming use.

F.    When a nonconforming use which has been operating in conformance with a previously approved use permit is abandoned, the same use which previously existed may be resumed, reestablished, or reopened within a six month time period from the date of abandonment in accordance with the following criteria:

1.    Written notice of the date of reestablishment shall be given to the planning director prior to reestablishment of the use.

2.    A city business license shall be obtained.

3.    All permits/approvals from any agency regulating the nonconforming use shall be obtained.

4.    A fictitious business name shall be filed with Napa County if required by state regulations.

5.    All required information shall be filed with the State Board of Equalization.

6.    If a building permit is requested to remodel the existing building, the use permit remains vested, provided the building permit has been issued, construction consistent with the building permit has commenced, and construction is actively pursued toward completion prior to the six-month time period defining abandonment.

When it has been determined that the use has been resumed, reestablished, or reopened consistent with this criteria, the use is deemed vested.

G.    When a nonconforming use which requires a use permit within the zoning district and which has not been granted a use permit is abandoned the use may not be reestablished except upon approval of a use permit as provided in Chapter 17.168, or submittal of a complete use permit application within the sixty (60) day period specified by subsection E of this section. If the operation of this type of nonconforming use is substantially changed, the new use must either be a permitted use in the district or a use permit must first be approved by the planning commission to allow the change in the operation of the same type of business previously established. Change in the operation of the business shall include, but not be limited to expansion of floor area, substantial modification of the type of business, change in type of merchandise which results in a different type of business, change in hours of operation which results in a different type of business (i.e., restaurant use to nightclub use) or changes to the business which will result in increased traffic, water use, or wastewater generation impacts.

H.    When a nonconforming use which is no longer permitted in the district and which has not been granted a use permit is abandoned the use may not be reestablished except upon approval of a use permit as provided in subsection J of this section. If the operation of a legally established nonconforming use is substantially changed, the new use must either be a permitted use in the district or the planning commission must first review the change in operation to determine that the change in operation does not increase the degree of nonconformity. If the planning commission determines that the change in operation substantially increases the degree of nonconformity the change in use is not authorized. Change in the operation of the business shall include, but not be limited to expansion of floor area, substantial modification of the type of business, change in type of merchandise (one type of business to another type of business), change in hours of operation which results in a different type of business (i.e., restaurant use to nightclub use) or changes to the business which will result in increased traffic, water use, or wastewater generation impacts.

I.    Notwithstanding the provisions in subsections E through H and J of this section the period of time in which a legally established nonconforming use may be reestablished may be extended for one year upon approval of the planning director for uses which have been closed because of seismic retrofit construction authorized by a city building permit.

J.    Notwithstanding the provisions in subsections E through I of this section, a nonconforming use of a building or structure which has been abandoned and the use is no longer permitted in the district may be reestablished after abandonment upon the approval of a use permit by the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.168. The planning commission must make the following findings to approve such a use permit:

1.    The building or structure was specifically designed or modified for a nonconforming use;

2.    The structural alterations necessary to bring the building or structure into conformance with the standards of the zoning ordinance are estimated by the chief building inspector to cost more than fifty (50) percent of the current market value of building or structure; and

3.    The proposed reestablishment of a nonconforming use will not be detrimental to any existing or potential permitted use in the area in which the nonconforming use is located.

These findings shall be in addition to those required for the approval of use permits contained in Chapter 17.168. (Prior code § 27.301)

17.140.030 Nonconforming buildings or structures.
A nonconforming building, structure or other physical feature is a legally established building, structure or other physical feature which does not meet the standards of the zoning district in which it is located. It can also be a building, structure or other physical feature for which a use permit, variance or other similar permit is required but for which no such permit has been obtained because the building, structure or other physical feature was established prior to the application of the existing zoning district due to rezoning, annexation or change in the regulations of the zoning ordinance. Legally established nonconforming buildings, structures and physical features shall be governed by the following regulations:

A.    Nonconforming buildings, structures or other physical features may be continued indefinitely subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.    A nonconforming building, structure or other physical feature shall not be reconstructed, except as provided for in subsection D of this section, expanded, or enlarged unless the new work will be in conformance with the regulations and standards of the zoning district in which it is located and the provisions of the zoning ordinance.

C.    A nonconforming building, structure or physical feature may be remodeled, rehabilitated, or structurally altered if the new work does not increase the degree of nonconformity.

D.    A nonconforming building, structure or physical feature damaged or destroyed by any means except demolition or intentional removal, may be reconstructed to its original condition if the chief building inspector determines that the cost of reconstruction does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value as determined by the county assessor on the last equalized assessment roll at the time of its destruction or damage. Where the chief building inspector determines that the costs of reconstruction exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value as determined by the county assessor on the last equalized assessment roll at the time of its destruction or damage, a nonconforming building, structure or physical feature may be reconstructed to its original or other nonconforming condition only upon the approval of a use permit by the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.168 applied for within one year of damage or destruction. The planning commission may require as a condition of approval that the building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use. The planning commission must make the following findings to approve such a use permit:

The proposed reconstruction of a nonconforming building, structure or physical feature will not be detrimental to any existing or potential permitted use, building or structure in the area in which the nonconforming use is located.

This finding shall be in addition to those required for the approval of use permits contained in Chapter 17.168. (Prior code § 27.302)

17.140.040 Nonconforming lots.
A nonconforming lot is a legally established lot which does not conform to the regulations regarding area, width, frontage or other such standard for the zoning district in which it is located because of rezoning, annexation or change in the regulations of the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance or Subdivision Map Act. Legally created nonconforming lots shall be governed by the following regulations:

A.    A nonconforming lot shall not be changed in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity unless there is a corresponding decrease in the degree of nonconformity of an adjoining lot and no new lot(s) or additional density permitted will result.

B.    Any conforming use or conforming building, structure or other physical feature may be established on any nonconforming lot provided the use, building, structure or other physical feature conforms to the standards and regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and the provisions of this title.

C.    A nonconforming lot to be used for residential purposes shall be subject to the density requirements of the zoning district and general plan designation in which it is located. However, one single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be permitted on any nonconforming lot in any zoning district in which a single-family dwelling is permitted, provided the single-family dwelling and accessory buildings shall conform to the design standards and regulations of the zoning district in which they are located and the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 27.303)

17.140.050 Illegal nonconforming uses or structures as public nuisance.
Any building or structure set up, erected, built or moved and any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Action shall be immediately commenced for abatement, removal and enjoinment in the manner provided by law; other steps shall be taken to apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building or moving any such building or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Prior code § 27.304)

17.140.060 Signs.
The following provisions shall apply to all advertising billboards, identification signs, on-site commercial or industrial advertising signs, public or quasi-public directional signs, shopping center identification signs, shopping center directory signs, temporary real estate signs and temporary portable advertising signs in public parks, schools and playgrounds:

A.    A lawful sign or advertising billboard existing at the time of the passage of this title, although such a sign does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued; provided, however, that nonconforming signs may not be continued for longer than five years after the effective date of this title, or seven years from date of erection, whichever is longer. If any nonconforming sign is abandoned, is destroyed to the extent of more than one-half of the value thereof as determined by the city building inspector, or its use is discontinued for a period of six months or more, such sign shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located.

B.    No lawful sign or advertising billboard existing at the time of the passage of this title shall be enlarged, altered, reconstructed or replaced unless the enlarged, altered, reconstructed sign or replacement sign conforms to all the provisions of this title; provided, however, reasonable repair and maintenance shall be permitted.

C.    The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming signs in districts hereafter changed or established and any time limit for the suspension of a nonconforming sign shall date from the date of the enactment of this title or any amendment of district boundaries which may make the signs nonconforming.

D.    It shall be the duty of the owner of any nonconforming sign and the duty of the owner of any premises upon which a nonconforming sign is located, to remove the same pursuant to the provisions of this title or to bring same into conformance with the provisions of this title. If such owners fail to perform such duty, the city council shall direct the city building inspector to notify such owners in writing, registered mail, postage prepaid, to their last known addresses, to cause such removal or conformance within thirty (30) days after mailing of such notice. The owners shall have the right, upon owner’s request, to a public hearing at any city council meeting following giving of the notice and prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period on the issue of whether or not the owner is obligated hereunder to perform such duty. If such owners fail to perform such duty within the thirty (30) day period, the city council, in addition to other available remedies, may cause the removal of such signs to be done by the city or its contractor and assess the cost and expense of the same against the property on which the sign was located which costs and expenses be a lien upon such property and if not paid, such payment may be enforced against the property by any appropriate action in a court having jurisdiction thereof. (Prior code § 27.305)

Chapter 17.144
AFFORDABLE HOUSING*
Sections:

17.144.010    Purpose.

17.144.020    Definitions.

17.144.030    Applicability.

17.144.040    Project requirements.

17.144.050    Application.

17.144.055    Waiver or reduction of development standards.

17.144.060    Land donation.

17.144.070    Parking.

17.144.080    Priority for water and sewer services.

*    Prior history: Prior code §§ 27.310—27.312 and Ord. 02-6.

17.144.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the development of housing affordable to all segments of the community and to provide for incentives to defray the costs of providing affordable housing for very low, low, and moderate income households in the city of St. Helena. In enacting these provisions, the city expressly intends this chapter to satisfy the requirements of: (A) Government Code Section 65915 and the city’s housing element by specifying how the city shall provide density bonuses and/or incentives or concessions for the construction of certain housing projects affordable to lower income, very low income, senior households, and for condominium and planned development projects, moderate income; and (B) Government Code Section 65589.7 and the city’s housing element by specifying how the city will grant priority for the provision of water and sewer services to developments that include housing units affordable to lower income households. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Concession or incentive” means and includes, but is not limited to, a modification of zoning code requirements such as reductions in lot size, frontage requirements, setbacks, yards, parking, or open space or fencing requirements; height increases; a modification of architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission; waivers, reductions or delay in improvement requirements (e.g., utility undergrounding, sidewalks, right-of-way dedication but not including curb-to-curb street width standards); monetary assistance, reductions or waivers of development fees, or provision of land to the extent that monetary assistance or land is available; approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area in which the housing project will be located.

“Condominium project” is as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code.

“Density bonus,” except as applied to a condominium project or a senior housing development, means a density increase of at least twenty percent (20%) unless a lesser percentage is elected by the developer, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the site under the applicable zoning district and land use element of the general plan. The amount of the density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 17.144.030. For each one percent increase above ten percent (10%) in the percentage of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%). For each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-six percent (36%). All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

“Density bonus,” for a condominium project in which at least ten percent (10%) of total units are reserved for moderate income households, is a density increase of at least five percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the developer, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the site under the applicable zoning district and land use element of the general plan.

“Density bonus,” for a senior housing development, as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code or any successor statutes, or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the California Civil Code or any successor statutes, shall be twenty percent (20%) of the number of senior housing units, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the developer.

“Lower income households” is as defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Moderate income households” is as defined by Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Planned development project” is as defined by subdivision (k) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code.

“Qualifying residents” is as defined in Section 51.3 of the Civil Code.

“Very low income households” is as defined by Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.030 Applicability.
An applicant may request a density bonus and concessions or incentives for a residential or residential mixed-use project of five or more units that satisfy one or more of the following criteria:

A.    At least ten percent (10%) of total units are designated for lower income households;

B.    At least five percent of the total units are designated for very low income households;

C.    A senior citizen housing development as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code;

D.    For a condominium project or planned development project only, at least ten percent (10%) of total units are designated for moderate income households. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.040 Project requirements.
In addition to satisfying one or more of the criteria in Section 17.144.030, the housing project developer requesting a density bonus and/or incentive or concession shall satisfy the following requirements:

A.    The designated units shall be comparable to the nondesignated units within the project. Location of designated units shall be at the city’s discretion.

B.    The developer and/or owner shall enter into an agreement with the city to ensure the continuing affordability of units designated for low and very low income households. Where the city grants a density bonus or concessions or incentives, such agreement shall be for a term of thirty (30) years, or longer should the project financing so require.

C.    The developer and/or owner shall enter into an agreement with the city to ensure that the initial occupant of units in condominium projects and planned development projects directly related to the receipt of the density bonus shall be a person or family of moderate income. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city council shall adopt a resolution establishing the method for determining how the city will recapture its proportionate share of appreciation which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (c) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote home ownership.

D.    Units designated for rent by lower income households shall be affordable at rents that do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of sixty percent (60%) of area median income. Units designated for rent by very low income households shall be affordable at rents that do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of fifty percent (50%) of the area median income.

E.    Units designated for purchase by low income or moderate income households shall be affordable according to limits established by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

F.    The developer and/or property owner shall provide the city a yearly accounting of the total project units occupied and vacant, the total occupied and vacant units designated for low or very low income households, and rents charged. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.050 Application.
A.    To apply for a density bonus and/or incentives or concessions, the applicant may submit a proposal for specific incentives or concessions and may request a meeting with the city. The preliminary proposal shall provide the following information:

1.    Preliminary sketch plan showing the context, location of buildings, and parking;

2.    Number, type, and size of the housing units;

3.    Any request for waiver of development standards;

4.    Information satisfactory to the planning director to enable the city to determine the project cost per unit and whether the waiver or modification of otherwise applicable standards is necessary to: (a) provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code or any successor statute; (b) provide for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in subdivision (c) of Government Code Section 65589.7 or any successor statute; or (c) otherwise make the housing units economically feasible. Such information may include capital costs, equity investment, debt service, projected revenues, operating expenses, and any other information deemed necessary by the planning director.

B.    The city shall, within ninety (90) days of receipt of the preliminary written proposal, notify the developer in writing whether and in what manner the city shall grant a density bonus and incentives or concessions as follows:

Number of Concessions or Incentives

Percentage of Units for Very Low Income

Percentage of Units for Low Income

Percentage of Units for Moderate Income in a Condominium or Planned Development

1

5%

10%

10%

2

10%

20%

20%

3

15%

30%

30%

In addition to the foregoing, any developer who proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of this chapter and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the project shall also be entitled to either an additional density bonus or an additional concession or incentive in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915(h) or any successor statute.

C.    Alternatively, within ninety (90) days, the city council shall preliminarily find that:

1.    The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50025.2 of the Health and Safety Code or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 17.144.040; or

2.    The concession or incentive would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety, or upon the physical environment, or upon real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. For purposes of this paragraph, “specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Such notification shall represent the joint recommendation of city staff charged with implementing this section; provided, however, that the city council, in acting on the project, may modify such recommendation.

D.    In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915(f) or any successor statute, a developer may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than the maximum specified in this chapter.

E.    In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915(f)(5) or any successor statute, the granting of a density bonus pursuant to this chapter shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

F.    If the developer does not submit a written preliminary proposal, the developer shall submit a written proposal for specific incentive along with information described in subsection (A)(4) of this section (along with other materials required for application submittal) at the time a formal application is submitted. The decision making body shall either grant the density bonus and at least one additional concession/incentive requested by the developer or make one of the findings, based on substantial evidence, described in subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section.

G.    The developer shall pay any fee(s), as established by resolution of the city council to implement this section, including but not limited to fees to process the request for a density bonus and/or other concessions or incentives; prepare contracts and other documents; and monitor contracts and documents for compliance. Fees shall be paid prior to building permit issuance unless otherwise established by resolution.

H.    Affordable units under this section shall be constructed at the same time as the market-rate units. The right to a density bonus or concession under this chapter shall not be transferred to another development. Where a developer proposes to simultaneously develop two or more parcels in the city, nothing in this section shall prohibit the council from using a density bonus and/or concession/incentive granted for one of the parcels on another of the multiple parcels. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.055 Waiver or reduction of development standards.
In addition to any density bonus and/or concessions or incentives granted pursuant to this chapter, a developer may also request that the city waive or reduce any development standard that has the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of this chapter at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915(e) or any successor statute. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part))

17.144.060 Land donation.
A.    When an applicant voluntarily offers to donate land which is of sufficient developable acreage and with appropriate zoning classification to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in accordance with this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent (15%) increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. For each one percent increase above the minimum land donation described in subsection B of this section, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%).

B.    The voluntary donation of land shall comply with the following criteria:

1.    The land is transferred no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

2.    The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the number of residential units of the proposed development. Housing units designated for very low income households pursuant to Chapter 17.146 shall not be included when determining compliance with this section.

3.    The transferred land is at least one acre or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

4.    The transferred land is within the boundary of the proposed development or, with the approval of the city council, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

C.    The applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval wishing to donate land pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(h) shall include in its application for development the following information:

1.    The size of the parcel;

2.    The amount of developable acreage;

3.    A preliminary plan for the development of at least forty (40) units affordable to very low income households on the developable acreage;

4.    A description of the public facilities and infrastructure that would serve the units;

5.    The name of the public or private entity to which the land will be donated.

D.    The city council shall approve, modify or disapprove the application to donate land in accordance with the requirements of this section and Government Code Section 65915(h).

E.    Unless the construction of at least forty (40) units affordable to very low income households on the donated land is the subject of a separate development application, the units shall be considered a part of the application for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development for purposes of review under the California Environmental Quality Act and other state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.070 Parking.
A.    This section implements the provisions of Government Code Section 65915(p).

B.    If a development is constructed with the vehicular parking ratios described in Government Code Section 65915(p)(1), and the parking ratios are less than otherwise required by the city, the applicant for development shall record a covenant against the property disclosing the difference between the parking ratios that have been used for the development and the city’s requirements. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part): Ord. 05-4 § 1 (part))

17.144.080 Priority for water and sewer services.
In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65589.7 or any successor statute, the city shall grant priority for the provision of water and sewer services to developments that include housing units affordable to lower income households in accordance with a written policy adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 15-1 § 3 (Exh. 1) (part))

Chapter 17.146
HOUSING TRUST FUND, HOUSING IMPACT FEE AND INCLUSIONARY/IN-LIEU FEE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

17.146.010    Purpose.

17.146.020    Definitions.

17.146.030    Housing trust fund.

17.146.040    Nonresidential development project housing impact fee.

17.146.050    Residential development project—Inclusionary/in-lieu fee requirements.

17.146.060    Enforcement provisions.

17.146.070    Bi-annual review.

17.146.080    Adjustment—Appeal.

17.146.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a housing trust fund, a housing impact fee on developers of nonresidential development projects in the city of St. Helena, and an inclusionary requirement or an in-lieu fee on developers of residential development projects to mitigate the impacts caused by these development projects on the additional demand for more affordable housing and rising land prices for limited supply of available residential land. The fees will be used to defray the costs of providing affordable housing for very low, low, and moderate income households in the city of St. Helena. The fees and inclusionary requirements required by this chapter do not replace other regulatory, development and processing fees or exactions; funding required pursuant to a development agreement or reimbursement agreement; assessments charged pursuant to special assessments or benefit assessment district proceedings, etc., unless so specified. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Addition” means an extension or increase in floor area of an existing building.

“Affordable housing” means housing for which “affordable rent” or an “affordable sales price” is required to be charged.

“Affordable rent” means monthly rent, including tenant-paid utilities allowances as determined by the housing director and all fees for housing services, that do not exceed one-twelfth of thirty percent (30%) of the maximum annual income for a household of the applicable income level.

In the case where the applicant is requesting a density bonus under California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 or where the applicant is requesting direct financial assistance requiring a different rent, “affordable rent” for lower-income households means monthly rents that do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of sixty percent (60%) of area median income. Affordable rent shall be based on presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio unit, two persons in a one-bedroom unit, three persons in a two-bedroom unit, and one additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter.

“Affordable sales price” means the maximum purchase price that will be affordable to the specified target income household. A maximum purchase price shall be considered affordable only if each monthly owner-occupied housing payment is equal to or less than one-twelfth of thirty percent (30%) of annual income for the specified target income household. In setting the affordable sales price, the housing director shall use realistic estimations regarding down payment, mortgage interest rate and term, so that targeted income families can reasonably qualify. Affordable sales price shall be based upon presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio unit, two persons in a one-bedroom unit, three persons in a two-bedroom unit, and one additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter.

“Affordable units” means those dwelling units which are required to be rented at affordable rents or purchased at an affordable sales price to specified households as described in Section 17.146.050.

“Annual household income” means the combined gross income for all adult persons living in a dwelling unit as calculated for the purpose of the Section 8 program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor.

“Building permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Title 15, Chapter 15.04 of the St. Helena Municipal Code.

“Chief building official” means the chief building official of the city of St. Helena, or the designee of such individual.

“Concession” or “incentive” shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Government Code Section 65915.

“Construction costs” means the estimated cost per square foot of construction, as established by the building department of the city of St. Helena for use in the setting of regulatory fees and building permits, multiplied by the total square footage, minus the garage floor area, to be constructed.

“Conversion” means conversion of an existing residential building to a nonresidential use, excluding home occupations as defined in Section 17.116.040, or three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or more of a nonresidential building from one use category to another as set forth in Table 1 (office, commercial/retail, winery/industrial, hotel).

“Developer” means every person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, constructing, placing, or creating new nonresidential or residential development directly or through the services of any employee, agent, independent contractor or otherwise.

“Discretionary permit” means any permit or license issued by the city of St. Helena for a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation wherein the city decides to either approve or disapprove a particular activity in accordance with applicable laws, including but not limited to use permits, and the approval or modification of tentative, or tentative parcel maps pursuant to Title 16 of the St. Helena Municipal Code.

“Dwelling unit” means a building or portion of a building including one or more rooms which is designed or used as a residence for one family or housekeeping unit with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and dining.

“Eligible household” means any household or applicant which the housing director has determined meets the eligibility standards for affordable housing pursuant to the Section 8 program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor.

“Employee” means each person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business.

“Gross square feet floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings. In cases where no walls exist, the gross horizontal floor area shall be that area covered by the roof excluding two feet on each side of the structure for a standard roof projection. Outside areas used for sales and/or display may also be considered (e.g., plant nurseries, building materials, auto sales, wine production, etc.) when the planning director determines that the use of the outside area significantly contributes to the employee density of the building. For purposes of the requirements of Section 17.146.050, the square footage of any tank pad or wine crush pad or similar nonwalled agriculture related structure shall be included in the gross square feet of a nonresidential development project. A building or structure consisting of nonusable floor space, e.g., a garage, carport or storage shed shall not be deemed part of the gross floor area, unless the planning director feels it significantly contributes to the employee density of the building. Unfinished attics, crawlspaces, and basements shall not be assessed until converted and finished as usable floor space.

“Housing board” means the housing trust fund board established pursuant to Section 17.146.030.

“Housing director” means the planning director of the city of St. Helena or the designee of such individual.

“Housing fund” means the city of St. Helena affordable housing trust fund established pursuant to Section 17.146.030.

“Housing impact fee” means the fee established pursuant to Section 17.146.040 for nonresidential development projects.

“Housing in-lieu fee” means the fee established pursuant to Section 17.146.050 for residential development projects.

“Low-income households” are those households with incomes of fifty-one percent (51%) to eighty percent (80%) of median income.

“Market rate units” means dwelling units in a residential project, which are not affordable units.

“Median income” means the median income, adjusted for family size, applicable to Napa County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Moderate-income households” are those households with incomes of eighty-one percent (81%) to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of median income.

“Monthly owner-occupied housing payment” shall be that sum equal to the principal, interest, property taxes, homeowner’s insurance and homeowner’s association dues paid on an annual basis divided by twelve (12).

“Nonresidential development project” means any development or use for which a discretionary permit or building permit is required, other than those developments or uses involving solely the construction or remodeling of dwelling units. Nonresidential development projects shall include conversion of an existing building from a residential to a nonresidential use, or three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or more of a nonresidential building from one use category to another. Change of use shall be determined by reference to Table 1 of Section 17.146.040.

“Planning director” means the director of the city of St. Helena planning department or the designee of such individual.

“Residential development project” means a project for the construction or remodeling of any dwelling unit located within the boundaries of the city for which a building permit or discretionary permit is issued by the city, provided that the development project consists of: (1) the construction of any dwelling unit, except for legally constructed second units as defined in municipal code Chapter 17.116; (2) the remodeling of any dwelling unit unless otherwise excepted in Section 17.146.050(A)(7); (3) projects that are not otherwise excepted under Section 17.146.050(A); or (4) the subdivision of land which is planned, designed, or used for the following land use categories:

1.    Single-Family Residential. This category consists of single-family dwellings, including a mobilehome constructed to meet 1976 HUD standards when placed on a permanent foundation, which are designed or used exclusively as residences, including only one dwelling unit.

2.    Multifamily Residential. This category consists of multiple-family dwellings which are designed or used exclusively as residences, including two or more dwelling units.

“Very low-income households” are those households with incomes of up to fifty percent (50%) of median income. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.030 Housing trust fund.
A.    Housing Trust Fund Established. There is established the city of St. Helena affordable housing trust fund (the “housing fund”). Separate accounts within such housing fund may be created from time to time to avoid commingling as required by law or as deemed appropriate to further the purposes of the housing fund.

B.    Administration of Fund. The housing fund shall be administered by the housing director who shall have the authority to govern the housing fund consistent with this chapter, and to prescribe procedures for such purpose, subject to approval by the council.

C.    Housing Board. A housing trust fund board (the “housing board”) is established. The composition, size, term, decision-making authority and other organizational features of the housing board shall be as determined by resolution of the city council. To the extent permitted by law and determined by resolutions of the city council and Napa County board of supervisors, the housing board shall be an advisory joint city/county housing board with final funding decisions made by the appropriate legislative body on expenditure of monies from their respective housing funds, unless otherwise provided in an agreement between the city and the county. The housing board shall develop a housing assistance plan program and financing strategy every two years, subject to approval by the council, to further define and prioritize the uses of the monies in the housing fund, provided that failure to prepare such strategy does not excuse compliance with this chapter.

D.    Purposes and Use of Funds.

1.    Monies deposited in the housing fund along with any interest earnings on such monies shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to households of moderate, low and very low income households, including, but not limited to acquisition of property and property rights; cost of construction including costs associated with planning, administration, and design, as well as actual building or installation, as well as any other costs associated with the construction or financing of affordable housing; reimbursement to the city for such costs if funds were advanced by the city from other sources; and reimbursement of developers or property owners who have been required or permitted to install facilities which are beyond that which can be attributed to a specific development. To the maximum extent possible, all monies should be used to provide for additional affordable housing and services. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative expenses not reimbursed through processing fees, including reasonable consultant and legal expenses related to the establishment and/or administration of the housing fund and reasonable expenses for administering the process of calculating, collecting, and accounting for inclusionary fees and any deferred city fees authorized by this section. No portion of the housing fund may be diverted to other purposes by way of loan or otherwise.

2.    Monies in the housing fund shall be used in accordance with the priorities identified by the council approved housing assistance plan program and financing strategy to construct, acquire, rehabilitate or subsidize very low, low and moderate income housing and/or to assist other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals in the construction, rehabilitation, reimbursement of city advanced funds, reimbursement of developer supplied infrastructure capacity, location or subsidy of very low, low and moderate income housing. To the extent possible, as determined by the council, monies shall be targeted to benefit households identified as a need in the housing element of the general plan. Monies in the housing fund may be disbursed, hypothecated, collateralized or otherwise employed for these purposes from time to time as the housing director and city council determine is appropriate to accomplish the purposes of the housing fund. These uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, pre-home ownership coinvestment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases, or other public/private partnership arrangements. The housing fund monies may be extended for the benefit of rental or owner-occupied housing or housing services.

3.    Expenditures by the housing director from the housing fund shall be controlled, authorized and paid in accordance with general city budgetary policies. Execution of contracts related to the use or administration of housing fund monies shall be in accordance with standard council policy.

E.    Location of Housing Units and Housing Services to be Assisted With Housing Fund Monies. With respect to monies generated by the housing impact fee established by Section 17.146.050, these criteria shall also consider a reasonable geographical linkage between the nonresidential development projects subject to such fee and the housing assistance provided with the housing fund monies collected in connection with such projects, such that those receiving the housing assistance could reasonably commute to the commercial locations. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.040 Nonresidential development project housing impact fee.
A.    Application. A housing impact fee is imposed on all developers of nonresidential development projects, including conversions as set forth in Section 17.146.020. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this fee shall not apply to developers of nonresidential projects that fall within one or more of the following categories:

1.    Projects that are the subject of development agreements currently in effect with the city, approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter where such agreements expressly preclude the city from requiring compliance with this type of housing fee program;

2.    The nonresidential uses are set forth either in a building permit application accepted as complete by the city prior to the adoption of Resolution 2003-65 on May 27, 2003, or in a use permit or similar discretionary approval approved prior to the adoption of Resolution 2003-65 on May 27, 2003. However, any extension or modification of such approval or permit after such date shall not be exempt;

3.    That portion of a project located on property owned by the state of California, the United States of America or any of its agencies used exclusively for governmental or educational purposes;

4.    A project to the extent it has received a vested right to proceed without payment of housing impact fees pursuant to state law;

5.    Projects operated by nonprofit organizations which provide food storage, meal service and/or temporary shelter to the homeless;

6.    Projects for which no nexus can be established;

7.    Projects for uses labeled “exempt” in Table 2 of this section; or

8.    Any building which is damaged or destroyed by fire or natural catastrophes so long as the square footage of the building remains the same.

B.    Payment of Fee. Unless otherwise preempted by law, the housing impact fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. For good cause shown, the city council may allow for the fee to be paid at the time of final inspection/certificate of occupancy.

C.    Calculation of Housing Impact Fee.

1.    The housing impact fee for nonresidential development projects shall be charged on a per square foot basis for all new gross floor area, including all additions where floor area is increased, and for conversions as defined within this chapter, with a specific per square foot amount set for each nonresidential use type identified in Table 1. The amount and calculation for each such fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Gross floor area is determined by calculating the combined area for all floors in accordance with the definition of “gross square feet floor area” contained in Section 17.146.020.

2.    In calculating the fee, the chief building official shall use those fees in Table 1 at the time of the issuance of the building permit or if no building permit is required, at the time of issuance of a use permit or other discretionary permit. In the case of large, mixed-use development projects involving the simultaneous construction of different structures and/or different uses, the categories in Table 1 may be used to create a mixed fee to be collected for all uses in the project. In that case, the fee shall be designed to approximate the revenue which would have been collected had the appropriate type of use category in Table 1 been applied to each individual portion of the project.

3.    Every person converting an existing residential building to a nonresidential use or three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or more of an existing building from one use category to another use category (Table 1) shall pay a fee equal to the difference between the fees calculated for the existing and new uses. No fee shall be assessed on conversion to another use within the same category, unless such conversion includes an increase in the gross floor area. No person shall be entitled to a refund on conversions from a higher rate use category to a lower rate use category.

4.    The type of use subject to the housing impact fee will be determined in the following situations based on a case-by-case calculation of employee density:

a.    In the case of uses listed as “special fee” in Table 1,

b.    In the case of a use which does not fall into one of the uses listed in Table 1 and the housing director determines that: (i) the building size is an inappropriate indicator of employee density, or (ii) insufficient generalized information is available to permit a determination that the use falls within one of the use categories listed in Table 1. In the case of uses involving one or fewer employees, such uses shall be exempt from the fee requirement.

5.    Upon the remodeling of a nonresidential building to add additional square footage that does not involve a conversion of use, the appropriate housing impact fee shall be paid only on the additional square footage.

6.    The housing director’s determination of employee density pursuant to subsection (C)(3) shall be based on: data concerning anticipated employee density for the project submitted by the applicant; employment surveys or other research on similar uses submitted by the applicant or independently researched by the housing director; or any other data or information the housing director determines relevant. Any application for a nonresidential development project where a special fee determination is requested shall be accompanied by information sufficient to enable the housing director to make a determination of employee density pursuant to this subsection.

Table 1: Nonresidential Land Use Fee Categories.

Office    

Commercial/Retail    

Hotel/Motel    

Winery/Industrial    

Special Fee    Determined on a case-by-case basis

Exempt    No fees

Commercial/Retail

Antique store

Appliance store (inc. repair)

Art supply store or gallery

Auto sales

Auto supply store

Auto, truck, and equipment leasing and rental

Bakery (no seating)

Barber shop/beauty shop

Bicycle store

Boat sales

Bookstore

Catalogue office/retail center

Clothing store

Computer store

Confectionery shop

Contractor’s showroom

Delicatessen

Department store

Drinking establishments

Dry cleaners, laundromat

Eating establishments

Electronics store

Farmers’ market

Farm supply store

Feed store

Florist

Foodstore (no seating)

Frame shop

Furniture store

Gunsmith

Hardware store (inc. saw, knife, tool sharpening)

Health club

Hobby, toy, and game store

Home furnishing store

Home health care equipment

Ice cream, frozen yogurt shops

Interior decorating shop

Jewelry store

Liquor store

Locksmith

Luggage store

Lumber and other building materials store

Massage salon

Music store

Nail salon

Newsstand

Nursery, lawn, garden supplies

Paint and wallpaper store

Party supply store

Pawnshops

Pet store

Pharmacy and drug store

Photographic supply store (inc. commercial art and photography services)

Pool supply and sales

Postal services

Printing and copy services

Saddle and equestrian sales

Service station

Sewing, needlework, fabric store

Shoe store, repair

Sporting goods store

Spa

Stamp and coin store

Stationary store

Tailor and dressmaker

Tanning salon

Tattoo, piercing salon

Tobacconist

Trophy shop

Used merchandise store

Variety store

Video rental store

Watch and clock shop

Welding supply store

Wine shop (inc. wine tasting stores and winery visitor tasting rooms)

Yoga studio

Hotel/Motel

Bed and breakfast

Hotels

Motels

Office

Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping office

Advertising agencies

Architectural office

Bank, savings and loan institutions, credit unions

Chamber of commerce office

Computer and data processing services

Contractor’s offices (excluding storage yards)

Dental offices

Engineering and surveying office

Graphic design services

Insurance office

Legal services

Management, consulting, and public relations services

Media representatives

Medical office

Mortgage company

Newspaper office

Optician

Personnel services

Real estate

Research and development labs

Secretarial, mail, message, and postal services

Security services

Stockbrokers

Taxidermist

Telephone center

Title company

Travel agency

Veterinary office

Winery/Industrial

Ambulance facilities

Animal boarding facility, kennels

Auto repair, body work

Breweries

Carpentry, cabinet, and sign shops

Car wash

Cleaning and janitorial services

Commercial laundries

Contractor’s yards

Dance studio

Landscape services

Machine, welding, sheet metal, electric motor, pump, and heavy equipment repair shop

Manufacturing and production facilities

Mortuary and funeral home

Music recording studio

Newspaper distribution facility (no retail sales)

Photography studio

Recycling centers

Small wineries (not including tasting rooms)

Towing services

Truck, bus, taxi, van and limousine terminals and service centers, including truck, trailer, and recreational vehicle rental and storage

Veterinary services (animal boarding)

Well drilling shops

Wineries (not including tasting rooms or gift shops)

Mini-storage facilities

Wine storage facilities

Warehouse and wholesale businesses (excluding retail sales)

Special Fee

Childcare facilities serving seven or more children

Electric and gas utilities

Nursing homes

Private parking facilities when not required to serve an approved use

Private for-profit elementary or secondary schools, college/universities

Residential care facilities

Social halls (privately owned)

Telecommunication facilities

Theatres (movie and legitimate)

Exempt

Childcare facilities serving six or fewer children

Churches

Nonprofit schools

Vineyards

Public elementary or secondary schools, college/ universities

Public library, art galleries, museums, and other nonrecreational public facilities

Public parking lot

Public utility yard

D.    Alternative to Payment of Housing Impact Fee. As an alternative to payment of the housing impact fee, a developer of a nonresidential development project may submit a request to mitigate the impacts of such development through the construction of residential units, the dedication of land, or mixed use or other resources. Such requests may be approved by the city council, if the city council determines that such alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than payment of the housing impact fee.

E.    Processing Requirements.

1.    Each discretionary permit for a project subject to this section shall contain an express condition requiring compliance with this section. Notwithstanding this subsection, failure to include such condition does not excuse compliance with this chapter.

2.    No application for building permits or discretionary permits for any project subject to this section shall be deemed complete unless the application contains: (a) a statement of the number of gross square feet in a nonresidential development project to be constructed, added, or placed that are subject to the requirements of this section, together with documentation sufficient to support the application; (b) the intended use or uses for the nonresidential development project by gross square feet; and (c) a statement of any exemptions applicable to the project.

3.    The housing director may require similar information for completeness of other city permits or licenses as necessary or convenient to implement this section. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.050 Residential development project—Inclusionary/in-lieu fee requirements.
A.    Inclusionary Requirement. At least twenty percent (20%) of all new dwelling units in a residential development project shall be affordable units, which shall be constructed and completed not later than the related market rate units. For fractions of affordable units, including fractions resulting from construction of less than five dwelling units, the developer may elect, at his or her option, to construct the next higher whole number of affordable units, perform an alternative equivalent action which has received the approval of the city council pursuant to subsection B, or pay the housing in-lieu fee specified in subsection E for such fraction. Notwithstanding the above, this section shall not apply to projects which fall into one or more of the following categories:

1.    The construction of a single dwelling unit which is the whole of a residential development project and which is built, owned, and after completion, occupied for two years by a moderate-income household verified by the housing director and meets the requirements established by subsection M. For purposes of this exemption, a dwelling unit shall be deemed “built” by its owner if it is built by or for a permit holder who intends to reside in the dwelling unit subject to subsection M;

2.    The building permit application for a residential development project was accepted as complete by the city prior to the adoption of Resolution 2003-65 on May 27, 2003, or in a use permit or similar discretionary approval approved prior to the adoption of Resolution 2003-65 on May 27, 2003. However, any extension or modification of such approval or permit after such date shall not be exempt;

3.    A residential development project to the extent it has received a vested right to proceed without payment of housing impact fees pursuant to state law;

4.    Building permits for residential development projects if compliance with this section for such project has already been satisfied including, but not limited to, building permits on newly created lots where the subdivider has built affordable units or otherwise satisfied this section;

5.    Replacement or rehabilitation of any dwelling unit which is damaged or destroyed so long as the square footage and use of the building remains the same. Upon the remodeling or rebuilding of a residential dwelling to add additional square footage, the housing impact fee shall be paid on the additional square footage (except for a one-time exclusion of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet per residence);

6.    The whole of a residential construction project that contains four or fewer units, is built at the maximum density allowed under the zoning ordinance, and has a total floor area of two thousand (2,000) square feet or less; or

7.    The one-time remodeling of any dwelling unit for which the gross square floor area of the structure is increased by eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or less, provided that the residence was not exempt pursuant to subsection (A)(6) within the three years prior to date of building permit application for remodeling.

B.    Alternative Equivalent Proposal.

1.    A developer of any residential project may propose to meet the requirements of subsection A with an alternative equivalent action, subject to the review and approval of the city council. Proposals for alternative equivalent actions may include, but are not limited to, dedication of vacant land, the construction of affordable units on another site, or acquisition and enforcement of required rental/sales price restrictions on existing standard dwelling units consistent with this section. Any proposal shall show how the alternative action will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than compliance with the express requirements of subsection A or payment of the appropriate in-lieu housing fee.

2.    Alternative equivalent action proposals for single-family and multifamily residential developments shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council, and may be approved at the city council’s sole discretion, if the city council determines that such alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than compliance with the express requirements of subsection A.

C.    In-Lieu Housing Fee. A developer of four or fewer residential dwelling units which are the whole of a residential development project may meet the requirements of subsection A through payment of an in-lieu fee.

A developer of any other residential project may propose to meet the requirements of subsection A through payment of an in-lieu fee by showing good cause that it is not feasible to construct the required units. A written request shall be submitted with the developer’s application for a discretionary approval or building permit, whichever comes first. The request shall include: a statement identifying all overriding conditions that prevent the developer from meeting the requirement to construct the affordable units; sufficient independent data, including appropriate financial information, to support the developer’s claim that it is not feasible to construct the required affordable units; and a detailed analysis of why the concessions and incentives identified in subsection F cannot mitigate the conditions that are preventing the developer from constructing the affordable units. The housing director shall review all such requests and prepare a recommendation for the city council. Such requests shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council, and may be approved if the council determines that there are overriding conditions which prevent the developer of a multifamily residential project from meeting the requirement to construct affordable units, and that payment of the in-lieu fee will further affordable housing opportunities to an equal or greater extent.

D.    Time of Payment of In-Lieu Fee. Unless otherwise preempted by law, the in-lieu fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. For good cause shown, the city council may allow for the fee to be paid at the time of final inspection/certificate of occupancy.

E.    Calculation of Housing In-Lieu Fee. The housing in-lieu fee shall be charged on a percentage basis of the projected construction costs of market rate dwelling units. The amount and calculation of the housing in-lieu fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Construction costs of market rate dwelling units is determined in accordance with the definition in Section 17.146.020. Construction costs shall be separately calculated for each dwelling unit in attached single-family residential and rental residential development projects, and the appropriate fee paid for each unit within the residential project. The housing in-lieu fee required by this section may be satisfied either by cash payment or, upon the recommendation of the housing director and approval of the city council, by an alternative which will provide the city with a value equal to or greater than the amount of the required in-lieu fee.

F.    Affordable Housing Concessions or Incentives.

1.    For residential development projects which meet the requirements specified in subsection A through the actual construction of affordable units, the city shall follow the procedures described below and provide the described concessions and/or those incentives identified in California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918:

a.    A developer may submit a written preliminary development proposal prior to the submittal of any formal application for a general plan amendment, rezoning, use permit, tentative subdivision or parcel map or other permit or entitlement. The proposal should describe and specify the number, type, location and size of the housing development, and should identify any requests for density bonus, additional incentives, concessions, waivers, or modification of development or zoning standards that will be necessary to make construction feasible for the entire development, including the affordable units. The city council shall review the preliminary development proposal within sixty (60) days at a regular council meeting and shall identify issues of potential concern, offer direction regarding the proposed development, and make any requests for additional affordable housing incentives, concessions or waivers or modification of development or zoning standards. Such preliminary review shall not bind the city council, but rather shall be subject to the discretion of the city council to modify its preliminary recommendations based upon a full review of all pertinent project information, including any environmental impact analysis, presented at the public hearing on the application.

b.    Applications that include the construction of affordable units shall be given priority by all city departments before other residential land use applications regardless of the original submittal date. Applications including affordable rental units shall be given priority before applications including owner-occupied units.

c.    All city-required fees on affordable units shall be deferred for payment until the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.

2.    The city council may consider, on a case-by-case basis, at its sole discretion, providing the following additional concessions or incentives identified in Government Code Section 65915 which are consistent with state law and the housing element of the city of St. Helena general plan for projects which meet or exceed the requirements of Chapter 17.144.

a.    An additional density bonus or other incentives of equal financial value subject to the city council’s review and approval.

b.    Waiver or modification of city standards that have a direct impact on reducing total project costs while being consistent with required building and safety code standards. The developer shall be responsible for documenting that the waiver or modification is necessary for the feasibility of the residential development project and is consistent with required building and safety code standards.

c.    Direct financial assistance in the form of a loan or grant using trust fund or other appropriate available funds subject to the recommendation of the housing director.

d.    Defer payment of city fees on market rate units until the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the unit.

3.    The city council may consider, on a case-by-case basis, at its sole discretion, providing additional concessions or incentives consistent with state law and the housing element of the city of St. Helena general plan for residential development projects which provide at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total dwelling units as affordable units or meet the maximum density allowed under the zoning ordinance.

G.    Requirements for Rental Affordable Units.

1.    If under subsection A, the developer is required to build three or fewer units of affordable rental housing, the following requirements apply:

a.    If the developer is required to build only one affordable unit, that unit shall be affordable for a very low-income household.

b.    If the developer is required to build two affordable units, one unit shall be affordable for a very low-income household and one unit shall be affordable for a low-income household.

c.    If the developer is required to build three affordable units, one unit shall be affordable for a very low-income household, one unit shall be affordable for a low-income household, and one unit shall be affordable for a moderate-income household.

d.    If the city’s fair share housing goals, as set by the housing element of the general plan, have been met for the lowest income category, any required units shall be affordable in the next higher income category in which there is a fair share requirement.

2.    If under subsection A, the developer is required to build four or more units of affordable housing, the number of affordable units which are required to be constructed in very low, low or moderate units shall be determined by the ratio of units needed in each of those categories in order to satisfy the city’s fair share housing goals. Where the number of required affordable units in each category is a fractional number, the fractional units shall be carried to the category in which there is the greatest number of units needed. For instance, the city currently needs thirty-one (31) very low (thirty-six percent (36%)), twenty (20) low (twenty-three percent (23%)), and thirty-six (36) moderate (forty-one percent (41%)) units to satisfy its fair share requirements. Therefore, a project that requires nine affordable units would be required to build three very low units, two low units and four moderate units.

3.    With respect to any particular rental residential project, the city council may, upon the recommendation of the housing director, forgive all or a portion of the affordability requirement set forth in subsection A of this section upon a showing by the applicant that imposition of such requirement on the residential project will cause undue hardship and that such residential project will contribute significantly to affordable housing opportunities in the city.

H.    Requirements for Owner-Occupied Affordable Units.

1.    One-half of the affordable units, which are required to be constructed in connection with the construction of market rate units, intended for owner-occupancy shall be available at affordable sales prices to households whose annual household income does not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of median income. If one-half of the affordable units required are available at affordable sales prices to households whose annual household income does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of median income, the developer shall be entitled to an additional density bonus of five percent for the proposed development.

2.    As an alternative to receiving an additional density bonus of five percent, a developer may submit a request for another incentive of a financial value equal to the density bonus. Such requests shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council and shall be approved, at the city council’s sole discretion, if the city council determines that such alternative incentive will further affordable housing opportunities.

3.    The remaining one-half of the required affordable units shall be available at affordable sales prices to moderate-income household. Where the number of required affordable units is an odd number, the number of units affordable to moderate-income households may be one greater than the number affordable at or below one hundred percent (100%) of median income.

I.    Basic Requirements for Owner-Occupied and Rental Affordable Units. Affordable units shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to market rate units in the same residential project. Subject to the approval of the planning commission, square footage of affordable units and interior features in affordable units need not be the same as or equivalent to those in market rate units in the same residential project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the residential project, or, subject to the approval of the planning commission, may be clustered within the residential project when this furthers affordable housing opportunities.

J.    Continued Affordability.

1.    If the affordable units are owner-occupied, prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy or approval of the final inspection for affordable units, regulatory agreements and resale restrictions, deeds of trust and/or other documents, all of which must be acceptable to the housing director and city attorney and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, shall be recorded against parcels having such affordable units and shall be effective for a minimum of thirty (30) years.

2.    Resale restrictions shall be recorded upon each resale of an affordable unit, and the effective period shall be an additional thirty (30) years from the date of resale.

3.    Income eligibility of the owners and title in the affordable unit may change over time due to circumstances including death. Upon the death of one of the owners, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the income-eligibility of the household. Upon the death of a sole owner or all owners and inheritance of the affordable unit by a nonincome-eligible child or stepchild of one or more owners, there will be a one year compassion period between the time when the estate is settled and the time when the property must be sold to an income-eligible household. Inheritance of an affordable unit by any other person whose household is not income-eligible shall require resale of the unit to an income-eligible household as soon as is feasible, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days.

4.    If the affordable units are renter occupied, prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy or approval of the final inspection for affordable units, regulatory agreements and resale restrictions, deeds of trust and/or other documents, all of which must be acceptable to the housing director and city attorney and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, shall be recorded against parcels having such affordable units and shall be effective in perpetuity.

5.    Notwithstanding any other provision in this section:

a.    The maximum sales price permitted on resale of an affordable unit intended for owner-occupancy shall not exceed the seller’s purchase price, adjusted for the percentage increase in median income since the seller’s purchase, plus the market value of substantial structural or permanent fixed improvements to the property as determined by an independent appraisal, plus the cost of reasonable seller’s broker fee as determined by the housing director. For purposes of this subsection, median income shall be calculated based upon the presumed occupancy levels used to determine affordable sales price.

b.    The resale restrictions shall provide that in the event of the sale of an affordable unit intended for owner-occupancy, the city shall have the right to purchase or assign its right to purchase such affordable unit at the maximum price which could be charged to an eligible household. In its sole discretion, the city shall also have the right to postpone its right to purchase without waiving that right.

6.    No household shall be permitted to occupy an affordable unit, or purchase an affordable unit for owner-occupancy, unless the city or its designee has approved the household’s eligibility, or has failed to make a determination of eligibility within the time or other limits provided by a regulatory agreement or resale restrictions. If the city or its designee maintains a list of eligible households, households selected to occupy affordable units shall be selected first from that list to the extent provided in the regulatory agreement or resale restrictions.

K.    Annual Monitoring and Transfer Fees.

1.    For each rental affordable unit provided hereunder, the current owner may be required to pay an annual monitoring fee for the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the regulatory agreement(s) required hereunder.

2.    For each owner-occupied affordable unit provided under this section, the current owner may be required to pay a transfer fee for any change of ownership during the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the resale restrictions required by subsection J.

L.    Discretionary Permit Requirements. Every discretionary permit for a residential development project approved after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this chapter. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map. Notwithstanding this subsection, failure to include such condition or note does not excuse compliance with this chapter.

M.    Requirements for Certificate of Occupancy/Final Inspection.

1.    No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for any new dwelling unit in a residential development project until the developer has satisfactorily completed the requirements hereunder, i.e., on-site construction of affordable units, alternative equivalent action(s) or payment of the housing in-lieu fee.

2.    No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for a dwelling unit described in subsection (A)(1) of this section until the builder or owner has made a showing acceptable to the housing director that such an exemption is appropriate. The housing director shall develop and implement regulations designed to ensure that such initially exempt dwelling units remain in compliance with the terms of the exemption throughout the first two years of occupancy. A builder or owner of a dwelling unit found to be out of compliance at any time during such two-year period shall be required to pay one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the then current in-lieu fee for that dwelling unit, as specified by resolution of the city council. Such payment, however, shall not limit the city’s ability to proceed against any party pursuant to Section 17.146.060 or other applicable law. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.060 Enforcement provisions.
A.    It is unlawful, a public nuisance and a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent an affordable unit at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to a household not qualified under this chapter, and such person shall be subject to a fine for the first offense of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per unit from the date of original noncompliance until the affordable unit is in compliance with this section. A second offense by the same owner for the same unit shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per unit.

B.    The St. Helena city attorney’s office or the Napa County district attorney, as appropriate, shall be authorized to abate violations of this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all implementing regulatory agreements and resale controls placed on affordable units by civil action, injunctive relief, and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

C.    The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.070 Bi-annual review.
The housing impact fee, housing in-lieu fee and inclusionary requirements authorized by this chapter and implementing resolution(s) shall be reviewed every two years by the city council, provided that failure to perform such review does not excuse compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

17.146.080 Adjustment—Appeal.
A.    A developer of any project subject to the requirements in this chapter may appeal to the city council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of the requirements based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impact of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the inclusionary requirement.

B.    A developer subject to the requirements of this chapter who has received an approved tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval and who submits a new or revised tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval for the same property may appeal for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of the requirements with respect to the number of lots or square footage of construction previously approved.

C.    Any appeal under this section shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten (10) days before the first public hearing on any discretionary approval or permit for the development, or if no such discretionary approval or permit is required, or if the action complained of occurs after the first public hearing on such permit or approval, then the appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after payment of the fees objected to. The appeal shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the appeal at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing within sixty (60) days after the filing of the appeal, whichever is later. The appellant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the appeal including comparable technical information to support appellant’s position. No waiver shall be approved by the city council for a new tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval on property with an approved tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary permit unless the council finds that the new tentative subdivision or parcel map, use permit or similar discretionary approval is consistent with the approved project both in its design and its mitigation of environmental impacts. The decision of the council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fee or inclusionary requirement. (Ord. 04-7 § 3 (part))

Chapter 17.148
SIGNS
Sections:

17.148.010    Definitions.

17.148.020    Exclusions.

17.148.030    Signs prohibited.

17.148.040    Regulated signs.

17.148.050    Illumination.

17.148.060    Neon signs.

17.148.070    Monument signs.

17.148.080    Real estate signs.

17.148.090    Temporary noncommercial signs.

17.148.105    Public information signs.

17.148.110    Miscellaneous regulations.

17.148.120    Administration.

17.148.130    Nonconforming signs.

17.148.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Abandoned Sign. Any sign which pertains to a business or occupation which is no longer using the particular property, or which relates to a time or event which no longer applies, constitutes abandoned advertising or identification.

“Advertising billboard” means any structure or sign upon which there is any advertising message calling attention to a use, product, service or similar function not conducted or sold upon the site upon which the billboard is located or in the structure to which the billboard is attached or otherwise affixed. Billboards may be freestanding or affixed or otherwise attached to another structure.

“Awning, canopy or marquee” means a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face over a public right-of-way and constructed of a durable material such as metal, wood, glass or plastic or a less permanent hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building and is covered with a rigid or nonrigid material such as canvas.

“Awning, canopy or marquee sign” means any message which is painted on or otherwise affixed to a building awning, canopy or marquee. Each side of an awning with a message shall be counted as a separate sign.

“Balloon sign” means a temporary sign which may or may not contain graphics painted on or affixed to a balloon or inflated character.

“Banner” means a temporary sign for grand openings or special events composed of lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as not to allow movement of the sign.

“Building sign” means a sign lettered to give the name of a building itself or the date constructed, as opposed to the name of occupants or services.

“Changeable copy sign” means a sign which, in part or whole, provides for periodic changes in the letters or in the material composing the sign. Signs on which the only change is a periodic price change for the product or products customarily sold on the premises and on which the location, size and color of the numbers remain constant are not to be considered changeable copy signs.

“Commercial message” means any copy that directly or indirectly names, draws attention to, or advertises a business, product, good, service, or other commercial activity, or which proposes a commercial transaction.

“Commercial sign” means a sign with a commercial message.

“Directory sign” means a sign designed and intended to list and/or name any or all of the business firms and/or types of businesses conducted at an office building or shopping-center-type development and which is freestanding or attached to the building or structure in which the use is conducted.

“Election period” means the period commencing sixty (60) days before any national, state, or local election in which city electors may vote up through the date of the election.

“Encroachment” means the extension of any sign over a public right-of-way or private access way.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign that is self-supporting in a fixed location and not attached to a building.

“Home occupation sign” means a sign identifying a home occupation, which is an accessory use of a residential property for gainful employment by the resident of a dwelling.

“Identification sign” means a sign designed and intended to identify the name of a commercial business, professional office use, public use, quasi-public use, or similar use and which sign is permanently affixed upon the structure or premises to be identified.

“Illegal sign” means any sign which was not lawfully erected or maintained, or was not in conformance with the ordinance in effect at the time of the erection of the sign or advertising statuary, or which was not installed with a valid permit from the city.

“Illuminated awning” means an internally illuminated shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of a nonrigid translucent covering over a supporting framework. This type of sign may or may not contain graphics or copy on the surface of the awning.

“Incidental sign” means a sign pertaining to and advertising goods, products, services or facilities which are available on the premises. Such signing is in addition to the main identification signing.

“Interior sign” means a sign which may be displayed within a business or residence provided it is not displayed so as to be viewed from any public space.

“Internally illuminated sign” means a sign which is illuminated from a lighting source within the internal structure of the sign which illuminates the entire face of the sign (does not include neon signs or halo illuminated signs).

“Message” means a graphic, letter, numeral, symbol, logo, hallmark, text, insignia, sample, model, picture, drawing, device, or appliance, or combination thereof, affixed for identification, and/or services.

“Monument sign (freestanding or detached or pole)” means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground that are independent from any building or other structure.

“Neon sign” means a sign which is illuminated in whole or in part by neon or similar gas.

“Nonappurtenant sign” means a sign which advertises a business, products, services or other uses which are not associated with the premises where the sign is located.

“Noncommercial message” means any copy that communicates a message that is not a commercial message. A noncommercial message does not directly or indirectly name, draw attention to, or advertise a business, product, good, service, or other commercial activity, or propose a commercial transaction.

“Noncommercial sign” means a sign with a noncommercial message.

“Nonprojecting sign” means a sign which uses a building structure as its main source of support and contains copy that is parallel to the wall to which it is affixed.

“Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series designed to move in the wind.

“Portable freestanding sign” means a sign that is designed to be movable and is not structurally attached to the ground, a building, a structure or any other sign. Portable freestanding signs include, but are not limited to, sandwich board signs, A-frame signs, and easels.

“Primary frontage” means the side of a building facing a street or, in the case of a building having more than one side facing a street, the side so designated by planning department staff.

“Projecting sign” means a sign which uses a building structure as its main source of support and contains copy that is perpendicular, or at an angle, to the building face.

“Public information sign” means a sign bearing symbols, badges or other messages identifying, stating the location of, or providing information concerning regularly scheduled meetings of civic and community service clubs, churches and religious organizations, hospitals serving the general public, and municipal services and buildings (e.g., fire station, police station, city hall, post office, etc.).

“Real estate open house sign” means a temporary portable freestanding two-sided A-frame sign that directs customers to property where an open house is in progress.

“Real estate sign” means a temporary, on-premises sign, which gives notice offering the sale, rental, or lease of real estate.

“Rider” shall mean additional signs or copy appended or attached to the main sign and frequently provides additional information in the form of text, graphics, and/or logo.

“Roof sign” means any sign placed upon, projecting from, or directly above the roof of a structure or building.

“Secondary frontage” means the sides of a building other than the primary frontage which are visible from a public right-of-way or from adjacent private property or which provide secondary access to the use or activity.

“Shopping center development” means an integrated commercial development larger than one acre in size where two or more commercial uses are conducted and are provided with a common parking lot.

“Shopping center identification sign” means a sign designed and intended to name or identify a shopping-center-type development.

“Sign” means any medium, including its structure and component parts in view of the general public, which is used to attract attention for advertising or identifying purposes.

“Sign area” means that area enclosed in the frame of the sign as measured from the outside of the frame and following the contour of the frame. In those instances where a sign is painted or otherwise affixed or attached to a wall or similar structure or portion thereof, the area of a sign shall be computed by measuring the overall length and width of the message. This computation shall also be utilized when raised or freestanding letters are affixed or attached to a structural surface.

“Street furniture sign” means a sign located on a bench or similar structure which is located within the public right-of-way.

“Subdivision identification sign” means an identification sign with the name of the residential subdivision which is located within the subdivision.

“Temporary advertising sign” means a sign used for grand openings or special sales.

“Temporary sign” means a sign constructed of cloth, canvas, lightweight fabric, cardboard, wallboard, wood or other light materials, with or without frames, which is not intended for or suitable for long-term or permanent display, due to the materials used, the means of display, or the procedures by which it is approved.

“Vehicular sign” means a sign affixed on a vehicle or trailer for the purpose of circumventing the regulations within this chapter.

“Wall sign” means a sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects not more than two feet from the building or structure and does not extend above the roof, parapet, building facade or any outermost edge of the building or structure.

“Window sign” means any sign painted on or attached to a window or located inside a window and designed to be viewed from outside of the building in which the window is located. This term does not include merchandise located in a window. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-6 § 14: prior code § 27.320)

17.148.020 Exclusions.
The following signs are not governed by the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Official notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or by any person giving legal notice;

B.    Business name added to a directory sign for which a sign permit has previously been authorized;

C.    City Signs. Signs identifying the department, service, or location of city facilities and operations subject to the location and size limitations in Section 17.148.040;

D.    Directional, warning or information signs required by law or by governmental authority;

E.    Signs of public utility companies indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety or which show the location of underground facilities or public telephones;

F.    Signs advertising a future occupant of a building or noting the contractors, engineers or architects erecting or remodeling a building, provided the same do not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, are single-faced and are removed upon occupancy or completion of erection or remodeling;

G.    Signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way or from other private property in the vicinity;

H.    Signs which are part of a temporary window display and which are not affixed to the window;

I.    Festival/benefit banners on/over public property, or off-premises signs advertising community events sponsored by or for the benefit of nonprofit organizations as approved by resolution of the city council;

J.    No more than one national flag of a country and/or no more than one flag of a state which is displayed in a manner consistent with laws governing respect of such flags, and flown from a pole the height of which is no more than the maximum permitted height for structures in the applicable zoning district. Other types of flags shall be considered signs;

K.    Temporary advertising signs for a business grand opening provided the sign is not displayed for more than thirty (30) days;

L.    One temporary advertising sign, including banners (up to sixty (60) square feet) for a special business sale or promotional event, provided the sign is not displayed for more than two weeks at any one time and for not more than four times per year (maximum of eight weeks of temporary advertising signs being displayed per year);

M.    Paper banners attached to the interior of the window advertising weekly specials at grocery stores and variety stores;

N.    Real estate signs less than four square feet in size on the property listed for sale or rent as regulated by Section 17.148.080;

O.    Temporary signs for blood bank, community service club events or similar not-for-profit community activities, and garage or rummage sale signs pertaining to activity on the property where they are located and displayed on the day of the activity only;

P.    Building signs as defined in Section 17.148.010 and less than four square feet in size;

Q.    Signs required to be posted by law;

R.    Holiday lights and decorations. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.321)

17.148.030 Signs prohibited.
The following signs shall be prohibited within the city:

A.    Airborne balloons, banners (except as excluded by Section 17.148.020(L)), pennants, valances, propellers, spinners, streamers, lights or similar devices or ornamentation designed for purposes of attracting attention, promotion or advertising;

B.    Signs located within the public right-of-way including any sign or handbill attached to a utility pole or street sign pole except those required or permitted by federal, state or local law;

C.    Revolving, animated, wind-blown or moving signs and signs with flashing illumination, including flashing arrows, blinking lights or other devices. This does not include traditional barber poles which may be allowed in front of barbershops upon approval of sign permit by the planning commission;

D.    Off-premises signs, except those signs approved by a planning commission sign permit to be located on a legal easement for an access way through another property when such access is required for public use;

E.    The following types of signs as defined in Section 17.148.010:

1.    Advertising billboards,

2.    Balloon signs,

3.    Changeable copy signs, except for theater marquees or gas station signs,

4.    Home occupation signs,

5.    Illuminated awnings,

6.    Internally illuminated signs, except for theater marquees,

7.    Neon “Open” signs, subject to planning commission review, provided the tubing is white and the neon “Open” sign is located on property where the speed limit is in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour,

8.    Nonappurtenant signs,

9.    Pennants,

10.    Portable freestanding signs,

11.    Roof signs,

12.    Street furniture signs,

13.    Subdivision identification signs,

14.    Vehicular signs. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.322)

17.148.040 Regulated signs.
No sign, addition to a sign, alteration of a sign or replacement of a sign, unless specifically excluded in Section 17.148.020, shall be permitted in any district without first obtaining an administrative sign permit or a planning commission sign permit.

A.    Administrative Sign Permit.

1.    An administrative sign permit shall be reviewed by the planning department for compliance with the standards set forth for the district in which the sign is to be located.

2.    The applicant shall be notified within thirty (30) days whether or not the administrative sign permit is approved. If the permit is not approved the applicant may either amend the design to comply with the standards or may amend the application to request sign permit approval from the planning commission. If the design of the sign is amended and resubmitted for review the applicant shall be notified within thirty (30) days from the date the amended design is submitted whether or not the administrative sign permit is approved.

3.    Insubstantial changes to existing signs, such as a change in color or business name, may be authorized by an administrative sign permit.

4.    Temporary advertising signs not meeting the display time period limitations specified in Section 17.148.020 may be authorized through the approval of an administrative sign permit. In no case shall such signs be displayed for more than twenty (20) weeks within a calendar year, and an annual schedule of all proposed display time frames shall be submitted with the administrative sign permit application.

B.    Planning Commission Sign Permit.

1.    A planning commission sign permit shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a regularly scheduled meeting for compliance with the standards set forth for the district in which the sign is to be located.

2.    The purpose of the planning commission sign permit is to allow the consideration of illuminated signs (including neon), signs that are larger, of a unique design or location, or signs in addition to those permitted with an administrative sign permit. The planning commission shall consider the compatibility of the sign to the site, the appropriateness of the materials and colors in relation to the project, the compatibility of the sign to the small town character of St. Helena, and the impact the sign may have on surrounding properties. The commission shall not approve signs which obscure or detract from the architecture of a historic building or structure.

3.    A sign program addressing the needs for all businesses within a building with multiple tenants or within shopping centers or other types of planned commercial developments may be required prior to the approval of any signs for an individual business within that development. The planning commission shall consider the cumulative visual effect of all signs, and may reduce the overall number and/or area of signs allowed for each business or may require that directory signs be used instead of individual signs. A sign program may be proposed for a building with multiple tenants or shopping centers or other types of planned commercial developments prior to approval of any signs for an individual business within that development.

4.    The planning commission may approve sign permits within any zoning district to retain historic signs or to approve new signs that are compatible with historic structures or uses. Signs that exceed the limitations of size, number or lighting may be approved with the finding that the signs contribute to the historical or architectural character of the community.

5.    Permits shall be subject to general administrative procedures set forth in Chapters 17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.168 and 17.172.

C.    Standards. The size and number of identification signs for each business on a property shall depend upon the zoning district in which it is located as described below. All other signs and illumination for signs, unless noted in Section 17.148.020 or 17.148.030, shall be subject to review and approval of a planning commission sign permit.

TABLE 17.148.040(C)

MAXIMUMS BY DISTRICT

Administrative Sign Permit.

CB – Central Business

SC – Service Commercial

Each business shall be permitted one of each of the following types of signs (up to three total) upon issuance of an administrative sign permit. One such sign may be externally illuminated.

I – Industrial

BPO – Business, Professional & Office

PQP – Public and Quasi-Public

Sign type:

CB

SC/I1

BPO

PQP

Identification sign on an awning fascia over the primary frontage of the business.

5 s.f.

10 s.f.

10 s.f.

10 s.f.

Nonprojecting identification sign on the primary frontage of the building or on a door or window.

10 s.f.

12 s.f.

10 s.f.

10 s.f.

Projecting identification sign on the primary frontage of the building.

3 s.f.

(per side)

12 s.f.

3 s.f.

(per side)

3 s.f.

(per side)

Business name, address and hours of operation on a door or window.

4 s.f.

4 s.f.

4 s.f.

4 s.f.

The additional following limitations shall apply to administratively approved signs:

The maximum cumulative area of all signs on the primary frontage, including incidental signs, shall not exceed the lesser of forty (40) s.f. in area or a ratio of one s.f. of signage to one linear foot of business frontage.

No more than three identification signs on the primary frontage of the business. The maximum cumulative sign area (including both sides of a two-sided sign) of all identification signs on the primary frontage of a business is sixty (60) s.f.

No more than three identification signs on the primary frontage of the business. The maximum cumulative sign area (including both sides of a two-sided sign) of all identification signs on the primary frontage of a business is forty (40) s.f.

No more than three identification signs on the primary frontage of the business. The maximum cumulative sign area (including both sides of a two-sided sign) of all identification signs on the primary frontage of a business is twenty (20) s.f.

 

One additional sign for each secondary frontage per business.

One additional sign for each secondary frontage per business.

One additional sign for each secondary frontage per business.

One additional sign for each secondary frontage per business.

 

Maximum cumulative sign area for all secondary frontage signs, including both sides of a two-sided sign: Twenty (20) s.f.

Maximum cumulative sign area for all secondary frontage signs, including both sides of a two-sided sign: Twenty (20) s.f.

Maximum cumulative sign area for all secondary frontage signs, including both sides of a two-sided sign: Twenty (20) s.f.

Maximum cumulative sign area for all secondary frontage signs, including both sides of a two-sided sign: Twenty (20) s.f.

 

1The planning commission may approve signs that exceed the height, size and number of signs specified in these districts (SC and I only) for properties located along Main Street where the visibility of the sign is impaired due to the following:

A) The building is set back from the street for a distance of fifty (50) feet or more;

B) The visibility of the building is obscured;

C) The speed limit on Main Street is greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; and

D) A sign meeting the standards of this title would create a safety hazard by obscuring the vision of vehicles exiting the property.

Permitted signs (no permit required):

Each business shall be permitted two non-illuminated incidental signs not to exceed two s.f. per sign.

Each business shall be permitted two non-illuminated incidental signs not to exceed two s.f. per sign.

Each business shall be permitted two non-illuminated incidental signs not to exceed two s.f. per sign.

Each business shall be permitted two non-illuminated incidental signs not to exceed two s.f. per sign.

 

Each business shall be permitted to put on a door or window the address and/or hours of operation in an area not to exceed two s.f. in size.

Each business shall be permitted to put on a door or window the address and/or hours of operation in an area not to exceed two s.f. in size.

Each business shall be permitted to put on a door or window the address and/or hours of operation in an area not to exceed two s.f. in size.

Each business shall be permitted to put on a door or window the address and/or hours of operation in an area not to exceed two s.f. in size.

Residential Districts.

Signs within residential districts are permitted for identification of multifamily residential developments and bed and breakfast inns upon review and approval of a planning commission sign permit. Subdivision identification signs or home occupation signs are not permitted.

a. For multifamily residential developments: one sign with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) s.f.

b. For bed and breakfast inns: one sign attached to the main house with a maximum sign area of eight s.f.

Winery and Agricultural Districts.

Signs within the winery or agricultural districts are permitted only upon review and approval of a planning commission sign permit. When reviewing signs for wineries or other agricultural businesses the commission shall consider the cumulative visual impact of all signs on the property.

(Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.323)

17.148.050 Illumination.
All internally illuminated signs, unless specifically prohibited in Section 17.148.030, shall be subject to review and approval of a planning commission sign permit, who shall review the sign for hours of operation, size, color, intensity of light, and creativity of design. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.324)

17.148.060 Neon signs.
A.    All neon signs are regulated by planning commission sign permit.

B.    Each business is limited to one neon sign.

C.    No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the sign area allowed for the primary frontage of a business shall be neon.

D.    Neon may be used for business identification only and shall not be used for incidental signs pertaining to and advertising goods, products, services, brand names or facilities which are available on the premises. Neon “Open” signs are prohibited. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.325)

17.148.070 Monument signs.
A.    All monument signs shall be located on the property served by the sign; off-premises signs are not permitted.

B.    The maximum height of a monument sign shall be eight feet, as measured from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be considered to be the grade after construction exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating for landscaping or for the purpose of locating the sign.

C.    Monument signs shall be located no closer to the right-of-way than one-half the distance of a required front or side setback. Planning commission approval shall be required for any request to locate a monument sign closer to the right-of-way than is permitted above. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.326)

17.148.080 Real estate signs.
A.    Real estate open house signs, as defined in Section 17.148.010, may be located off-premises as follows:

1.    The use of off-premises open house signs is allowed only on Saturdays and Sundays, between the hours of noon to four p.m.

2.    Open house signs that are placed on Main Street may include the words “Open House” and may have a directional arrow, but shall not include the address of the property where the open house is located nor any other riders. The signs shall not advertise any particular real estate company or agent.

3.    Open house signs that are placed on streets other than Main Street may include the words “Open House,” may have a directional arrow, may include the address of the property where the open house is located and may include the name of the real estate company or agent. Only one sign per directional change is allowed.

4.    Only one sign is allowed at a street intersection.

5.    Signs shall not block sidewalks or pedestrian pathways; a four-foot-wide clear path of travel shall remain open.

6.    Signs shall not be placed in a manner that impedes the sight distance and visibility for motorists.

7.    No signs shall be placed on private property without the written permission of the property owner.

8.    No signs shall be posted on street signs or utility poles.

B.    Open house signs in violation of this section may be subject to summary abatement under Section 1.12.130, Summary abatement of immediate dangers, and a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty to be imposed according to the provisions of Chapter 1.12, Enforcement Procedures. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 09-1 § 3; Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part))

17.148.090 Temporary noncommercial signs.
A.    General Regulations. Temporary noncommercial signs in all districts are permitted at all times without a sign permit subject to the following regulations:

1.    Number. Each parcel is permitted two freestanding or building-mounted temporary noncommercial signs at all times. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this chapter.

2.    Area. A temporary noncommercial sign may not exceed six square feet in area per side.

3.    Height. A temporary noncommercial sign may not exceed four feet in height or two feet in height from the top of any wall or fence if posted on a wall or fence. Signs are not permitted on top of walls or fences greater than forty-two (42) inches in height. A temporary noncommercial sign mounted, affixed or painted onto a structure may not exceed eight feet in height.

4.    Location. Temporary noncommercial signs may be placed in the front yard, rear or side yard of any property; provided, that the signs do not encroach into any public right-of-way. Temporary noncommercial signs may not be located in the visibility triangle on corner lots. Temporary noncommercial signs mounted to, affixed or painted to a structure must meet the public right-of-way and vision triangle limitation above and may not impact any character defining element of a historic building or district.

5.    Lighting. Temporary noncommercial signs may not be illuminated.

B.    Election Period Regulations. During any election period the following additional opportunities for temporary noncommercial signs are provided without a sign permit subject to the following regulations:

1.    Number. Each parcel in all zoning districts is permitted two temporary noncommercial election period signs. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this chapter.

2.    The additional temporary noncommercial election period signs are subject to the area, height, location, and lighting limitations described under subsection A of this section.

3.    Removal. The additional temporary noncommercial signs permitted during an election period must be removed within seven days following the end of the election period. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)))

17.148.105 Public information signs.
A.    Any community service club or organization may erect and maintain a public information sign on the property where they meet without requiring a sign permit. The maximum size for such a sign is five square feet.

B.    A public information sign may be maintained along Highway 29 at the south entrance to the community. The maximum area of the public information sign shall be two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet per side, whether single- or double-faced. The sign shall be freestanding, with a maximum height and width of fifteen (15) feet. The sign may be composed of any number of badges, plaques or signs which are either affixed or hanging within the total allowed square footage of the overall sign faces. Only one badge, plaque or sign for each group or organization described within Section 17.148.010 may be mounted on the public information sign. Each such component badge, plaque or sign shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height, width or diameter, and may be single- or double-faced. Each component badge, plaque or sign of a group or organization may bear an additional attached sign stating only the location and/or times of regularly scheduled meetings of the group or organization, which sign shall not exceed nine inches in height or twenty-four (24) inches in width and may be single- or double-faced.

C.    The public information sign must be maintained by the organizations utilizing the sign. The applicable sign permit may be revoked or the sign may be abated by the city council upon the failure to properly maintain such sign.

D.    The public information signs shall be considered additional permitted signs which do not reduce nor restrict the signs otherwise permitted on the premises where the organization meets. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.328. Formerly 17.148.100.)

17.148.110 Miscellaneous regulations.
A.    Continued Maintenance. All signs must be maintained by the property owner, tenant, or permittee. In the event a sign becomes derelict for reasons of lack of maintenance the approval may be revoked and the sign subject to abatement.

B.    Abandonment or Termination of Use. A sign shall be removed by the property owner within thirty (30) days of abandonment or termination of the use.

C.    Obstruction of Pedestrian Ways. No sign shall be permitted that will impede, obstruct or create hazards with respect to pedestrian traffic. The lowest portion of a projecting sign over a pedestrian sidewalk shall be at seven feet six inches above the ground surface.

D.    Overhanging Signs. No sign shall be permitted over a highway, street, or driveway, except for a festival or benefit banner as approved by the city council.

E.    Conflicting Regulations. Exceptions to this chapter may be made for signs for gasoline service stations and other businesses if signs are subject to federal or state government regulations that may be in conflict with this chapter. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.329. Formerly 17.148.100.)

17.148.120 Administration.
A.    An application for an administrative sign permit or a planning commission sign permit shall be made by the property owner, or his or her authorized agent, to the planning department on forms prescribed for this purpose.

B.    An applicant for any permit shall file with his or her application a site plan and/or building elevations showing the location of the sign, a sketch or photograph showing the size, coloring, illumination, and manner of construction of the proposed sign and any other matter necessary to a determination of whether or not to issue a permit. When unusual signs are proposed the applicant shall submit a photo montage and/or model which clearly demonstrates the size, shape and location of the sign. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.330. Formerly 17.148.110.)

17.148.130 Nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be regulated as set forth in Chapter 17.140. (Ord. 18-6 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 18-3 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 08-2 § 2 (part): Ord. 06-5 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.331. Formerly 17.148.120.)

Chapter 17.152
RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT SYSTEM*
Sections:

17.152.010    Purpose.

17.152.020    Regulation of building permits.

17.152.030    Population caps and annual growth rate calculation.

17.152.040    Exempted and regulated development categories.

17.152.050    Distribution of permits.

*    Prior code history: Prior code §§ 27.340—27.345.

17.152.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the “St. Helena General Plan Residential Growth Management System” as adopted in 1979 and revised in September 1993, with the adoption of a new general plan, and again in June 2002, with the adoption of an updated “Housing Element of the General Plan.” The purpose of the policies is to regulate the residential growth of the city to approximately two percent per year, while providing for both market rate and affordable housing units. (Ord. 04-10 (part))

17.152.020 Regulation of building permits.
No building permit for a new residence shall be issued except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 04-10 (part))

17.152.030 Population caps and annual growth rate calculation.
The 2002 Housing Element update stated that the prior General Plan Goal 2.6.10 should be amended to reflect the data of the year 2000 census. The 2000 census found that the city had two thousand seven hundred seven (2,707) total dwelling units. With a limitation of nine building permits for market rate housing per year, issued over ten (10) years, the number of dwelling units will be approximately two thousand eight hundred (2,800), not including regulated affordable units, guest cottages, or accessory dwelling units. This number shall not be construed as a goal, but as a maximum number of units. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 04-10 (part))

17.152.040 Exempted and regulated development categories.
A.    Exempted Development Categories. This chapter shall not apply to the issuance of building permits for the following projects:

1.    Industrial;

2.    Commercial;

3.    Commercial/residential (daily rental);

4.    Replacement housing (on the same site as a preexisting unit which has been removed, demolished or burned within the immediately preceding two years) but not in conjunction with subsection (A)(5) of this section;

5.    Relocation of units already existing in the city;

6.    Additions, renovations and refurbishment of existing dwelling units;

7.    Accessory buildings of any type (except dwelling units);

8.    Guest cottages (detached bedroom(s) without kitchen facilities);

9.    Accessory dwelling units as defined in Section 17.04.160 and regulated by Section 17.116.030;

10.    Affordable Housing. Affordable units are those dwelling units which are required to be rented at affordable rents or purchased at an affordable sales price, consistent with Chapter 17.146. The number of affordable housing units constructed shall be determined by the city council at the time of review of the development agreement authorizing the units. The agreement shall contain guarantees that the dwelling units would continue to be affordable to persons of very low, low, or moderate income for an agreed upon period of time.

B.    Annual Allocations and Carryover. No more than nine building permits for market rate housing may be issued each year. Permits remaining unused at the end of the year will carry over into the subsequent year, but shall only be available for allocation for the construction of market rate units in development projects that include a minimum of forty percent (40%) affordable units. (Ord. 17-2 (part); Ord. 04-10 (part))

17.152.050 Distribution of permits.
A.    Annual allocations of regulated building permits shall be issued on January 1st of each year on a first approved, first served basis.

B.    Each building permit shall indicate whether the permit is exempt from the growth management system, or from what category the permit was drawn. The planning department shall maintain a list of how many permits remain available for the year.

C.    Each dwelling unit, including those within a multifamily building, is counted as one unit for purpose of allocation of building permits under this chapter. Attached housing units with floor area of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or less per dwelling unit shall count as one-half unit.

D.    After all permits have been allocated in a given year, building permit applications and plans for new units regulated by this chapter will continue to be reviewed and approved. Building permits are reviewed under the residential growth management system after a building permit application is deemed complete. A building permit application cannot be considered complete until it is found in compliance with the general plan and zoning ordinance. Building permit allocations begin on January 1st of each year. Permits are allocated within the priority in which they were deemed complete until all permits have been issued. A building permit will not be issued until the following allocation period in which permits become available for that category.

E.    All approved building permits shall be automatically extended to the time when permit availability occurs unless the permit is withdrawn by the applicant.

F.    Building permits must be obtained within thirty (30) days after notification of permit availability. If the permit is not obtained within thirty (30) days the application will be deemed withdrawn and the building permit will become available to the next priority number.

G.    Permits may not be transferred to a different site or substituted for a different dwelling. Minor design changes may be approved by the planning director. The action of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.08.

H.    The city council shall review the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter at their first regularly scheduled meeting of September of each year. (Ord. 04-10 (part))

Chapter 17.156
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

17.156.010    Authority.

17.156.020    Forms and information.

17.156.030    Fees.

17.156.040    Qualifications.

17.156.050    Form of agreement.

17.156.060    Review of applications.

17.156.070    Notices and hearing.

17.156.080    Determination by planning commission.

17.156.090    Decision by city council.

17.156.100    Amendment or cancellation.

17.156.110    Recordation.

17.156.120    Periodic review.

17.156.130    Modification or termination.

17.156.010 Authority.
The city may enter into an agreement with a qualified applicant for the development of real property as provided in this chapter under the authority of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. (Prior code § 27.350)

17.156.020 Forms and information.
A.    The city planner shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required under this chapter for the preparation and implementation of development agreements.

B.    The city planner may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the city planner considers necessary to process the application. (Prior code § 27.351)

17.156.030 Fees.
The city council shall by separate resolution fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document provided for or required under this chapter. (Prior code § 27.352)

17.156.040 Qualifications.
Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. Applicant includes authorized agent. The city planner may require an applicant to submit proof of his or her interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant. Before processing the application, the city planner shall obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest in the real property to enter into the agreement. (Prior code § 27.353)

17.156.050 Form of agreement.
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant. This requirement may be met by designating the city’s standard form of development agreement and including specific proposals for changes in or addition to the language of the standard form. (Prior code § 27.354)

17.156.060 Review of applications.
The city planner shall stamp the date on the application the day it is received. The city planner shall review the application and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If the city planner finds that the application is complete, it shall be accepted for filing. If the city planner finds that the application is incomplete, he or she shall determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the application. After receiving the required information, the city planner shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the agreement proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Prior code § 27.355)

17.156.070 Notices and hearing.
A.    A public hearing on an application for a development agreement shall be held by the planning commission and the city council. Notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement shall be given as provided in Government Code Sections 65100 and 65110. These notice requirements are declaratory of existing law. If state law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner.

B.    The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or this chapter to receive such notice does not affect the authority of the city to enter into a development agreement.

C.    The applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the proposed development agreement.

D.    No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. (Prior code § 27.356)

17.156.080 Determination by planning commission.
After the hearing by the planning commission, the planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation shall include the planning commission’s determination whether or not the development agreement proposed:

A.    Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

B.    Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located;

C.    Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice;

D.    Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare;

E.    Will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values. The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation;

F.    Will have a sufficient water supply for subdivisions pursuant to the requirements of Government Code Section 66473.7. (Ord. 02-6 § 16: prior code § 27.357)

17.156.090 Decision by city council.
A.    After the city council completes its public hearing, it may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. It may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing back to the planning commission for report and recommendation. The planning commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the city council.

B.    The city council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan.

C.    If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance. After the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the city may enter into the agreement. (Prior code § 27.358)

17.156.100 Amendment or cancellation.
Either party, by mutual consent, may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance (Section 17.156.070). (Prior code § 27.359)

17.156.110 Recordation.
A.    Within ten (10) days after the city enters into the development agreement, the city clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder.

B.    If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Section 17.156.100, or if the city terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Section 17.156.130 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the city clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the county recorder. (Prior code § 27.360)

17.156.120 Periodic review.
A.    The city shall review the development agreement every twelve (12) months from the date the agreement is entered into. The time for review may be modified either by agreement between the parties or by initiation in one or more of the following ways:

1.    Recommendation of the planning staff;

2.    Affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning commission;

3.    Affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council.

B.    The city planner shall begin the review proceeding by giving notice that the city intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the property owner. The notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered. The review shall be conducted by the planning commission.

C.    The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing at which the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the property owner.

D.    The planning commission shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement.

E.    If the city finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded.

F.    If the city finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the city may modify or terminate the agreement.

G.    Any person may appeal a determination pursuant to subsections E and F of this section to the city council in accordance with the city’s rules for consideration of appeals. (Prior code § 27.361)

17.156.130 Modification or termination.
A.    If, upon a finding under Section 17.156.120(F), the city determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the city shall give notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain:

1.    The time and place of the hearing;

2.    A statement as to whether or not the city proposes to terminate or to modify the development agreement;

3.    Other information which the city considers necessary to inform the property owner of the nature of the proceeding.

B.    At the time and place set for the hearing on modification or termination, the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The city council may refer the matter back to the planning commission for further proceedings or for report and recommendation. The city council may impose conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city. The decision of the city council is final. (Prior code § 27.362)

Chapter 17.160
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Sections:

17.160.010    Purpose.

17.160.020    General provisions.

17.160.030    Application required.

17.160.040    Requirements.

17.160.050    Tenant provisions.

17.160.060    Procedure.

17.160.070    Findings required.

17.160.080    Final map findings.

17.160.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this permit is to provide criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominium housing consistent with the following objectives: to reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to be relocated by providing procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation; to insure that the purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed about the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase; to insure that converted housing achieves high quality appearance and safety; to reduce the impact that conversions have upon the supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons and families in St. Helena; and to insure that such conversions are consistent with the goals, policies and programs of the general plan including the housing element. (Prior code § 27.365)

17.160.020 General provisions.
The following general provisions shall apply to the processing of a condominium conversion permit:

A.    An existing multiple-family residential development shall not be converted to condominium housing unless a condominium conversion permit has been issued pursuant to this section. Not late than September 1st of each year the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the vacancy rate of all housing units vacant and available for occupancy in the city. The housing market shall be deemed to have a severe rental housing shortage if the vacancy rate is three percent or less and shall be deemed to have a housing shortage if the vacancy rate is more than three percent but less than five percent. This assessment of the housing market shall remain effective for one year from the date the report is made to the planning commission or until it is revised by the planning department consistent with the requirements.

B.    Condominium conversion permits shall not be issued during any one year in which a severe rental housing shortage exists. Condominium conversion permits may be issued allowing the conversion of multiple-family residential units not to exceed one-half of the number of multiple-family rental units for which building permits were issued during the one-year period ending on the preceding July 31st during any one year in which a housing shortage is deemed to exist.

C.    If the number of units for which a conversion application has been filed exceeds the number of units that may be converted pursuant to subsection B of this section, a lottery shall be held by the planning director not later than two weeks following the deadline for complete applications (November 15th) to determine the order in which the applications shall be considered by the planning commission. Applications must be deemed complete to be included in the lottery. Applications filed but not deemed complete may be considered on a first come first serve basis if there are additional units eligible for conversion once the application has been deemed complete.

D.    An application for a condominium conversion permit cannot be made for a building that is less than ten (10) years old (age being measured from the date the building received its final approval from the building division of the planning department).

E.    Unless the average proposed sale price is four times the current median income as estimated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Napa-Vallejo-Fairfield Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and this price can be substantiated by appropriate comparison sales, the minimum size project for conversion shall be thirty (30) units. This requirement is intended to insure an adequate financial base for the homeowner’s association. (Prior code § 27.366)

17.160.030 Application required.
An application on forms provided by the planning director shall be required for a condominium conversion permit. An application for a condominium conversion permit may only be filed between September 1st and November 15th of each year. In addition to the site plan, building elevations, landscape plans, etc., each application for a condominium conversion permit shall contain the following information:

A.    A report from a structural engineer licensed by the state, other than the owner, detailing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each element of the project proposed for conversion, including without limitation roofs, foundations, exterior paint, paved surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, swimming pools, sprinkler systems for landscaping and fire protection systems;

B.    A building history report including date of construction of the project, and date description of all major repairs to the structure and structural elements;

C.    A copy of the proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&R’s) for the project;

D.    A history of occupancy report including:

1.    Rental rate history for each type of unit in the project over the past five years,

2.    Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence and age,

3.    Proposed sale prices of units,

4.    Proposed homeowner’s association or other similar owner organization responsible for the maintenance of any property held in common ownership,

5.    Names and addresses of all tenants at the time of filing an application;

E.    A tentative map prepared pursuant to the subdivision ordinance;

F.    Evidence of service by mail that the written notice of intention to convert required by Section 17.160.050(A) was provided to each tenant sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a complete application. In no case shall an application be deemed complete until this notice and the time requirements have been completed pursuant to state law;

G.    Any other information which the planning commission finds necessary to assist in the review of the application. (Prior code § 27.367)

17.160.040 Requirements.
The following are the minimum requirements for the approval of a condominium conversion permit:

A.    All residential buildings shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of the housing code as adopted by the city which were in effect at the time of issuance of building permits.

B.    All buildings shall be in compliance with the exit, occupancy, height, area and sound transmission requirements for the type of construction and occupancy involved as required in the Uniform Building Code which were in effect at the time of issuance of building permits.

C.    All buildings shall be in compliance with or legally nonconforming to the zoning regulations and the goals and policies of the general plan, in effect on the date of final map approval.

D.    All conversion projects shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and subdivision ordinance.

E.    A homeowner’s association or other similar owner organization responsible for the maintenance of any property held in common ownership shall be required for each conversion project.

F.    The following minimum size shall be met for each unit: six hundred (600) square feet for studio units, seven hundred (700) square feet for one-bedroom units and eight hundred fifty (850) square feet for units with two or more bedrooms.

G.    Any structural or mechanical elements identified in the structural engineer’s report as having a useful life of less than two years shall be replaced. The planning commission may require that other elements be refurbished and restored in order to achieve high quality appearance and safety.

H.    Each living unit shall be provided with an approved smoke detection system. All other on-site fire protection systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times by the homeowner’s association.

I.    All open space areas, including those privately owned, shall be landscaped in accord with a landscaping plan approved by the planning commission. The landscaping shall generally be planned and developed in accord with Section 17.112.140.

J.    On-site parking shall be provided in accord with the parking and loading requirements contained in Chapter 17.124.

K.    Each unit shall have its own gas and electric meter. Access to meters and heaters shall not require entry through another unit. A water shutoff valve shall be provided for each unit or for each plumbing fixture. Individual exposed antenna shall not be permitted.

L.    There shall be provided a minimum covered storage area of forty (40) square feet for each dwelling unit for storage of bicycles, patio furniture, garden tools, etc.

M.    Each unit shall have a laundry area for a washer and dryer.

N.    All boats and travel trailers shall be stored only within areas specifically designated for such storage on the approved plans. The boat and trailer storage area shall be screened and landscaped in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.120.

O.    Project identification signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.148.

P.    The project shall contain a directory sign indicating the location and house number of units which do not front on public streets. (Prior code § 27.368)

17.160.050 Tenant provisions.
The following tenant provisions shall apply to an application for a condominium conversion permit:

A.    A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each existing tenant’s apartment sixty (60) days prior to the filing of an application. This notice shall contain:

1.    Name and address of the current owner;

2.    Name and address of the proposed subdivider;

3.    Notice of the tenant’s right to speak at any public hearing;

4.    Tenant’s right to purchase and the terms thereof;

5.    Tenant’s right of notification to vacate with approximate date the unit is to be vacated;

6.    State of limitation on rent increase;

7.    Provisions for moving expenses;

8.    Provisions for special cases;

9.    Other information as required by the planning department.

B.    Each shall receive at least ten (10) days written notice that an application for a public report has been submitted to the department of real estate and that such report will be made available upon request.

C.    Each tenant shall receive at least ten (10) days written notice that the final map will be considered by the city council.

D.    Each tenant shall receive a written notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or on terms more favorable to the tenant. This right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report issued by the department of real estate, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right.

E.    Each tenant shall have at least one hundred eighty (180) days from the first notice to vacate the unit, including at least thirty (30) days from the filing of the final map, in which to vacate the unit, provided that approval of a condominium conversion permit shall not impair the length of term or any other rights of a tenant under a valid existing lease or tenant agreement.

F.    Rents shall not be increased from the date of approval of the tentative map.

G.    Each tenant forced to relocate due to conversion shall receive moving expenses equal to one and one-half times their current monthly rent. Relocation payments may be applied to down payments for those tenants purchasing units.

H.    All new tenants, after filing of the application to convert, shall be informed of the application to convert and shall not be eligible for moving expenses. (Prior code § 27.369)

17.160.060 Procedure.
The building elevations and site development plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for design review pursuant to Chapter 17.164. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the condominium conversion permit application prior to a final decision. (Prior code § 27.370)

17.160.070 Findings required.
In approving a condominium conversion permit the planning commission must make the following findings:

A.    The proposed use or structure is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans;

B.    Conditions as deemed necessary in the public interest have been imposed;

C.    The proposed use or structure will not constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the community; and

D.    The proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage of low and moderate income tenants, senior citizen tenants or tenants with children, and will not remove a significant number of low and moderate income rental units from the city’s housing stock at a time when no equivalent housing is readily available in the community. (Prior code § 27.371)

17.160.080 Final map findings.
In approving a final map authorized by a condominium conversion permit the city council must make the following finding: all of the special notice requirements of Section 17.160.050 have been complied with consistent with the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.1. (Prior code § 27.372)

Chapter 17.164
DESIGN REVIEW1
Sections:

17.164.010    Statement of policy.

17.164.020    Purpose.

17.164.030    Design criteria.

17.164.040    Limitations of review.

17.164.050    Applicability.

17.164.055    Administrative design review.

17.164.060    Exemptions.

17.164.070    Submissions.

17.164.080    Stages of inquiry.

17.164.090    Statement of minimum conditions.

17.164.100    Time limitations.

17.164.110    Notice.

17.164.010 Statement of policy.
The city council finds that new development can have a substantial impact on the character of the area in which it is located. Some harmful effects of one land use upon another can be prevented through zoning, subdivision controls and housing and building codes. Other aspects of development are more subtle and less amenable to exacting rules of thumb promulgated without regard to specific development proposals. Among these are the general form of the land before and after development, the spatial relationships of the structures and open spaces to proximate land uses and the appearances of buildings and open spaces as they contribute to an area as it is being developed. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.375)

17.164.020 Purpose.
The purpose of design review is:

A.    To promote those qualities in the environment which bring value to the community;

B.    To foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the community as a place to live and work;

C.    To preserve the character and quality of our heritage by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a discernible character or are of special historic significance;

D.    To protect certain public investments in the area;

E.    To encourage, where appropriate, a mix of uses within permissible use zones;

F.    To raise the level of community expectations for the quality of its environment. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.376)

17.164.030 Design criteria.
A.    In addition to the purposes prescribed in Section 17.164.020 the following factors shall be considered by the planning commission in reviewing all applications:

1.    Consistency and compatibility with applicable elements of the general plan;

2.    Compatibility of design with the immediate environment of the site;

3.    Relationship of the design to the site;

4.    Determination that the design is compatible in areas considered by the board as having a unified design or historical character;

5.    Whether the design promotes harmonious transition in scale and character in areas between different designated land uses;

6.    Compatibility with future construction both on and off the site;

7.    Whether the architectural design of structures and their materials and colors are appropriate to the function of the project;

8.    Whether the planning and siting of the various functions and buildings on the site create an internal sense of order and provide a desirable environment for occupants, visitors and the general community;

9.    Whether the amount and arrangement of open space and landscaping are appropriate to the design and the function of the structures;

10.    Whether access to the property and circulation systems are safe and convenient for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles;

11.    Whether natural features and vegetation are appropriately preserved and integrated with the project;

12.    Whether the materials, textures, colors and details of construction are an appropriate expression of its design concept and function and whether they are compatible with the adjacent and neighboring structures and functions;

13.    Whether the landscape design concept for the site, as shown by the relationship of plant masses, open space, scale, plant forms and foliage textures and colors, create a desirable and functional environment and whether the landscape concept depicts an appropriate unity with the various buildings on the site;

14.    Whether sustainability and climate protection are promoted through the use of green building practices such as appropriate site/architectural design, use of green building materials, energy efficient systems and water efficient landscape materials.

B.    The planning commission shall develop additional criteria for review of architectural and landscape plans. Such criteria shall be approved by the planning commission and city council and shall be designed to form a basis of understanding between project designers and the commission on design objectives for St. Helena. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part); prior code § 27.377)

17.164.040 Limitations of review.
A.    The commission shall not design or assist in the design of any buildings or projects submitted for approval except on request of the proponent or his or her architect. The commission shall restrict its considerations to a reasonable and professional review of the proposal and plans, leaving full responsibility for the design and development to the applicant.

B.    Individual initiative and experimentation are to be encouraged.

C.    Only the proponent’s failure to take reasonable account of the items discussed in Sections 17.164.010 through 17.164.030 shall justify the commission’s disapproving a proposal solely on the basis of design.

D.    In its endeavor to improve the quality of a design, the commission shall keep considerations of cost in mind. But consideration of cost shall not override the other objectives of this title.

E.    The commission is not to use design review intentionally or inadvertently to exclude housing for minority groups or housing for low and moderate income persons.

F.    The commission is not to use design review intentionally or inadvertently to prohibit or unduly restrict building types, materials or methods or to vary the specific allowances or other development controls. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.378)

17.164.050 Applicability.
A.    Any exterior modification to a commercial, multi-family or designated historic building, including new construction;

B.    The construction of a new single-family home;

C.    Structures, buildings or site modifications requiring use permits in any district, excluding fences;

D.    Additions to a single-family home which create a second or third floor, story or living space where one does not currently exist;

E.    Tentative map conditions shall include the requirement for design review approval of any new structure prior to the issuance of any future building permits for structures on the newly created parcels (note: effective on maps approved after January 1992);

F.    Any new public facility, or modification thereof;

G.    Demolition. Except when required for the emergency protection of public health, safety or welfare as determined by the building official or to allow the removal of a nonhistoric accessory structure, no permit authorizing the demolition of any building within any zoning district shall be issued until approved by the planning commission in accordance with the following findings:

1.    That, based on the public record and testimony presented at a public hearing, the building is determined not to be a significant architectural or historical building. If a building is determined to be significant by the planning commission, no demolition will be authorized unless the following findings are made by the commission:

a.    That the building poses a threat to health, safety and general welfare if it is not demolished,

b.    That restoration of the building is not feasible or practicable using current building codes including, but not limited to, the Historic Building Code provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the state of California,

c.    That no public or other funding is available for financing renovation or purchase of the building;

2.    That the demolition does not eliminate elements that are required to maintain the essential character of the neighborhood;

3.    That design review of the proposed replacement structure is approved prior to, or in conjunction with, approval of the demolition of a housing structure. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 17-2 § 10; Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.379)

17.164.055 Administrative design review.
A.    The following activities are subject to all design criteria of the city of St. Helena; however, the review shall be ministerial and conducted administratively by city planning staff as a component of the building permit review:

1.    Those activities not described above;

2.    Any form of repair or maintenance where the work solely involves the replacement of materials in like kind and form or to any such work in areas not visible to the public from the public right-of-way or areas accessible to the public;

3.    An accessory dwelling unit that meets the requirements of Section 17.116.030;

4.    The alteration, modification or addition to an existing single-family residential structure or building (except as identified in Section 17.164.050);

5.    The construction of an accessory structure in keeping with all development criteria of the zoning district in which the structure is proposed.

The planning director or designee shall review the above project types for conformance with the development criteria of the general plan, the appropriate zoning district and all other development criteria established by the city as an element of the administrative design review process.

When a ministerial review is approved which allows modifications as identified under subsection (A)(4) of this section (alteration, modification or addition to an existing single-family residential structure), the planning division shall notify adjacent property owners of such approval; however, this action shall be final and not subject to appeal procedures identified in Section 17.08.180. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)))

17.164.060 Exemptions.
A.    Whenever the city planner finds that a proposal which requires planning commission review and action raises no substantial design problem of the sort outlined in Sections 17.164.010 through 17.164.030, the planner shall place such an exemption recommendation on the planning commission’s consent agenda.

B.    The planning commission may delegate to the city planner responsibility for review and recommendation for applications for zoning and building permits in those cases where, in the opinion of the commission, the proposed use or structure would not have a significant impact on neighboring properties or on the entire area, or in cases where the proposed use of structure is clearly consistent with the purposes of Sections 17.164.020 and 17.164.030 and the remaining requirements of this chapter and the general plan.

C.    The city planner may review and approve the replacement of existing architectural features that do not involve substantial design changes or changes in materials. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.380)

17.164.070 Submissions.
The proponent shall submit through the city planning division the following:

A.    Preliminary building floor plans and exterior elevations drawn to scale adequate to show clearly the design intent. These plans and exterior elevations shall include structures and significant natural features on abutting properties;

B.    A site plan, or plans, at a scale to show clearly the following:

1.    The dimensions, orientation, and acreage of each lot or plot to be built upon or otherwise used,

2.    Layout of the entire project, and its relation to surrounding properties and the existing buildings thereon,

3.    Location and dimensions of present and proposed street and highway dedication required to handle the traffic generated by the proposed use,

4.    Location of points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and internal vehicular circulation patterns,

5.    The location and layout of all paved areas including off-street parking and loading facilities,

6.    All existing and proposed topography,

7.    Location and size of existing and proposed planting and screening,

8.    The size, shape and location of existing and proposed construction,

9.    Indication of the proposed use of construction shown on the site,

10.    Location of walls, fences and railings, and the indication of their height and the materials of their construction,

11.    Indication of exterior lighting adequate to determine its character and to enable review of possible hazards and disturbances to the public and adjacent properties,

12.    Indication of other potential disturbances to the public and adjacent properties due to noise or odors to be emitted by the proposed use,

13.    Location, size and design of exterior signs and outdoor advertising,

14.    A landscape plan showing grading, landscape materials and irrigating system,

15.    A statement of sustainable and green building principles that have been incorporated into the site and/or building design,

16.    A fee as determined by resolution of the city council;

C.    A photocopy reduction of items in subsection B of this section at a minimum of seventeen (17) inches by eleven (11) inches;

D.    The city planner may waive any of the above submissions that are believed unnecessary. The city planner may require such other information and exhibits as is deemed reasonably necessary to enable the planning commission or planning division to reach an informed result. That information may include:

1.    Photographs taken on the site showing structures on adjoining property,

2.    Detailed drawings of decorative elements,

3.    Samples of exterior materials and colors,

4.    Location and method of refuse storage,

5.    Scale drawings of signs,

6.    Sectional studies to explain the character of the design,

7.    Scale models and/or perspective drawings and/or perspective drawings superimposed at proper scale on photographs of the property. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.381)

17.164.080 Stages of inquiry.
Prior to filing any submissions, the proponent and/or their architect are encouraged to meet with the city planner in order to obtain information on the general guidelines which the commission expects to use. The proponent or architect is entitled to have the commission’s guidelines as they apply to their project in writing so that if they wish to rely on them, a permanent record of the basis for their reliance will exist. The commission will ordinarily approve, approve with minor modifications, or disapprove a proposal on the submissions described in Section 17.164.070 and for reasons based upon compliance with Sections 17.164.020 and 17.164.030. The commission may expressly reserve approval of detailed aspects of development not possible to decide on the submissions as provided by the proponent. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.382)

17.164.090 Statement of minimum conditions.
Whenever the commission disapproves a submission, at the request of the proponent it will be obliged to specify in writing the conditions under which a majority of the commission would accept the submission. However, it is not the intent of this section to require the commission to furnish the applicant with a design. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.383)

17.164.100 Time limitations.
When the city’s only discretionary action is design review, the commission shall take action at the first reasonable opportunity, following the submittal and review of a complete application. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): Ord. 02-6 § 17: prior code § 27.384)

17.164.110 Notice.
A.    Entitlement to, method and time of notice under this chapter shall be determined by the secretary of the commission in consultation with the city attorney. Notice should be circulated to reach all interested members of the community in sufficient time to enable them to participate meaningfully in commission proceedings and at the same time avoid undue expense and delay to the developer. For this purpose, notice may be had by posting, through advertisements in newspapers of general circulation and readership, by postcards, or any other means approved by the commission secretary and the city attorney.

B.    Any person or organization desiring to be notified of any or all meetings held pursuant to a submission required by this chapter shall be entitled to notice by filing a request with the secretary and paying a fee reasonably calculated to meet the costs of such notice. (Ord. 18-5 § 3 (Exh. A (part)): prior code § 27.385)

1
Code reviser’s note: Section 5 of Ordinance 18-5 provides that its amendments “are enacted for a period of two years and shall terminate on November 8, 2020, unless extended or made permanent by action of the City Council.”


Chapter 17.168
USE PERMITS
Sections:

17.168.010    Purpose.

17.168.020    General provisions.

17.168.030    Application required.

17.168.040    Procedure.

17.168.050    Findings required.

17.168.060    Recordation of use permits.

17.168.070    Master use permit.

17.168.010 Purpose.
The purpose of a use permit is to allow the proper integration in the city of essential or desirable uses which may be suitable only in certain locations or zoning districts, or to ensure that such uses are designed or arranged on the site in a particular manner. (Prior code § 27.435)

17.168.020 General provisions.
Uses which require use permit approval have been determined to have a special character that makes their establishment as a permitted or accessory use without prior review impractical and undesirable. This review shall be for the purpose of determining that each proposed use is, and will continue to be, compatible with surrounding existing and planned uses. It is also for the purpose of establishing special conditions as may be necessary to ensure the harmonious integration and compatibility of uses in the neighborhood and with surrounding areas. (Prior code § 27.436)

17.168.030 Application required.
A.    Application. Application for a use permit, use permit amendment or use permit extension shall be made with the planning department on a prescribed form and shall be accompanied by plans, elevations, facts and information deemed by the department to be necessary to show details of the proposed use or building. Applications shall include the property owner’s written authorization for any use permit, use permit amendment or use permit extension to be recorded against the property.

B.    Filing Fee. Fees for processing applications under this section shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be representative of the actual costs incurred by the city for processing the application.

C.    Filing Date. The filing date for an application shall be the date an application is certified by the city to be complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65020 et seq. (Prior code § 27.437)

17.168.040 Procedure.
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the use permit application prior to a final decision. (Prior code § 27.438)

17.168.050 Findings required.
In its review of applications for use permits, the planning commission shall evaluate each proposed use in order to consider its impact on the city. No use permit shall be granted unless all of the following general findings can be made:

A.    That the proposed use would not generate odors, fumes, light, glare, radiation or refuse that would be injurious to surrounding uses or to the community;

B.    That the proposed use would not generate levels of noise that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of neighboring properties or uses;

C.    That the proposed use would not generate traffic noise in excess of the normally acceptable range identified in the general plan;

D.    That the proposed use would not make excessive demands on the provision of public services including water supply, sewer capacity, energy supply, communication facilities, police protection and fire protection;

E.    That the proposed use would provide adequate ingress and egress to and from the proposed location;

F.    That allowing the proposed use would not conflict with the city’s goal of maintaining the economic viability of a local-serving economy;

G.    That the proposed use would be compatible with surrounding land uses and would not conflict with the purpose established for the district within which it would be located;

H.    That the proposed use would not be in conflict with the city’s general plan;

I.    That the proposed use would not be injurious to public health, safety or welfare;

J.    That granting the use permit would not set a precedent for the approval of similar uses whose incremental effect would be detrimental to the city or would be in conflict with the general plan;

K.    That, as demonstrated on a detailed plan submitted by the applicant, adequate off-street parking to accommodate the long-term parking needs of employees and business owners and customers is available;

L.    That the capacity of surrounding streets is adequate to serve the automobile and delivery truck traffic generated by the proposed use. (Prior code § 27.439)

17.168.060 Recordation of use permits.
Use permits, use permit amendments and use permit extensions shall be recorded following their effective date. (Prior code § 27.440)

17.168.070 Master use permit.
A master use permit is a special type of use permit which authorizes more than one conditional use, including future uses, from the list of conditional uses of the zoning district in which a property is located. On properties with one or more buildings which are occupied or designed for occupancy by multiple nonresidential uses, the planning commission may approve a master use permit. Following approval of a master use permit, any uses so authorized may be established subject only to a zoning clearance to verify status and compliance with any conditions of approval. Each master use permit shall list all of the conditional uses authorized by the permit and may be subject to conditions or requirements over and above those which might be applied for any particular use. The procedure and findings for a master use permit shall be the same as that of a use permit as described in Sections 17.168.010 through 17.168.060. (Prior code § 27.441)

Chapter 17.172
VARIANCES
Sections:

17.172.010    Purpose.

17.172.020    General provisions.

17.172.030    Application required.

17.172.040    Procedure.

17.172.050    Findings required.

17.172.060    Precedence.

17.172.010 Purpose.
The purpose of a variance is to allow variation from the strict application of the terms of this title where, by reason of the exceptional narrowness or unusual shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional size, shape, topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property; or because of the use or development of lands immediately adjoining such property, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this title would involve practical difficulties or would cause undue hardship. (Prior code § 27.445)

17.172.020 General provisions.
In no case shall a variance be granted to permit a use or a density other than a use or density permitted in the district in which the property in question is situated. Nonconforming uses, building or structures on neighboring lands shall not be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. (Prior code § 27.446)

17.172.030 Application required.
A.    Application. Application for a variance or variance renewal shall be made with the planning department on a prescribed form, and shall be accompanied by plans, elevations, statements and other facts or evidence necessary to show details of the proposed use, building or activity in support of making the findings set forth in Section 17.172.050.

B.    Filing Fee. Fees for processing applications under this section shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be representative of the actual costs incurred by the city for processing such application.

C.    Filing Date. The filing date for an application shall be the date an application is certified by the city to be complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65943 et seq. (Prior code § 27.447)

17.172.040 Procedure.
A.    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the variance application prior to a final decision.

B.    If the variance pertains to a new structure or building, or an addition to a structure or building, design review of the structure or building must be approved prior to or simultaneous to the approval of the variance. (Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.448)

17.172.050 Findings required.
In approving a variance the planning commission must make the following findings:

A.    A hardship peculiar to the property, not created by any act of the owner, exists. In this context, personal, family or financial difficulties, loss of prospective profits and neighboring violations, are not hardships justifying a variance;

B.    The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicant which are possessed by other properties in the same district and in the same vicinity; and that a variance, if granted, would not constitute a special privilege of the recipient not enjoyed by his or her neighbors;

C.    The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially impair the purpose and intent of this title or the public interest, nor adversely affect the general plan;

D.    The condition or situation of the specific piece of property for which the variance is sought is not so general or recurrent in nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such condition or situation; and

E.    The variance and any buildings or structures permitted by the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the community. (Prior code § 27.449)

17.172.060 Precedence.
A previous variance shall not be considered to have set a precedent for the granting of further variances; each case must be considered on its individual merits. (Prior code § 27.450)

Chapter 17.176
REIMBURSEMENT FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

17.176.010    Purpose.

17.176.020    Definitions.

17.176.030    Public improvement reimbursement agreement—Procedure.

17.176.040    Public improvement reimbursement agreement—Contents.

17.176.050    Payment by benefited property owner.

17.176.060    Implementation by city council.

17.176.010 Purpose.
As a condition of approval of the grant of a land use entitlement for the development of property, a developer may be required to install public improvements that provide a benefit to the general public and to other specific properties in the vicinity of the improvements. This situation may occur when one developer elects to seek approval and begin development sooner than another.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a mechanism whereby a property owner who benefits by but does not contribute to certain public improvements will, at the time the benefited property owner develops property, reimburse the developer who has installed improvements. (Prior code § 28.1)

17.176.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

“Benefit district” means the geographical area which benefits by a privately financed public improvement.

“Benefited property” means a property within a benefit district for which no contribution to the cost of the public improvement was made at the time of its construction. Benefited property includes property owned by a public agency.

“Financing party” means a property owner or developer who installs or pays for the installation of public improvements within a benefit district.

“Land use entitlement” means a permit or approval granted by the city for the development of property, including a subdivision map approval, land use permit, development plan approval, grading permit, building permit and architectural or design review approval. (Prior code § 28.2)

17.176.030 Public improvement reimbursement agreement—Procedure.
A.    General. If a property owner is required to construct public improvements as a condition of approval of a proposed development and the required public improvements have the capacity and capability of serving and are designed to serve additional properties not within the proposed development and to directly benefit other properties in the vicinity, the property owner may apply to the city for a reimbursement agreement as provided in this section.

B.    Application. A person requesting a reimbursement agreement shall submit an application on a form provided by the city and shall provide information as required by the city engineer, including the area of the proposed benefit district. The applicant shall also submit a proposed form of agreement.

C.    Notice and Hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. At least ten (10) days before the hearing the city shall notify each affected property owner in writing, advising of the hearing and providing a copy of the proposed reimbursement agreement and staff report which will be submitted to the council. In this subsection, “affected property owner” means: (1) the record owner (as shown on the latest county assessor’s secured real property assessment roll) of each property within the proposed benefit district; (2) the financing party; and (3) the occupant, if any, of each property within the proposed benefit district mailed to the property location.

An affected property owner may file written or oral comments or objections to the application before or at the hearing.

No property may be added to a benefit district unless the notice is sent to the affected property owner. Failure to receive the notice required by this section shall not invalidate the reimbursement agreement.

D.    City Council Action—Findings. After the public hearing, the city council may by resolution grant, grant with modification or deny approval of a reimbursement agreement.

Before granting approval, the city council shall make each of these findings:

1.    The improvement for which reimbursement is sought is a public improvement which will, upon completion, be accepted by the city;

2.    The public improvement has the capacity and capability of serving and is designed to serve additional properties not within the proposed development due to the supplemental size, capacity, number or length of the improvement;

3.    The proposed benefit district represents a geographical area of property which will benefit directly and substantially by the public improvement; and

4.    The method of determining contribution and the amount of contribution is fair and reasonable to both the financing party and the benefited property owner and fairly distributes the charge among all subject parcels in proportion to the estimated benefit each will receive from the proposed improvement.

E.    Timing. Except as allowed by the city council for good cause shown, a financing party may not request a public improvement reimbursement agreement after the date construction begins on a public improvement, except that if the improvement is financed through the levy of a special assessment, the request may be made at any time and the agreement may be approved concurrently with, or at any time after, the levy of the assessment.

F.    Recordation. The city shall have an approved public improvement reimbursement agreement, including a list of the benefited properties, recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Prior code § 28.3)

17.176.040 Public improvement reimbursement agreement—Contents.
A public improvement reimbursement agreement shall include, but is not limited to, the following provisions:

A.    A statement of the total construction cost, the applicant’s equitable share of the cost, and the amount of the total cost eligible for reimbursement;

B.    A map approved by the city engineer showing each property included within the benefit district and a list of each property by the county assessor parcel number;

C.    The method of spreading the eligible reimbursement cost to be charged under the agreement to properties within the benefit district and the rate of interest or appreciation to be added to initial charges during the period of the agreement;

D.    A provision indicating who the financing party is for the purpose of receiving reimbursement, i.e., whether the developer or the property owner of record at the time the reimbursement is made (this may depend upon whether the public improvement is financed by the developer or by individual property owners through an assessment district);

E.    The date on which the reimbursement agreement takes effect and benefited property owners begin contributions;

F.    A statement that no reimbursement charges collected by the council may be distributed to a financing party until the public improvement is completed and accepted by the city;

G.    A list of administrative costs, if any, to be charged by the city to administer the agreement. These costs may be shown as a percentage of the charges collected by the city;

H.    A provision that reimbursement to the financing party shall be paid only from charges collected by the city under the agreement from the benefited properties listed in the agreement as such properties receive a land use entitlement. Reimbursement to the financing party shall be paid only from such charges collected within fifteen (15) years from the date the agreement becomes effective, unless a different time period is approved by the city council; and

I.    A provision that the city is not liable to the financing party for failure of the city to collect a reimbursement charge due from a property or because of legal inability of the city to collect the charge from a property. (Prior code § 28.4)

17.176.050 Payment by benefited property owner.
A.    Payment Due. A benefited property owner shall pay to the city the applicable contribution charge set forth in the agreement whenever that person obtains a land use entitlement. The charge is payable at the time the entitlement is granted or at such other time as allowed by the city council for good cause shown.

B.    Applicability. The contribution charge applies only: (1) after the reimbursement agreement is recorded; (2) during the period a reimbursement agreement is in effect; and (3) if the city engineer determines that the land use entitlement involves the scope and type of development contemplated by the agreement. Payment of the contribution charge is not required as a condition of issuing a land use entitlement for the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure (or the erection of an accessory building or structure) if the work:

1.    Is on the same parcel of land;

2.    Does not create an additional dwelling unit; and

3.    In any three-year period will not exceed one-half the value of all existing improvements on the parcel of land.

C.    Stipulation. No property may be assessed a double fee under this section.

D.    No Obligation. A benefited property owner has no obligation to pay a contribution charge if the owner does not obtain a land use entitlement during the effective period of the reimbursement agreement. (Prior code § 28.5)

17.176.060 Implementation by city council.
The city council may adopt rules and regulations it considers necessary to implement this section. (Prior code § 28.6)

Chapter 17.180
SMALL WINERIES
Sections:

17.180.010    Purpose.

17.180.020    Definitions.

17.180.030    Applicability.

17.180.040    Use permit required.

17.180.050    Design review required.

17.180.060    Pre-prohibition wineries.

17.180.070    Uses prohibited.

17.180.080    Development and use standards.

17.180.090    Application requirements.

17.180.100    On-premise events and sales.

17.180.110    Inspection, fees, and licenses.

17.180.010 Purpose.
The intention of the Small Winery regulations is to promote and implement the policies of the General Plan which aim to preserve agricultural land uses within the city of St. Helena. The establishment of small wineries on vineyard property supports the economic feasibility of continuing agricultural use of the land because an individual property owner can process his or her grape crop into wine within his or her privately owned facility.

Allowing the development of small wineries is also intended to support the establishment of smaller, locally-owned and operated wineries. The Small Winery is distinguished from the larger wineries that are allowed in the W: Winery zoning district and other specified commercial zoning districts because small wineries are accessory uses to the primary residential use of a property, and because public events and public-oriented uses are not permitted at the small wineries. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.279)

17.180.020 Definitions.
Accessory use is defined as any use subordinate to the main use and customarily a part thereof. An accessory use must be clearly incidental, related and subordinate to the main use, reasonably compatible with the other principal uses in the zoning district and with the intent of the zoning district, and cannot change the character of the main use.

Contiguous parcel is defined as any parcel whose property lines adjoin the parcel upon which the Small Winery is located, and any parcel that is immediately adjacent to or across any public or private street, excluding Highway 29, from that parcel upon which the winery is located.

Marketing event is defined as any activity conducted at the Small Winery for the purpose of educating members of the wine trade and persons who have pre-established business relationships with the Small Winery or its owner/operator about the wine produced at the Small Winery in order to increase the amount of wine sold to those individuals. Marketing activities may include food service without charge when provided in association with such education and development, but shall not include cultural and social events unrelated to such education and development.

Phase I Water Availability Analysis (WAA-1) is a report, prepared by a licensed civil engineer or hydrologist that states the proposed development of the parcel and estimates the total water use in acre-feet per year. It includes all water use proposed for the parcel including potential vineyard development.

Phase II Water Availability Analysis (WAA-2) is an aquifer test conducted by a licensed hydrologist, whereby the subject well is pumped for a prescribed period of time and the impacts on water levels at neighboring or monitoring wells is evaluated.

Phase III Water Availability Analysis (WAA-3) is a mitigation plan prepared by a licensed civil engineer or hydrologist that proposes changes to the project that will reduce the impacts to the groundwater basin.

Pre-prohibition winery (Ghost winery) is defined as a building that was used as a winery prior to Prohibition but has since been abandoned from use as a winery. For purposes of this Section, Prohibition took effect on January 16, 1920.

Premises is defined as the parcel on which the Small Winery is located.

Private marketing events are those marketing events which are hosted by the Small Winery owner/operator for members of the wine trade and for persons who have pre-established business relationships with the Small Winery or its owner/operator.

Produced is defined as any aspect of the winemaking process.

Public events are events which are open to members of the general public who are not members of the wine trade or who do not have pre-established business relationships with the Small Winery or its owner/operator.

Tours and tastings are tours of the Small Winery and/or tastings of wine produced on the premises.

Winery is defined as an agricultural processing facility used for the fermenting and processing of grape juice into wine, and the refermenting of still wine into sparkling wine. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.280)

17.180.030 Applicability.
Small wineries shall only be permitted as specifically allowed within the regulations pertaining to the established zoning districts. The reestablishment of pre-prohibition wineries may be permitted within any district, except the winery zoning district, in compliance with the regulations of Section 17.180.050.

The reestablishment of pre-prohibition wineries in the winery zoning district shall comply with the winery district regulations in Chapter 17.24. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.281)

17.180.040 Use permit required.
A use permit, granted according to the process described in Chapter 17.24, shall be required prior to the establishment of a small winery in any zoning district. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.282)

17.180.050 Design review required.
Pursuant to Chapter 17.164, all signs, new structures or buildings, or exterior revisions (not including change in exterior color) of any existing structures or buildings for both permitted and conditional uses shall require design review. (Ord. 07-4 § 2 (part): Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.283)

17.180.060 Pre-prohibition wineries.
A.    The reestablishment of a pre-prohibition winery may be permitted with approval of a use permit and design review.

B.    The following findings must be made in order to approve a use permit for the reestablishment of a pre-prohibition winery:

1.    There is substantial evidence proving that the subject structure was used as a winery building prior to January 16, 1920.

2.    More than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior of the original historic structure remains standing.

C.    The appearance of the renovated building must be consistent with the original appearance of the building, as documented by photographs or as recommended by a qualified architectural historian.

D.    Pre-prohibition winery status may allow modification of regulations of the underlying zoning district to preserve the historic nature of the structure.

E.    Pre-prohibition wineries shall not be automatically entitled to the prior annual production capacity, or type or intensity of prior social or marketing activities. Pre-prohibition winery operations must be consistent with all small winery regulations contained in Sections 17.180.070 through 17.180.110.

F.    Conditions of approval for a use permit to reestablish a pre-prohibition winery shall provide for the continued preservation of the historic nature of the structure through rezoning to include an HP: Historic Preservation overlay or other means deemed suitable.

G.    Construction must comply with the California Uniform Building Code and/or the State Historic Building Code, as amended and adopted by the city of St. Helena. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.284)

17.180.070 Uses prohibited.
A.    Public events shall not be permitted.

B.    No facilities for assembly, public sales or entertaining including, but not limited to, retail sales rooms, visitor centers, dining rooms separate from that within the residential unit, kitchens or food service facilities shall be permitted. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.285)

17.180.080 Development and use standards.
A.    Small wineries shall generally be allowed only on parcels of five acres or greater in size; however, exceptions may be granted if it can be demonstrated that there will be minimal impact upon surrounding properties.

B.    Small wineries shall be an accessory use to a residential use. The residential use shall be the primary residence of the winery owner or winery operator.

C.    The development of small wineries shall be consistent with the development standards for accessory buildings for the district in which the small winery is located, except that more restrictive standards may be applied if it is determined that the winery building or operations will have a negative impact upon other properties in the vicinity.

D.    Only one small winery is permitted per parcel.

E.    A minimum of eighty-five percent (85%) of the grape source utilized for the wine produced at the small winery shall be grown on the premises and contiguous parcels as approved by use permit.

F.    There shall be a direct correlation between the yearly production limit of the small winery and the anticipated tonnage of grapes. A general guideline for establishing the production limit is 1,000 gallons per acre of vineyard planted on the property where the small winery is located; however, the general guideline can vary depending upon the crop yield of the particular vineyard.

G.    Pursuant to Section 13.04.100(f), no municipal water may be utilized for the small winery operations or vineyard irrigation.

H.    A minimum of three parking spaces (two standard parking spaces and one accessible parking space) shall be provided with the winery use. Additional parking spaces may be required depending upon the number of employees employed at the winery. All employees shall be required to park on-site. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.286)

17.180.090 Application requirements.
A.    A well water analysis is required to determine if any wells on the property have adequate capacity to support the estimated future water use. If not, the applicant must submit a copy of an approved well expansion plan prior to issuance of a building permit and the expanded well must be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

B.    Application for a small winery use permit shall include a Phase I Water Availability Analysis (WAA-1). The report shall describe all current and estimated future water use on the parcel, including residential, small winery, and irrigation uses. The WAA-1 shall be reviewed by the city engineer, and if it is determined that water use is likely to exceed one acre foot of water per acre of land per year, the applicant shall be required to complete a Phase II Water Availability Analysis (WAA-2) to determine the impact of the proposed water use upon neighboring monitoring wells. If, through the WAA-2, it is determined that the proposed project will have a significant impact on neighboring wells the applicant will be required to mitigate that impact by revising the project. This mitigation plan is a Phase III Water Availability Analysis (WAA-3). Mitigation could include scaling back the size of the winery or phasing the vineyard development. All phases of a Water Availability Analysis shall be prepared or conducted by a licensed civil engineer or hydrologist on forms prescribed by the city or with methodology approved by the city engineer.

C.    A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted for review and approval with the use permit application.

D.    A traffic analysis, completed by a licensed traffic engineer, shall be submitted with the use permit application. The analysis should define the projected Average Daily Trips that will be generated by the new small winery traffic, and should include a determination as to whether the estimated increase in traffic will result in a significant adverse impact on the streets and intersections in the vicinity of the project site.

E.    The use of mobile bottling lines shall be reviewed during the use permit process to determine impact upon residential uses in the vicinity of the property. If the use of mobile bottling lines is to be allowed, the size and parking of trucks, frequency of use and hours of operations shall be subject to limitations established in the use permit process.

F.    Disposal of pomace and wastewater shall be reviewed during the use permit process. Small winery operations shall generate no discernible odors of sewerage or putrefying organic material origin, other than normal fermentation odors, at the property line.

G.    The construction of caves shall require use permit review. Use permit applications for caves shall include information pertaining to disposal of spoils. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.287)

17.180.100 On-premise events and sales.
A.    Public events are not permitted.

B.    The number and frequency of private wine marketing events shall be strictly limited and reviewed during the use permit process. Private wine marketing events are limited to a maximum of one event per calendar month. The maximum number of guests allowed at any private wine marketing event shall be determined by the Fire Code occupancy of the small winery building. This maximum capacity shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the small winery building. Use permit conditions may impose stricter limitations if residential development on adjoining parcels is in close proximity to the new small winery use.

C.    There can be no advertising in publications produced for general distribution for private wine marketing events and all attendees must have been specifically invited to participate in the private wine marketing event by the small winery owner/operator. Because facilities for assembly or entertaining are prohibited, all private wine marketing events must be held within the confines of the on-site residential unit, the production area of the small winery building, or outside.

D.    The establishment of on-premise wine sales shall be determined through the use permit process. If wine sales are to be allowed, they shall be restricted only to wine that is produced on the premises. No merchandise shall be sold.

E.    The hours of sales shall be by appointment only as reviewed during the use permit process. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.288)

17.180.110 Inspection, fees, and licenses.
A.    A business license is required prior to the commencement of operation of a small winery.

B.    The city planning director, or his or her designee, shall inspect small wineries as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this Article and use permit conditions. An inspection fee shall be set by council resolution. (Ord. 02-8 § 2 (part): prior code § 27.289)

Chapter 17.190
BEEKEEPING
Sections:

17.190.010    Purpose.

17.190.020    Definitions.

17.190.030    Applicability.

17.190.040    Standards.

17.190.050    Beekeeping registration.

17.190.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the regulations is to allow beekeeping in a manner that is respectful of the safety of persons that may be in close proximity to the apiary. Beekeeping can contribute to pollination, and better harvests in gardens. By contributing to pollination, urban beekeeping is an important complement to urban food production and to the city’s sustainability goals stated in the General Plan Update 2030. (Ord. 11-2 § 3 (Exh. B (part)))

17.190.020 Definitions.
“Apiary” means a place where one or more honeybee colonies are kept.

Beehive. A “beehive” is made up of a series of rectangular boxes stacked one on top of the other, which house a colony. Standard dimensions of these boxes are twenty (20) by sixteen and one-half (16.5) by nine and one-half inches.

“Honeybee colony” means a cluster of worker-bees with a queen and drones.

“Swarming” means the natural method of honeybee colonies to reproduce, resulting in the departure of part of the bee population with a queen to create a new honeybee colony.

The terms “apiary,” “beehive” and “colony” are used interchangeably. (Ord. 11-2 § 3 (Exh. B (part)))

17.190.030 Applicability.
Beekeeping shall only be permitted as specifically allowed within the regulations pertaining to the established zoning districts. (Ord. 11-2 § 3 (Exh. B (part)))

17.190.040 Standards.
A.    It shall be the duty of every person on whose property bees are kept to adhere to good management practices and maintain bees in a condition that will reasonably prevent swarming and aggressive behavior.

B.    It shall be the responsibility of the person on whose property the bees are kept to provide adequate water for the bees to prevent bees from seeking water in neighboring swimming pools, birdbaths, ponds or other community bodies of water.

C.    A maximum of two beehives per lot on a parcel of land less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

D.    A maximum of four beehives per lot on a parcel of land with an area over ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

E.    Beehives are restricted to rear yards.

F.    In order to ensure the appropriate height of the honeybee flight path:

1.    The beehive entrance will be directed away from the neighboring property and situated behind a solid fence or hedge that is six feet in height running parallel to the property line; or

2.    A beehive will be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet away from the neighboring property line. (Ord. 11-2 § 3 (Exh. B (part)))

17.190.050 Beekeeping registration.
Beekeeping registration is required prior to establishment of an apiary, as follows:

A.    The applicant shall submit and the planning director shall review plans demonstrating compliance with the standards of Section 17.190.040.

B.    The applicant shall register the apiary with the county of Napa agricultural commissioner to receive notification of pesticide applications, pursuant to Section 29101 of the California Food and Agricultural Code.

C.    The applicant shall submit plans and a signed statement showing and agreeing to compliance with all obligations imposed by Section 17.190.040 and holding the city harmless if said owner does not so comply. (Ord. 11-2 § 3 (Exh. B (part)))

Chapter 17.200
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:

17.200.010    Purpose.

17.200.020    Applicability.

17.200.030    Application requirements.

17.200.040    Review authority.

17.200.050    Review procedure.

17.200.060    Findings, other requirements, and decision.

17.200.070    Appeal of determination.

17.200.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.020 Applicability.
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts.

A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed in Section 17.200.030. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.030 Application requirements.
A.    Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the planning department, or in the form of a letter, to the planning director and shall contain the following information:

1.    The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

2.    Address of the property for which the request is being made.

3.    The current actual use of the property.

4.    The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts.

5.    The zoning code provision, regulation or policy that is the subject of the applicant’s requested reasonable accommodation, and a narrative and graphic (where applicable) description of the specific accommodation requested.

6.    Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

B.    Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made requires one or more discretionary approvals (including, but not limited to, conditional use permit, site plan and architectural review, encroachment permit, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by subsection A of this section, together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.040 Review authority.
A.    Planning Director. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the planning director if no discretionary permit approval is required other than the request for reasonable accommodation.

B.    Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary permit application shall be reviewed by the review authority reviewing the discretionary permit application. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.050 Review procedure.
A.    Planning Director Review. The director shall make a written determination within forty-five (45) days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.200.060. The director shall mail a notice of a request for reasonable accommodation to contiguous owners of property, as shown on the latest equalized Napa County assessment roll, but may include other property owners as determined by the director. Said notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to making a determination.

B.    Other Reviewing Authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the review authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary permit application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. The written determination to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with Section 17.200.060. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.060 Findings, other requirements, and decision.
A.    Findings. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on a consideration of the following factors:

1.    Whether the housing which is the subject of the request will be used by an individual considered disabled under the Acts.

2.    Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts.

3.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the town.

4.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a town program or law, including but not limited to land use or zoning.

5.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would adversely impact surrounding properties or uses.

6.    Whether there are reasonable alternatives that would provide an equivalent level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to the city’s applicable rules, standards and practices.

7.    Whether the accommodation would alter the significance of a historic structure.

B.    Other Requirements.

1.    An approved request for reasonable accommodation is subject to the applicant’s compliance with all other applicable regulations.

2.    A modification approved under this chapter is considered a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and does not run with the land.

C.    Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the review authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A of this section, including but not limited to the following:

1.    Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this chapter and any conditions of approval.

2.    Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.

3.    Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.

4.    Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists.

5.    Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses.

6.    Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures.

7.    Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

17.200.070 Appeal of determination.
A determination by the planning director to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the city council in compliance with Section 17.08.180. (Ord. 15-2 § 14 (part))

Appendix I
REGULATED FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS INVENTORY JANUARY 2008
 

INSIDE SEATS

OUTSIDE SEATS

UNSPECIFIED

TOTAL SEATS

A & W**

107

28

0

135

501 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-4333

 

 

 

 

(City Council Det. 1/10/95)

 

 

 

 

Ana’s Cantina**

64

0

0

64

1205 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-4921

 

 

 

 

(UP 5/3/89)

 

 

 

 

Armadillo’s**

48

0

0

48

1304 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-8082

 

 

 

 

(La Placita UP 6/7/89)

 

 

 

 

Azteca Market

12

0

0

12

789 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP-Resolution 12/14/04)

 

 

 

 

Big Dipper

25

0

0

25

1336 Oak Avenue

 

 

 

 

963-2616

 

 

 

 

(file memo dated 2/9/90)

 

 

 

 

Cindy’s Backstreet Kitchen**

0

0

125

125

1327 Railroad Ave.

 

 

 

 

963-1200

 

 

 

 

(UP 6/6/90)

 

 

 

 

Cook St. Helena**

36

0

0

36

1310 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-7088

 

 

 

 

(UP 8/30/88)

 

 

 

 

Culinary Institute**

0

0

125

125

2555 Main Sreet

 

 

 

 

963-4503

 

 

 

 

(UP 10/15/93)

 

 

 

 

Gillwood’s**

55

0

0

55

1313 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-1788

 

 

 

 

(City Council minutes 11/9/82)

 

 

 

 

Giugni’s

25

0

0

25

1227 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-3421

 

 

 

 

(occ. det.)

 

 

 

 

Go Fish**

0

0

169

169

641 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-1401

 

 

 

 

(Southside Cafe UP 6/14/94)

 

 

 

 

Golden Harvest**

35

0

0

35

61 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-3235

 

 

 

 

(UP 7/8/86)

 

 

 

 

La Prima**

68

24

0

92

1010 Adams Street

 

 

 

 

963-7909

 

 

 

 

(occ. det.)

 

 

 

 

Market Restaurant**

72

0

0

72

1347 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-4646

 

 

 

 

(U.P. 10/16/01)

 

 

 

 

Martini House**

109

66

0

175

1245 Spring Street

 

 

 

 

963-5578

 

 

 

 

(UP 12/19/00)

 

 

 

 

Model Bakery

20

0

0

20

1357 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-8192

 

 

 

 

(City Council Det. of Use 8/23/94)

 

 

 

 

N. V. Coffee Roasting Co.

40

10

0

50

1400 Oak Ave.

 

 

 

 

963-4491

 

 

 

 

(UP 7/24/90)

 

 

 

 

Pizzeria Tra Vigne**

0

0

120

120

1000 Main Street

 

 

 

 

967-9999

 

 

 

 

(UP 8/27/91)

 

 

 

 

St. Helena Hotel

54

0

0

54

1309 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-4388

 

 

 

 

(UP 11/17/87

 

 

 

 

Stomp/Keller’s**

72

0

0

72

1320 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 11/01/05)

 

 

 

 

CC Blue Sushi**

36

0

0

36

1148 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 9/20/05)

 

 

 

 

Taylor’s Refresher**

0

0

139

139

933 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(City Council Det. 1/10/95)

 

 

 

 

Terra**

105

0

0

105

1345 Railroad Ave.

 

 

 

 

963-8931

 

 

 

 

(Duckworth UP 6/7/88)

 

 

 

 

That Pizza Place**

12

0

0

12

1149 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 11/06/07)

 

 

 

 

Tra Vigne Cantinetta

4

16

0

20

(UPA 5/2/90)

 

 

 

 

Tra Vigne Restaurant**

60 (Dining)

100

0

160

(UP 9/15/81)

80 (Banquet)

0

0

80

1050 Charter Oak

 

 

 

 

963-4444

 

 

 

 

Villa Corona**

35

8

0

43

(formerly Napa Valley Deli)

 

 

 

 

1138 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-7710

 

 

 

 

(UP 5/17/94)

 

 

 

 

Vineland Station Tea House

0

0

20

20

1281 Vidovich Ave.

 

 

 

 

UP 2007-63

 

 

 

 

Vineland Station Cafe

40

10

0

50

1281 Vidovich Ave.

 

 

 

 

UP 2007-65

 

 

 

 

Wine Valley Restaurant**

33

0

0

33

1146 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 8/6/02)

 

 

 

 

SEATING TOTAL

2,177

RESTAURANT TOTAL

30

NUMBER OF RESTAURANTS PERMITTED IN ST. HELENA

30

1351 Lounge

Nonconforming use; business closed.

1351 Main Street

 

 

 

 

963-4045

 

 

 

 

(occ. det.)

 

 

 

 

Magnolia**

Permits for establishment of restaurant have expired.

(formerly Teng’s)

 

 

 

 

1113 Hunt Ave.

 

 

 

 

963-1161

 

 

 

 

(UP 12/17/96.)

 

 

 

 

Martin Design**

Permits for establishment of restaurant have expired.

(formerly Magnolia Cafe)

 

 

 

 

1118 Hunt Ave.

 

 

 

 

963-0748

 

 

 

 

(UP 98-91)

 

 

 

 

Mixers

Permits for establishment of restaurant have expired.

Juice bar as accessory use

 

 

 

 

1232 Spring Street

 

 

 

 

963-9592

 

 

 

 

Pairs Parkside Cafe**

Permits for establishment of restaurant have expired.

1420 Main Street

 

 

 

 

263-7666

 

 

 

 

(Rissa’s UP 4/18/90)

 

 

 

 

Roadhouse 29**

Permits for establishment of restaurant have expired.

(Formerly Fidel’s Tacos, Creekside Deli)

 

 

 

 

1065 Main Street

 

 

 

 

967-9997

 

 

 

 

(UP 12/17/93)

 

 

 

 

Roux**

Nonconforming use expired after 60 days.

1234 Main Sreet.

 

 

 

 

963-5507

 

 

 

 

(occ. det.)

 

 

 

 

Vineland Station

Use Permit not vested.

709 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 11/04/03)

 

 

 

 

Tasting on Main

Use Permit not vested.

1142 Main Street

 

 

 

 

(UP 2006-12)

 

 

 

 

*    The number of seats authorized in each establishment is either the number regulated by conditions imposed by the City or the number of occupants allowed based on the Uniform Fire Code regulating occupancy limits.

**    Restaurants with complete kitchens capable of providing full menu service of food prepared on premises.

Appendix II
HOTELS, MOTELS AND B&B INVENTORY
(1/01/97)

Name of Business

Number of Rooms

Ambrose Bierce

2

1515 Main St.

Jane Gibson

963-3003

Byland House

2

2000 Howell Mountain Road

Bill Byland

963-9073

Chestelson House

3

1417 Kearney

Jackie Sweet

963-2238

Cinnamon Bear

3

1407 Kearney

Jenny Jenkens

963-4653

Creekside Inn

3

945 Main Street

Jean Nicholson

963-7244

El Bonita Motel

41

195 Main Street

Mark Warren

963-3216

Harvest Inn

54

1 Main Street

Robert Mannix

963-9463

Hotel St. Helena

18

1309 Main Street

Elizabeth Martin

510-268-0359

963-4388

Inn at Southbridge

21

1020 Main Street

Sulphur Creek Assoc.

963-2225

Judy’s

1

2036 Madrona

Judy Sculatti

963-3081

Sunny Acres

2

397 Main Street

Susanne Salvestrin

963-2826

Vineyard Country Inn

21

201 Main Street

963-1000

 

 

Total

171

Title 18
ENVIRONMENT
Chapters:

18.04    Surface Mining and Reclamation

Chapter 18.04
SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
Sections:

18.04.010    Purpose and intent.

18.04.020    Definitions.

18.04.030    Incorporation by reference.

18.04.040    Scope.

18.04.050    Vested rights.

18.04.060    Process.

18.04.070    Standards for reclamation.

18.04.080    Statement of responsibility.

18.04.090    Findings for approval.

18.04.100    Financial assurances.

18.04.110    Interim management plans.

18.04.120    Annual report requirements.

18.04.130    Inspections.

18.04.140    Violations—Penalties.

18.04.150    Appeals.

18.04.160    Fees.

18.04.170    Mineral resource protection.

18.04.010 Purpose and intent.
The city recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the city and to the needs of society and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety. The city also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefore may vary accordingly.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the continued availability of important mineral resources, while regulating surface mining operations as required by California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code Sections 2710 et seq.), as amended, hereinafter referred to as “SMARA,” Public Resources Code (PRC) Section 2207 (relating to annual reporting requirements), and State Mining and Geology Board regulations (hereinafter referred to as “state regulations”) for surface mining and reclamation practice (California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, Sections 3500 et seq.), to ensure that:

A.    Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses;

B.    The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment;

C.    Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.

The city also recognizes the value to the community resulting from the gravel mining business on Sulphur Springs Creek. The creek channel is kept clear of debris and gravel accumulation downstream is reduced as a result of the gravel mining business. (Prior code § 23.1)

18.04.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

“Area of regional significance” means an area designated by the state mining and geology board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region of the state within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature loss of minerals that are of more than local significance.

“Area of statewide significance” means an area designated by the board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the state and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or regional significance.

“Borrow pits” means excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere.

“Compatible land uses” means land uses inherently compatible with mining and/or that require a minimum public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and which may allow mining because of the relative economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, very low density residential, geographically extensive but low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, silvicultural, grazing, and open space.

“Haul road” means a road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface mining operation.

“Idle” means surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year or more, by more than ninety percent (90%) of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date.

“Incompatible land uses” means land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or that require public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the greater economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, high density residential, low density residential with high unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but impact intensive industrial and commercial.

“Mined lands” means the surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

“Minerals” means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum.

“Operator” means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his or her behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his or her sole compensation.

“Reclamation” means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

“Stream bed skimming” means excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher.

“Surface mining operations” means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include, but are not limited to, in place distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). (Prior code § 23.2)

18.04.030 Incorporation by reference.
The provisions of SMARA (PRC Section 2710 et seq.), PRC Section 2207, and state regulations CCR Section 3500 et seq., as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than correlative state provisions, this chapter shall prevail. (Prior code § 23.3)

18.04.040 Scope.
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall conduct surface mining operations unless a permit, reclamation plan, and financial assurances for reclamation have first been approved by the city. Any applicable exemption from this requirement does not automatically exempt a project or activity from the application of other regulations, ordinances or policies of the city, including but not limited to, the application of CEQA, the requirement of site approvals or other permits, the payment of development impact fees, or the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be permitted under the law. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the city, public and private.

This chapter shall not apply to the following activities, subject to the above-referenced exceptions:

A.    Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster;

B.    On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities which are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions:

1.    All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA,” Public Resources Code, Division 13, Section 21000 et seq.),

2.    The city’s approval of the construction project included consideration of the on-site excavation and on-site earth-moving activities pursuant to CEQA,

3.    The approved construction project is consistent with the general plan or zoning of the site,

4.    Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued;

C.    Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated on-site structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the on-site stockpiling and on-site recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions:

1.    The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses in the city’s general plan,

2.    The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial, or are contained within a zoning category intended exclusively for industrial activities by the city,

3.    None of the minerals being processed are being extracted on-site,

4.    All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred on-site after January 1, 1976;

D.    Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less;

E.    Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose;

F.    Any other surface mining operations that the State Mining and Geology Board determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances;

G.    The solar evaporation of sea water or bay water for the production of salt and related minerals;

H.    Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the department of water resources or the reclamation board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies;

I.    Road construction and maintenance for timber or forest operations if the land is owned by the same person or entity, and if the excavation is conducted adjacent to timber or forest operation roads. This exemption is only available if slope stability and erosion are controlled in accordance with board regulations and, upon closure of the site, the person closing the site implements, where necessary, revegetation measures and post-closure uses in consultation with the department of forestry and fire protection. This exemption does not apply to on-site excavation or grading that occurs within one hundred (100) feet of a Class One watercourse or seventy-five (75) feet of a Class Two watercourse, or to excavations for materials that are, or have been, sold for commercial purposes. (Prior code § 23.4)

18.04.050 Vested rights.
A.    No person who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit to mine, so long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, state regulations, and this chapter. Where a person with vested rights has continued surface mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, he or she shall obtain city approval of a reclamation plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-Act mining, the reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the mining after the effective date of the Act (January 1, 1976).

B.    All other requirements of state law and this chapter shall apply to vested mining operations. (Prior code § 23.5)

18.04.060 Process.
A.    Applications for a site approval or reclamation plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the planning department. The application shall be filed in accord with this chapter and procedures to be established by the planning director. The forms for reclamation plan applications shall require, at a minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (Sections 2772-2773) and state regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed reclamation plan, to be established at the discretion of the planning director. As many copies of the site approval application as may be required by the planning director shall be submitted to the planning department.

B.    As many copies of a reclamation plan application as may be required shall be submitted in conjunction with all applications for site approvals for surface mining operations. For surface mining operations that are exempt from a site approval pursuant to this chapter, the reclamation plan application shall include information concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the reclamation plan. All documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted to the city at one time.

C.    Applications shall include all required environmental review forms and information prescribed by the planning director.

D.    Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents required by the planning director, consideration of the site approval or reclamation plan for the proposed or existing surface mine shall be completed pursuant to Chapter 17.08 at a public hearing before the planning commission, and pursuant to Section 2774 of the Public Resources Code.

E.    Within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application for a site approval for surface mining operations and/or a reclamation plan as complete, the planning department shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the one hundred (100) year flood plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the planning department shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received.

F.    The planning department shall process the application(s) through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) and the city’s environmental review guidelines.

G.    Subsequent to the appropriate environmental review, the planning department shall prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration by the planning commission.

H.    The planning commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the site approval and/or reclamation plan.

I.    Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial assurances (as provided in this chapter), or any amendments to the reclamation plan or existing financial assurances, the planning commission shall certify to the State Department of Conservation that the reclamation plan and/or financial assurance complies with the applicable requirements of state law, and submit the plan, assurance, or amendments to the State Department of Conservation for review. The planning commission may conceptually approve the reclamation plan and financial assurance before submittal to the State Department of Conservation. If a site approval is being processed concurrently with the reclamation plan, the planning commission may simultaneously also conceptually approve the site approval. However, the planning commission may defer action on the site approval until taking final action on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the planning commission may conditionally approve the site approval with the condition that the planning department shall not issue the site approval for the mining operations until cost estimates for financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan and financial assurances.

J.    Pursuant to PRC Section 2774(d), the State Department of Conservation shall be given thirty (30) days to review and comment on the reclamation plan and forty-five (45) days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The planning commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the state for the planning commission’s approval. In particular, when the planning commission’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the state’s comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the planning commission shall be promptly forwarded to the operator/applicant.

The planning commission shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the site approval and/or reclamation plan, and to approve the financial assurances pursuant to PRC Section 2770(d).

K.    The planning department shall forward a copy of each approved site approval for mining operations and/or approved reclamation plan, and a copy of the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation. By July 1st of each year, the planning department shall submit to the State Department of Conservation for each active or idle mining operation a copy of the site approval or reclamation plan amendments, as applicable, or a statement that there have been no changes during the previous year. (Prior code § 23.6)

18.04.070 Standards for reclamation.
A.    All Reclamation Plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Section 2772 and Section 2773) and state regulations (CCR Sections 3500—3505). Reclamation plans approved after January 15, 1993, reclamation plans for proposed new mining operations, and any substantial amendments to previously approved reclamation plans, shall also comply with the requirements for reclamation performance standards (CCR Sections 3700—3713).

B.    The reclamation plan shall, in addition to all other requirements, be signed by the applicant and either the principal mining engineer or some other qualified person responsible for drawing up the plans who is acceptable to the planning director and shall contain the following information:

1.    A detailed schedule of the anticipated sequence and timing of each stage of the reclamation;

2.    A physical description of the site prior to commencing operations, or, if operations have already commenced, a description as of the date the application is filed;

3.    The location and condition of any mined area which was completed or abandoned prior to January 1, 1976, and which will not be mined pursuant to the present application for a surface mining permit, if granted;

4.    The method of grading, backfilling, soil stabilization, compacting or contouring to be used to ensure that the mining property will contain stable slopes and waste piles. Final slope gradients for the mining property must be included;

5.    The manner in which rehabilitation of premining drainage will occur and the method by which contaminants remaining upon completion of the mining operation will be controlled so as to avoid contamination of surface runoff and ground water;

6.    The disposition of mine waste rock and overburden and the method to be utilized to salvage and reuse existing top-soil;

7.    The method of soil preparation and fertilizer used to prepare the land for replanting and the type of mixture of shrubs, trees, grasses, or other vegetation to be planted including the method of planting, approximate quantity and spacing. All land in areas containing Class I, II, or III soils which are zoned for prime agricultural purposes must be reclaimed to an agriculturally productive state equal or superior to that existing before mining commenced. All other lands zoned for agricultural purposes must be reclaimed so as to reasonably permit the use of the land in a manner which is compatible within an agricultural zone;

8.    A narrative of the manner in which structures, machinery, waste materials and scraps will ultimately be removed from the reclaimed site including a description of all structures to remain on site after reclamation has been completed and their ultimate location;

9.    A description of the proposed ultimate uses top which the land in capable of being adopted after reclamation including a discussion of the consistency of such proposed uses with any applicable general and specific plans and to what extent such uses will be compatible with adjacent properties;

10.    A reasonable detailed cost estimate of the probable costs of the reclamation to be conducted on the site taking into account inflationary factors. Supporting data for all required estimates are mandatory. If the mining and reclamation are to be completed in phases, a breakdown of the estimate of the cost of reclamation for each phase shall be included;

11.    A reasonable detailed financial statement by the applicant which demonstrates that sufficient funds will be available to enable the applicant to reclaim the land;

12.    A map which will delineate through the use of cross sections and elevations the physical characteristics of the land upon the conclusion of reclamation. A topographic map shall be provided with the location of the reclaimed land clearly indicated on the map. The map must show existing bodies of surface water, topographic, cultural and drainage features, and the proposed location of drill holes, trenches and roads;

13.    Such other data as may be required by the city planner.

C.    Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the city. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include: (a) the beginning and expected ending dates for each phase; (b) all reclamation activities required; (c) criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (d) estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation. (Prior code § 23.7)

18.04.080 Statement of responsibility.
The person submitting the reclamation plan shall sign a statement accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan. The statement shall be kept by the planning department in the mining operation’s permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the operation, the new operator shall submit a signed statement of responsibility to the planning department for placement in the permanent record. (Prior code § 23.8)

18.04.090 Findings for approval.
A.    Site Approvals. In addition to any findings required by this code, site approvals for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provisions of SMARA and state regulations.

B.    Reclamation Plans. For reclamation plans, the following findings shall be required:

1.    That the reclamation plan complies with SMARA Section 2772 and Section 2773, and any other applicable provisions;

2.    That the reclamation plan complies with applicable requirements of state regulations (CCR Sections 3500—3505, and Sections 3700—3713);

3.    That the reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the plan are consistent with this chapter and the city’s general plan and any applicable resource plan or element;

4.    That the reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA and the city’s environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible;

5.    That the land and/or resources such as water bodies to be reclaimed will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography, and other resources, or that suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbance to resource values;

6.    That the reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the general plan and applicable resource plan;

7.    That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by that department. Where the city’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the State Department of Conservation, the response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. (Prior code § 23.9)

18.04.100 Financial assurances.
A.    To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the city shall require as a condition of approval security which will be released upon satisfactory performance. The applicant may pose security in the form of a surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the city and the State Mining and Geology Board as specified in state regulations, and which the city reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation’s approved reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation’s approved reclamation plan. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the city and the State Department of Conservation.

B.    Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with elements of the reclamation plan, including but not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, restoration of water bodies and water quality, slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials, and other measures, if necessary.

C.    Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval prior to the operator securing financial assurances. The planning director shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together with any documentation received supporting the amount of the cost estimates, to the State Department of Conservation for review. If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within forty-five (45) days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates are adequate, unless the city has reason to determine that additional costs may be incurred. The planning director shall have the discretion to approve the financial assurance if it meets the requirements of this chapter, SMARA, and state regulations.

D.    The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year. Cost estimates should be prepared by a California registered professional engineer and/or other similarly licensed and qualified professionals retained by the operator and approved by the planning director. The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for each of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan shall be based upon cost estimates that include but may not be limited to labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee. A contingency factor of ten percent (10%) shall be added to the cost of financial assurances.

E.    In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the city or State Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site.

F.    The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed (including any maintenance required).

G.    The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year.

H.    Revisions to financial assurances shall be submitted to the planning director each year prior to the anniversary date for approval of the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why revisions are not required. (Prior code § 23.10)

18.04.110 Interim management plans.
A.    Within ninety (90) days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the planning department a proposed interim management plan (IMP). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, including but not limited to all site approval conditions, and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into consideration public health and safety. The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning department, and shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation plan. IMPs shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review.

B.    Financial assurances for idle operations shall be maintained as though the operation were active.

C.    Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the planning department shall forward the IMP to the State Department of Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of Conservation at least thirty (30) days prior to approval by the planning commission.

D.    Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the planning director and the operator, the planning commission shall review and approve or deny the IMP in accordance with this chapter. The operator shall have thirty (30) days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the planning director, to submit a revised IMP. The planning commission shall approve or deny the revised IMP within sixty (60) days of receipt. If the planning commission denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action to the city council.

E.    The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the planning commission may renew the IMP for another period not to exceed five years, or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. (Prior code § 23.11)

18.04.120 Annual report requirements.
Surface mining operators shall forward an annual surface mining report to the State Department of Conservation and to the city planning department on a date established by the State Department of Conservation, upon forms furnished by the State Mining and Geology Board. New mining operations shall file an initial surface mining report and any applicable filing fees with the State Department of Conservation within thirty (30) days of permit approval, or before commencement of operations, whichever is sooner. Any applicable fees, together with a copy of the annual inspection report, shall be forwarded to the State Department of Conservation at the time of filing the annual surface mining report. (Prior code § 23.12)

18.04.130 Inspections.
A.    The planning department shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the annual report required in Section 18.04.120, to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved site approval and/or reclamation plan, approved financial assurances, and state regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. The inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state licensed landscape architect, or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months, or other qualified specialists, as selected by the planning director. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board.

B.    The planning department shall notify the State Department of Conservation within thirty (30) days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection. (Prior code § 23.13)

18.04.140 Violations—Penalties.
If the planning director, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this chapter, the applicable site approval, any required permit and/or the reclamation plan, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Resources Code, Section 2774.1 and Section 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties, as well as those provisions of this code for revocation and/or abandonment of a site approval which are not preempted by SMARA. (Prior code § 23.14)

18.04.150 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the planning department in the exercise of the authority granted herein, shall have the right to appeal the action of the planning director pursuant to Section 17.08.180 of this code. (Prior code § 23.15)

18.04.160 Fees.
The city shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the state regulations, including but not limited to, processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall be paid by the operator, as required by the city, at the time of filing of the site approval application, reclamation plan application, and at such other times as are determined by the city to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable costs of implementing this chapter are borne by the mining operator. (Prior code § 23.16)

18.04.170 Mineral resource protection.
A.    Mine development is encouraged in compatible areas before encroachment of conflicting uses. Mineral resource areas that have been classified by the State Department of Conservation’s Division of Mines and Geology or designated by the State Mining and Geology Board, as well as existing surface mining operations that remain in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be protected from intrusion by incompatible land uses that may impede or preclude mineral extraction or processing, to the extent possible for consistency with the city’s general plan.

B.    In accordance with PRC Section 2762, the city’s general plan and resource maps will be prepared to reflect mineral information (classification and/or designation reports) within twelve (12) months of receipt from the State Mining and Geology Board of such information. Land use decisions within the city will be guided by information provided on the location of identified mineral resources of regional significance. Conservation and potential development of identified mineral resource areas will be considered and encouraged. Recordation on property titles of the presence of important mineral resources within the identified mineral resource areas may be encouraged as a condition of approval of any development project in the impacted area. Prior to approving a use that would otherwise be incompatible with mineral resource protection, conditions of approval may be applied to encroaching development projects to minimize potential conflicts. (Prior code § 23.17)